Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Security 3 Emergency use 4 History 5 Research 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Revolving door 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of doors that rotate about a vertical shaft For other uses, see Revolving door (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Revolving door" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A revolving door in Turkey (counter-clockwise rotation) A revolving door typically consists of three or four doors that hang on a central shaft and rotate around a vertical axis within a cylindrical enclosure. To use a revolving door, a person enters the enclosure between two of the doors and then moves continuously to the desired exit while keeping pace with the doors.

Revolving doors were designed to relieve the immense pressure caused by air rushing through high-rise buildings (referred to as stack effect pressure) while at the same time allowing large numbers of people to pass in and out. They are also energy efficient; they act as an airlock to prevent drafts, decreasing the loss of heating or cooling for the building as compared to a standard door.

[ 1 ] Construction [ edit ] Diagram of a revolving door, viewed from above Around the central shaft of the revolving door, there are usually three or four panels called wings or leaves .  Large diameter revolving doors can accommodate pushchairs and wheeled luggage racks - such large capacity doors are sometimes H-shaped to split the circle into only two (hence larger) parts.

Some revolving door displays incorporate a small glass enclosure, permitting small objects such as sculpture, fashion mannequins , or plants to be displayed to pedestrians passing through. Such enclosures can either be mounted at the central pivot, or attached to the revolving door wings.

The wings of revolving doors usually incorporate glass, to allow people to see and anticipate each other while passing through the door.  Manual revolving doors rotate with pushbars, causing all wings to rotate. Revolving doors typically have a "speed control" ( governor ) to prevent people from spinning the doors too fast.

Automatic revolving doors are powered above/below the central shaft, or along the perimeter.  Automatic revolving doors have safety sensors, but there has been at least one fatality recorded.

[ 2 ] Skyscraper design requires a means of draft block, such as revolving doors, to prevent the chimney effect of the tall structure from sucking in air at high speed at the base and ejecting it through vents in the roof while the building is being heated, or sucking in air through the vents and ejecting it through the doors while being cooled, both effects due to convection. Modern revolving doors permit the individual doors of the assembly to be unlocked from the central shaft to permit free flowing traffic in both directions.  This feature, called breakout or break away , is typically used only during emergencies, or to admit oversize objects.  The most effective method for this is the "bookfold" design, which allows all three or four wings to be broken away together.  Normally, the revolving door is always closed so that wind and drafts cannot blow into the building, to efficiently minimize heating and air conditioning loads.

In right-hand traffic countries, revolving doors typically revolve counter-clockwise (as seen from above), allowing people to enter and exit only on the right side of the door.  In left-hand traffic countries such as Australia and New Zealand, [ 3 ] revolving doors revolve clockwise, [ 4 ] but door rotations are mixed in Britain.

[ 5 ] Direction of rotation is often enforced by the door governor mechanism, or by the orientation of the door seal brush (weatherstrips).

Security [ edit ] An unusual pair of revolving doors at City Hall in London : one revolves clockwise; the other revolves counterclockwise.

Revolving doors can also be used as security devices to restrict entry to a single person at a time if the spacing between the doors is small enough.  This is in contrast to a normal door which allows a second person to easily " tailgate " behind an authorized person. Extreme security can require a particular type of bullet-resistant glass.

Sometimes a revolving door is designed for one-way traffic . An example is the now-common usage in airports to prevent a person from bypassing airport security checkpoints by entering the exit. Such doors are designed with a brake that is activated by a sensor should someone enter from the incorrect side. The door also revolves backwards to permit that person to exit, while also notifying security of the attempt.

A one-way High Entrance / Exit Turnstile Turnstile exit-only doors are also often used in subways and other rapid transit facilities to prevent people from bypassing fare payment.  They are similarly used at large sports stadiums , amusement parks , and other such venues, to allow pedestrians to exit freely, but not to enter without paying admission fees.  These doors usually work mechanically, with the door panels constructed of horizontal bars which pass through a "wall" of interlacing (interdigitated) bars, allowing the door leaves to pass through, but blocking people from illegally entering through the exit.

Emergency use [ edit ] On November 28, 1942, the Cocoanut Grove , a popular nightclub in Boston , Massachusetts, went up in flames, killing 492 people. One of the main reasons cited for the large number of casualties was the single revolving door located at the entrance. As the mob of panicking patrons attempted to use the door as an escape it soon became jammed, trapping countless people between the door and the crowd pushing towards it. As a result, many people died from smoke inhalation , as they were not able to escape the burning nightclub.

In 1943, it became a Massachusetts state law requirement to flank a revolving door with an outward swinging hinged door or to make the revolving door collapsible (so it becomes a double partition collapsing at 180°), allowing people to pass on either side. American revolving doors are now collapsible. Some jurisdictions require them to be flanked by at least one hinged door either by common practice or required by law. For example, the Ontario Building Code 3.4.6.14. asserts that revolving doors needs to "(a) be collapsible, (b) have hinged doors providing equivalent exiting capacity located adjacent to it".

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Patent drawing by Theophilus Van Kannel for a "Storm-Door Structure", 1888 Large revolving door with a central display case (counter-clockwise rotation). Revolving door is flanked on both sides by conventional doors with arrows pointing inward towards the preferred entry.

H. Bockhacker of Berlin was granted German patent DE18349 [ 7 ] on December 22, 1881 for Tür ohne Luftzug or ' Door without draft of air ' , which used a rotating cylinder with a door which after entering, the user then turned around to the exiting direction.

Theophilus Van Kannel of Philadelphia was granted US patent 387,571 on August 7, 1888, for a "Storm-Door Structure".

[ 8 ] The patent drawings filed show a three-partition revolving door.  The patent describes it as having "three radiating and equidistant wings ... provided with weather-strips or equivalent means to insure [ sic ] a snug fit". The door "possesses numerous advantages over a hinged-door structure ... it is perfectly noiseless ... effectually prevents the entrance of wind, snow, rain or dust ..."  "Moreover, the door cannot be blown open by the wind ... there is no possibility of collision, and yet persons can pass both in and out at the same time." The patent further lists, "the excluding of noises of the street" as another advantage of the revolving door. It goes on to describe how a partition can be hinged so as to open to allow the passage of long objects through the revolving door. The patent itself does not use the term revolving door .

[ 9 ] An urban legend , dating back to perhaps 2008, claims that the invention was motivated by his phobia of opening doors for others, especially women; according to Snopes , there is no evidence to support this.

[ 10 ] In 1889, the Franklin Institute of Philadelphia awarded the John Scott Legacy Medal to Van Kannel for his contribution to society.

[ 11 ] In 1899, the world's first wooden revolving door was installed at Rector's , a restaurant on Times Square in Manhattan, located on Broadway between West 43rd and 44th Streets.

[ 12 ] In 2007 Theophilus Van Kannel was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame for this invention.

[ 13 ] Research [ edit ] Revolving doors are favored because they can be used as an airlock to minimize a building's heating and air conditioning losses.

Research into the air and energy exchanges associated with revolving door usage have been carried out on a few occasions. The earliest such study was carried out in 1936 by A. M.

Simpson , [ 14 ] [ 15 ] who worked for the van Kannel revolving door company at the time. Simpson's study was followed by a study by Schutrum et al.

[ 16 ] in 1961, and more recently a study by van Schijndel et al.

[ 17 ] in 2003. These studies focused on providing detailed measurements of the quantities of air and heat transferred inside the compartments of a door as it revolves. With the exception of the study by van Schijndel et al., which was purely theoretical, the measurements carried out for the other studies were used to provide design charts enabling engineers to estimate the quantity of air transferred by a door in function of the revolution rate and temperature contrast. However, none of these studies are referenced by existing design codes.

[ citation needed ] The aforementioned studies are specific to the type of door which they were acquired for, namely 2 m × 2 m (6.6 ft × 6.6 ft) doors with four compartments.

[ 18 ] Although it appears that these dimensions were standard for four-compartment doors at the time, this is not the case nowadays.

[ citation needed ] A more recent experimental study [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] carried out at Imperial College London's Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering , provided more insight into the flow physics by which air is transferred across a revolving door.

Airflows and energy losses through revolving doors also occur as a result of leakages past the seals of the door. Leakages are common to any type of opening in an otherwise closed space, but have been investigated in the context of revolving doors by Zmeureanu et al.

[ 22 ] and by Schutrum et al.

[ 16 ] before that. The first study concluded that to avoid significant leakages, the seals of the doors should be maintained and periodically replaced if needed. The second study produced design charts for estimating the leakage rate through a revolving door. Unlike the curves for estimating the transfer rate also published in this study, the curves for estimating the leakage rate are more generic. As such these design curves still form the basis of the target leakage rates for revolving doors recommended by the ASHRAE standard 90.1 in the US.

[ 23 ] On May 25, 2006, an MIT Study entitled "Modifying Habits Towards Sustainability : A Study of Revolving Doors Usage on the MIT Campus" was published.  In it, B. A. Cullum, Olivia Lee, Sittha Sukkasi and Dan Wesolowski concluded, "...substantial energy is saved when people use the revolving doors instead of swing doors – the smallest of habit changes contributes to energy conservation ... Modification of one habit... indeed has the ability to eventually impact the environment on a global scale." While preferred by building owners for energy conservation, revolving doors may be avoided by some people due to the perceived greater physical effort in using them.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Paternoster lift Revolving door (politics) Turnstile References [ edit ] ^ Revolving Doors - Sustainability @ MIT Archived 2009-09-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ "About automatic door accident at Roppongi Hills - MORI BUILDING" . Archived from the original on 2008-01-26 . Retrieved 2009-07-08 .

^ "Roadside" . brianlucas.ca. 5 August 2013.

^ "Men walk out of the Australia Stock Exchange" . pond5.com.

^ "Which side of the road do they drive on?" . Brianlucas.ca . Retrieved 2009-07-08 .

^ ONTARIO REGULATION 350/06 made under the BUILDING CODE ACT, 1992 ^ "esp@cenet — Original document" . V3.espacenet.com . Retrieved 2009-07-08 .

^ Mars, Roman (7 November 2013).

"Why Don't People Use Revolving Doors?" .

Slate Magazine .

The Slate Group . Retrieved 7 November 2013 .

^ US 387571 , "Storm-door structure", issued August 7, 1888 ^ "FACT CHECK: Was the Revolving Door Invented by a Man Who Disliked Holding Open Doors for Women?" .

Snopes.com . 27 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "International Revolving Door Company Overview" . Archived from the original on November 7, 2007 . Retrieved 2006-06-15 .

^ The city in slang: New York life and popular speech . Irving Lewis Allen. Publisher: New York; Oxford University Press, 1993. Page 126.

ISBN 0-19-509265-1 ^ "Inventors Hall of Fame" . Archived from the original on 2009-08-27.

^ Simpson, A. M. and Atkinson, K. B.

InfInfiltration Problem of Multiple Entrances . Heating, piping and air conditioning, vol. 8 no. 6 pp 345 - 351, 1936 ^ Simpson, A. M.

Infiltration Characteristics of Entrance Doors . Journal of refrigerating engineering, vol. 31 no. 6 pp 345 -350, 1936 ^ a b Schutrum, L. F., Ozisik, N., Baker, J. T. and Humphreys, C. M.

Air Infiltrations through Revolving Doors , ASHRAE transactions, vol. 3 no. 1 pp. 43 - 50, 1961 ^ Van Schijndel, H., Zmeureanu, R., Stathopoulos, T.

Simulation of Air Infiltration through Revolving Doors , Proceedings of Building simulations 2003 conference, pp. 1193 - 2000, 2003 ^ Beardmore, A.

The Revolving Door Since 1881: Architecture in Detail , Boon Edam P.V., 2000 ^ Allgayer, D. M. and Hunt, G. R., Air Movement by Revolving Doors , Proceedings of the RoomVent 2004 conference, 2004 ^ Allgayer, D. M. and Hunt, G. R., Hybrid Ventilation by Revolving Doors , Proceedings of the HealthyBuildings 2006 conference, vol. 4 pp. 215 - 220, 2006 ^ Allgayer, D. M.

Air and Heat Movement by Revolving Doors , PhD Thesis, Imperial College London, 2006 [ dead link ] ^ Zmeureanu, R., Stathopoulos, T., Schopmeijer, M. E. D.

Air Leakage Through the Building Envelope via Revolving Doors , Proceedings of the International conference on building envelopes, systems and technology, pp. 467 - 472, 2001 ^ ASHRAE ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1-1999: Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings , US, 1999 ^ Cullum, B.A.

"Modifying Habits Towards Sustainability: A Study of Revolving Door Usage on the MIT Campus" (PDF) . MIT . Retrieved 7 November 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Alan Beadmore, The Revolving Door since 1881: Architecture in Detail , 2000, ISBN 90-901374-3-2 Harvey E. Van Kannel and Joanne Fox Marshall, T. Van Kannel, the inventor : his autobiography and journal , 1988, LCCN 88-91258 External links [ edit ] Media related to Revolving doors at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Revolving_door&oldid=1291291255 " Categories : American inventions Doors 1899 introductions Rotation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 08:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Revolving door 25 languages Add topic

