Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Interactivity in art 2 History 3 Forms 4 Events and places 5 Tools 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Interactive art 20 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creative works that involve viewer input This article is about display or performance art. For interactive musical performance, see Call and response (music) . For interactive digital music, see Adaptive music .

The Tunnel under the Atlantic (1995), Maurice Benayoun , Virtual Reality Interactive Installation, a video link between gallery visitors in Paris and Montreal Music Room (1983) , Jean-Robert Sedano and Solveig de Ory in Montpellier France [ 1 ] Interactive art is a form of art that involves the spectator in a way that allows the art to achieve its purpose. Some interactive art installations achieve this by letting the observer walk through, over or around them; others ask the artist or the spectators to become part of the artwork in some way.

[ 2 ] Works of this kind of art frequently feature computers , interfaces and sometimes sensors to respond to motion, heat, meteorological changes or other types of input their makers have programmed the works to respond to. Most examples of virtual Internet art and electronic art are highly interactive. Sometimes, visitors are able to navigate through a hypertext environment; some works accept textual or visual input from outside; sometimes an audience can influence the course of a performance or can even participate in it. Some other interactive artworks are considered as immersive as the quality of interaction involve all the spectrum of surrounding stimuli.

Virtual reality environments like works by Maurice Benayoun and Jeffrey Shaw are highly interactive as the work the spectators – Maurice Benayoun call them "visitors", Miroslaw Rogala calls them (v)users, Char Davies "immersants" –  interact with take all their fields of perception.

Though some of the earliest examples of interactive art have been dated back to the 1920s, most digital art didn't make its official entry into the world of art until the late 1990s.

[ 3 ] Since this debut, countless museums and venues have been increasingly accommodating digital and interactive art into their productions.  This budding genre of art is continuing to grow and evolve in a somewhat rapid manner through internet social sub-culture, as well as through large scale urban installations.

Interactivity in art [ edit ] Boundary Functions (1998) interactive floor projection by Scott Snibbe at the NTT InterCommunication Center in Tokyo [ 4 ] Interactive art is a genre of art in which the viewers participate in some way by providing an input in order to determine the outcome.  Unlike traditional art forms, wherein the interaction of the spectator is merely a mental event, interactivity allows for various types of navigation, assembly, and/or contribution to an artwork, which goes far beyond purely psychological activity.

[ 3 ] Interactivity as a medium produces meaning.

[ 5 ] Interactive art installations are generally computer-based and frequently rely on sensors, which gauge things such as temperature, motion, proximity, and other meteorological phenomena that the maker has programmed in order to elicit responses based on participant action.  In interactive artworks, both the audience and the machine work together in dialogue in order to produce a unique artwork for each audience to observe. However, not all observers visualize the same picture. Because it is interactive art, each observer makes their own interpretation of the artwork and it may be completely different from another observer's views.

[ 5 ] Interactive art can be distinguished from generative art in that it constitutes a dialogue between the artwork and the participant; specifically, the participant has agency, or the ability, even in an unintentional manner, to act upon the artwork and is furthermore invited to do so within the context of the piece, i.e. the work affords the interaction. More often, we can consider that the work takes its visitor into account. In an increasing number of cases, an installation can be defined as a "responsive environment", especially those created by architects and designers . By contrast, Generative Art , which may be interactive, but not responsive per se, tends to be a monologue – the artwork may change or evolve in the presence of the viewer, but the viewer may not be invited to engage in the reaction but merely enjoy it.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] According to the new media artist and theorist [ citation needed ] Maurice Benayoun , the first piece of interactive art should be the work done by Parrhasius during his art contest with Zeuxis described by Pliny , in the fifth century B.C. when Zeuxis tried to unveil the painted curtain. The work takes its meaning from Zeuxis' gesture and wouldn't exist without it. Zeuxis, by its gesture, became part of Parrhasius' work. This shows that the specificity of interactive art resides often less in the use of computers than in the quality of proposed "situations" and the "Other's" involvement in the process of sensemaking . Nevertheless, computers and real time computing made the task easier and opened the field of virtuality – the potential emergence of unexpected (although possibly pre-written) futures – to contemporary arts.

Some of the earliest examples of interactive art were created as early as the 1920s.  An example is Marcel Duchamp ’s piece named Rotary Glass Plates .  The artwork required the viewer to turn on the machine and stand at a distance of one meter in order to see an optical illusion.

[ 6 ] The present idea of interactive art began to flourish more in the 1960s for partly political reasons.  At the time, many people found it inappropriate for artists to carry the only creative power within their works.

[ citation needed ] Those artists who held this view wanted to give the audience their own part of this creative process.  An early example is found in the early 1960s "change-paintings" of Roy Ascott , about whom Frank Popper has written: "Ascott was among the first artists to launch an appeal for total spectator participation".

[ 7 ] Aside from the “political” view, it was also current wisdom that interaction and engagement had a positive part to play within the creative process.

[ 8 ] In the 1970s, artists began to use new technology such as video and satellites to experiment with live performances and interactions through the direct broadcast of video and audio.

[ 9 ] At this time, Gordon Pask came up with the "Conversation theory". This theory emphasizes the dynamic exchange of information between participants in a system. As a two-way dialogue, this concept of a conversation between the user and the system has shaped artists' thinking about interactivity.

[ 10 ] Interactive art became a large phenomenon due to the advent of computer-based interactivity in the 1990s. Along with this came a new kind of art-experience.  Audience and machine were now able to more easily work together in dialogue in order to produce a unique artwork for each audience.

[ 5 ] In the late 1990s, museums and galleries began increasingly incorporating the art form in their shows, some even dedicating entire exhibitions to it.

[ 11 ] This continues today and is only expanding due to increased communications through digital media.

10.000 Moving Cities (2018), Marc Lee , Augmented Reality Multiplayer Game, Art Installation [ 12 ] using smartphones A hybrid emerging discipline drawing on the combined interests of specific artists and architects has been created in the last 10–15 years.

[ when?

] Disciplinary boundaries have blurred, and significant number of architects and interactive designers have joined electronic artists in the creation of new, custom-designed interfaces and evolutions in techniques for obtaining user input (such as dog vision, alternative sensors, voice analysis , etc.); forms and tools for information display (such as video projection , lasers , robotic and mechatronic actuators , led lighting etc.); modes for human-human and human-machine communication (through the Internet and other telecommunications networks ); and to the development of social contexts for interactive systems (such as utilitarian tools, formal experiments, games and entertainment, social critique, and political liberation).

Forms [ edit ] Maurizio Bolognini , Collective Intelligence Machines series (CIMs, from 2000): interactive installations using the mobile phone network and participation technologies taken from e-democracy.

[ 13 ] There are many different forms of interactive art.  Such forms range from interactive dance, music, and even drama.

[ 14 ] New technology, primarily computer systems and computer technology, have enabled a new class of interactive art.

[ 15 ] Examples of such interactive art are installation art , interactive architecture , interactive film , and interactive storytelling . Since there is a presumed participant or agent in interactivity, interactive art has a deep connection with performance art.

[ 16 ] Events and places [ edit ] There are number of globally significant festivals and exhibitions of interactive and media arts.

Prix Ars Electronica is a major yearly competition and exhibition that gives awards to outstanding examples of (technology-driven) interactive art. Others include SIGGRAPH (the Association of Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group in Graphics), ISEA (the International Symposium on Electronic Art), DEAF (the Dutch Electronic Arts Festival), Transmediale Germany, Electronic Language International Festival Brazil, and AV Festival England.

CAiiA (the Centre for Advanced Inquiry in the Interactive Arts) was first established by Roy Ascott in 1994 at the University of Wales, Newport , and later in 2003 as the Planetary Collegium . It was the first doctoral and post doc research center to be established specifically for research in the interactive art field.

Interactive architecture has now been installed on and as part of building facades, in foyers, museums, and large scale public spaces, including airports, in a number of global cities. A number of leading museums, for example, the National Gallery , Tate , Victoria & Albert Museum , and Science Museum in London (to cite the leading UK museums active in this field) were early adopters in the field of interactive technologies, investing in educational resources, and more latterly, in the creative use of MP3 players for visitors. In 2004, the Victoria & Albert Museum commissioned curator and author Lucy Bullivant to write Responsive Environments (2006), the first such publication of its kind. Interactive designers are frequently commissioned for museum displays; a number specialize in wearable computing.

Tools [ edit ] Wiring – the first open-source electronics prototyping platform composed of a programming language , an integrated development environment (IDE), and a single-board micro controller . It was developed starting in 2003 by Hernando Barragán and was popularized under the name of Arduino Arduino – physical computing/electronics toolkit for interactive objects and installations I-CubeX – sensors, actuators and interfaces for interactive media Max/MSP – programming language for interactive media Processing (programming language) – used for many interactive art projects OpenFrameworks – open source tool similar to Processing, used for many interactive projects Pure Data – open source programming language for interactive computer music and multimedia works TouchDesigner – a node based visual programming language for real time interactive multimedia content See also [ edit ] Art game Artmedia Burning Man Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival Computer-generated art Contextual Theatre Electronic art Fax art Internet art Internet of Musical Things Kinetic sculpture Life Cube Project List of interactive artists New media art Performance art Relational art Robotic art Video game art Notes [ edit ] ^ Chambre à Musique: http://www.ludicart.com/historique/Chambre%20%C3%A0%20Musique%20CCL/Chambre_a_Musique_CCL.html ^ a b Soler-Adillon, Joan (2015-12-21).

"The intangible material of interactive art: agency, behavior and emergence" .

Artnodes (16).

doi : 10.7238/a.v0i16.2744 .

ISSN 1695-5951 .

^ a b Paul, C: Digital Art , page 67. Thames & Hudson Inc, 2003.

^ "Boundary Functions" ^ a b c Muller, L, Edmonds, E, Connel, M: "Living laboratories for interactive art", CoDesign , 2(4):3 ^ Paul, C: Digital Art , page 11. Thames & Hudson Inc, 2003.

^ Popper, Frank (2007). From Technological to Virtual Art. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. p. 77.

ISBN 978-0-262-16230-2 ^ Edmonds, E, Muller, L, Connel, M: "On creative engagement", Visual Communication , 5(307):3 ^ Paul, C: Digital Art , page 18. Thames & Hudson Inc, 2003.

^ Rosen M., "Gordon Pask's Cybernetic System: Conversations After the End of the Mechanical Age" in Samuel Bianchini and Erik Verhagen, Practicable : from participation to interaction in contemporary art , MIT Press, 2016, pp.25-38.

^ Paul, C: Digital Art , page 23. Thames & Hudson Inc, 2003.

^ "10.000 Moving Cities – Same but Different, AR (Augmented Reality) Multiplayer Game, Art Installation, 2018" . Marc Lee . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ Maurizio Bolognini , "De l'interaction à la démocratie. Vers un art génératif post-digital" / "From interactivity to democracy. Towards a post-digital generative art" , in Ethique, esthétique, communication technologique , Edition L'Harmattan. Paris, 2011, pp. 229-239.

^ Dannenberg, R, Bates, J: " A model for interactive art ", Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Symposium for Arts and Technology , 51(78):2 ^ Dannenberg, R, Bates, J: "A model for interactive art", Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Symposium for Arts and Technology , 51(78):1 ^ Dixon, Steve (2007).

Digital Performance A History of New Media in Theater, Dance, Performance Art, and Installation . Boston: MIT Press. pp. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

ISBN 9780262042352 .

Further reading [ edit ] Frank Popper , Art—Action and Participation , New York University Press, 1975 Ascott, R.2003.

Telematic Embrace: visionary theories of art, technology and consciousness . ( Edward A. Shanken , ed.) Berkeley: University of California Press.

Roy Ascott . 2002.

Technoetic Arts (Editor and Korean translation: YI, Won-Kon), (Media & Art Series no. 6, Institute of Media Art, Yonsei University). Yonsei: Yonsei University Press Ascott, R. 1998.

Art & Telematics: toward the Construction of New Aesthetics . (Japanese trans. E. Fujihara).  A. Takada &  Y. Yamashita eds. Tokyo:  NTT Publishing Co., Ltd.

Barreto, Ricardo and Perissinotto,  Paula “the_culture_of_immanence” , in Internet Art. Ricardo Barreto e Paula Perissinotto (orgs.). São Paulo, IMESP, 2002.

ISBN 85-7060-038-0 .

Brown, Kathryn, Interactive Contemporary Art: Participation in Practice , (I.B. Tauris, 2014).

Bullivant, Lucy, Responsive Environments: architecture, art and design , V&A Contemporary, 2006. London:Victoria and Albert Museum.

ISBN 1-85177-481-5 Bullivant, Lucy, 4dsocial: Interactive Design Environments . London: AD/John Wiley & Sons, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-470-31911-6 Bullivant, Lucy, 4dspace: Interactive Architecture . London: AD/John Wiley & Sons, 2005.

ISBN 0-470-09092-8 Dinkla, Söke, "Pioniere Interaktiver Kunst von 1970 bis heute". Hatje Cantz Verlag, 1997.

ISBN 9783893229239 Dreher, Thomas, The observer as actor in Happenings and context-sensitive installations. A short history of re- and interactive art/Der Beobachter als Akteur in Happenings und umweltsensitiven Installationen. Eine kleine Geschichte der re- & interaktiven Kunst , in German http://dreher.netzliteratur.net/4_Medienkunst_Text.html ] Thomas Dreher: History of Computer Art , chap. V: Reactive Installations and Virtual Reality Fleischmann, Monika and Reinhard, Ulrike (eds.).

Digital Transformations - Media Art as at the Interface between Art, Science, Economy and Society online at netzspannung.org , 2004, ISBN 3-934013-38-4 Ernest Edmonds, Linda Candy, Mark Fell, Roger Knott, Sandra Pauletto, Alastair Weakley. 2003.

Developing Interactive Art Using Visual Programming . In: Constantine Stephanidis & Julie Jacko (Editors), Human-Computer Interaction: Theory and Practice, (Part II). Volume 2. (Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, Crete, June 23–27), Published by Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, London, June 2003, pp. 1183–1187, ISBN 0-8058-4931-9 Ernest Edmonds, Greg Turner, Linda Candy. 2004.

Approaches to interactive art systems , Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques in Australasia and South East Asia , June 15–18, 2004, Singapore Fleischmann, Monika; Strauss, Wolfgang (eds.) (2001).

Proceedings of »CAST01//Living in Mixed Realities« Intl. Conf. On Communication of Art, Science and Technology, Fraunhofer IMK 2001, 401.

ISSN 1618-1379 (Print), ISSN 1618-1387 (Internet).

Oliver Grau Virtual Art, from Illusion to Immersion , MIT Press 2004, pp. 237–240, ISBN 0-262-57223-0 Christiane Paul (2003).

Digital Art (World of Art series). London: Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 0-500-20367-9 Peter Weibel and Jeffrey Shaw , Future Cinema , MIT Press 2003, pp. 472,572-581, ISBN 0-262-69286-4 Wilson, Steve, Information Arts: Intersections of Art, Science , and Technology ISBN 0-262-23209-X Edward A. Shanken , Art and Electronic Media . London: Phaidon, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-7148-4782-5 (in Spanish) Juan Martín Prada , Interactividad electrónica e interacción social , (Chapter 7 of Prácticas artísticas e Internet en la época de las redes sociales ), AKAL, Madrid, 2012 (in French) Jean-Robert Sédano , L'art interactif en jeu , Un livre interactif avec QR codes et anaglyphes, 2016, Éditions Ludicart, ISBN 978-2-9555803-0-1 Morignat Valérie, Real Presences Within Virtual Worlds , Actualités du récit. Pratiques, théories, modèles”, Volume 34 numéro 2-3, 2006, sous la direction de René Audet et Nicolas Xanthos] Morignat Valérie, Présences réelles dans les mondes virtuels , Actualités du récit. Pratiques, théories, modèles”, Volume 34 numéro 2-3, 2006, sous la direction de René Audet et Nicolas Xanthos] v t e Extended reality (XR) From least to most virtual: Augmented reality (AR) Mixed reality (MR) Virtual reality (VR) Virtuality Concepts Main Cinematic virtual reality Computer-mediated reality Immersion Metaverse Avatar Projection augmented model " Room-scale " Six degrees of freedom (6DoF) Spatial computing Telepresence Virtual reality applications Virtual reality sickness Virtual world Other Camera filter Quantified self Screen-door effect Simulation hypothesis Transhumanism Vergence-accommodation conflict VTuber Technologies Display EyeTap Head-mounted display optical Head-up display Pancake lens Smartglasses Virtual reality headset list Virtual retinal display 3D interaction Brain–computer interface Eye tracking Facial motion capture Finger/hand tracking Pose tracking Simultaneous localization and mapping Software Asynchronous reprojection Foveated rendering Image-based modeling and rendering Spatial audio Photography 360-degree video Free viewpoint television Omnidirectional (360-degree) camera VR photography Other Haptic suit Omnidirectional treadmill Wearable computer Peripherals Cyberith Virtualizer Leap Motion Oculus Touch PlayStation Move Razer Hydra Virtuix Omni Wired glove Wizdish ROVR Companies Apple Inc.

Brilliant Labs ByteDance Collabora Google HTC Khronos Group Liquid Image Magic Leap Meta Platforms Reality Labs Microsoft Niantic, Inc.

Pimax Rokoko Samsung Electronics Valve Corporation Varjo Vuzix Devices Current Apple Vision Pro Bigscreen Beyond Golden-i headsets HTC Vive Magic Leap Meta Quest 3 3S Open Source Virtual Reality PICO 4 Ultra Pimax PlayStation VR2 Valve Index Vuzix Former AntVR castAR EyePhone Google Cardboard Google Daydream Google Glass Meta Quest Pro Microsoft HoloLens 2 Oculus Go Oculus Quest Oculus/Meta Quest 2 Oculus Rift CV1 S PICO 4 PlayStation VR Samsung Gear VR Sensorama SixthSense The Sword of Damocles VFX1 Headgear Virtual Boy Virtual fixture Virtuality VR-1 Unreleased Project Iris Sega VR Software General Interactive art Virtual graffiti Metaverse Pervasive game Software related to augmented reality Virtual reality game Operating systems and desktop environments Android XR Meta Horizon OS version history visionOS Windows Mixed Reality Development tools and game engines A-Frame ARCore ARKit ARToolKit Godot Engine Jetpack Compose XR Meta Spatial SDK OpenVR OpenXR RealityKit S&box TabletopKit Unity Universal Scene Description Unreal Engine Vuforia Augmented Reality SDK WebXR Games List of HTC Vive games List of Meta Quest games List of Oculus Rift games List of PlayStation VR games VR2 Communities and social networks AltspaceVR FaceTime for visionOS Horizon Worlds NeosVR Rec Room Resonite Sansar Sensorium Sinespace VRChat VTime XR People Philippe Bekaert Maurice Benayoun Simon Birrell Mark Bolas Brendan Bradley Fred Brooks Boštjan Burger John Carmack Tim Cook Carolina Cruz-Neira Ela Darling Char Davies Thomas A. DeFanti Steven K. Feiner Scott Fisher Jerome Foster II Henry Fuchs Thomas A. Furness III Morton Heilig Eric Howlett Brendan Iribe Myron W. Krueger Jaron Lanier R. Bowen Loftin Palmer Luckey Mark Stephen Meadows Michelle and Uri Kranot Tony Parisi Nonny de la Peña Elia Petridis Warren Robinett Lawrence J. Rosenblum Daniel J. Sandin Dieter Schmalstieg Bob Sproull Nicole Stenger Ivan Sutherland Susumu Tachi Gunpei Yokoi Mark Zuckerberg In fiction Attack of the Killer App (Futurama Episode) Holodeck ( Star Trek ) Netrunner Neuromancer Ready Player One film Ready Player Two Snow Crash Superhot Sword Art Online The Matrix Portals Technology Category Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse Spatial computing Commons Augmented reality Mixed reality Virtual reality Metaverse Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interactive_art&oldid=1274400545 " Categories : Interactive art The arts Contemporary art Postmodern art Computer art Digital art New media art New media Conceptual art Mixed reality Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2022 Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 7 February 2025, at 03:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Interactive art 20 languages Add topic

