Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical work 2 Personal life 3 See also 4 References 5 Links Toggle the table of contents Joseph Levine (philosopher) 6 languages العربية Deutsch Français עברית مصرى Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher For the film producer, see Joseph E. Levine .

Joseph Levine Born ( 1952-01-17 ) 17 January 1952 (age 73) Spouse Louise Antony Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy Main interests Philosophy of mind Consciousness Philosophy of Language Metaphysics Notable ideas Explanatory gap Joseph Levine (born January 17, 1952) is an American philosopher at the University of Massachusetts Amherst who received his PhD from Harvard University in 1981. He works on philosophy of mind and is best known for formulating the explanatory gap argument against materialist explanations for consciousness .

[ 1 ] This has been cited as a precursor to David Chalmers 's formulation of the hard problem of consciousness . Levine is also the author of several popular and academic philosophy books and articles.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Levine writes on the philosophy of mind and is best known for formulating the explanatory gap argument against materialist explanations for consciousness.

[ 1 ] This has been cited as a precursor to David Chalmers's formulation of the hard problem of consciousness , and as one of the main objections materialist theories in the philosophy of mind must address.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The idea of the explanatory gap is that an unbridgeable gap exists when trying to comprehend consciousness from the perspective of natural science, as a scientific explanation of mental states would require a reduction from a physical process to phenomenal experience . The property of mental states to be experienced from a subjective point of view ( qualia ) might not be reducible from the objective, i.e. outside, perspective of science. In this sense, there would be a gap between the outside perspective of science and the internal perspective of phenomenal experience. Levine does not believe this gap necessitates a metaphysical conclusion; that is, he does not believe his argument refutes materialism. But he believes it poses a unique epistemic problem: While I think this materialist response is right in the end, it does not suffice to put the mind-body problem to rest. Even if conceivability considerations do not establish that the mind is in fact distinct from the body, or that mental properties are metaphysically irreducible to physical properties, still they do demonstrate that we lack an explanation of the mental in terms of the physical.

[ 5 ] Levine is the author of popular and academic philosophy books and articles.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Personal life [ edit ] Levine is married to philosopher Louise Antony . They have two children, including Bay Area musician Rachel Lark .

[ 9 ] [ 6 ] : 13 See also [ edit ] Thomas Nagel John Searle Frank Jackson Colin McGinn References [ edit ] ^ a b Joseph Levine (1983), "Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap," Pacific Philosophical Quarterly , 64(4), October 1983, pp. 354–361 ^ Weisberg, Josh.

"The Hard Problem of Consciousness" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

ISSN 2161-0002 . Retrieved 11 September 2018 .

^ Gennaro, Rocco J.

"Consciousness" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

ISSN 2161-0002 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ Van Gulick, Robert (2018).

"Consciousness" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ J. Levine, "Conceivability, Identity, and the Explanatory Gap" in  Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak and David Chalmers (eds.), Towards a Science of Consciousness III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates , The MIT Press, 1999,. pp 3-12.

^ a b Joseph Levine (2001), Purple Haze. The Puzzle of Consciousness . Oxford University Press, 2001 ^ Joseph Levine (2006), In Kenneth Williford & Uriah Kriegel (eds.), Self-Representational Approaches to Consciousness. The Mit Press. 173--198 (2006) ^ Joseph Levine (1993), On Leaving Out What It's Like , in: G. Humphreys and M. Davies (Eds.): Consciousness. Psychological and Philosophical Essays . Basil Blackwell, Oxford 1993, pp. 121–136. Reprint in: N.J. Block, O. Flanagan, and G. Güzeledere (Eds.): The Nature of Consciousness. Philosophical Debates . MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts 1997.

^ "What's the Point? With Rachel Lark: Louise Antony: The Artist as One of the Points on Apple Podcasts" .

Links [ edit ] Homepage of Joseph Levine , University of Massachusetts, Amherst, with bibliography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Catalonia Academics PhilPeople Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joseph_Levine_(philosopher)&oldid=1282153041 " Categories : 1952 births 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers American consciousness researchers and theorists Harvard University alumni Living people Materialists American metaphysicians American philosophers of language American philosophers of mind University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 17:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joseph Levine (philosopher) 6 languages Add topic

