Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Lawrence Scientific School 1.2 Re-establishment 1.3 Later history 2 Academic overview 3 Research highlights Toggle Research highlights subsection 3.1 Early 20th century 3.2 1995 to 2006 3.3 2007 and beyond 4 Notable alumni 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences 3 languages বাংলা 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′21.67″N 71°07′06.73″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3726861°N 71.1185361°W ﻿ / 42.3726861; -71.1185361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Engineering school of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Type Private Established 1847 ; 178 years ago ( 1847 ) Endowment $1.2 billion (2017) [ 1 ] Dean David C. Parkes Academic staff 147 faculty 642 researchers 232 staff (spring 2022) [ 2 ] Undergraduates 1,123 (spring 2022) [ 2 ] Postgraduates 682 (spring 2022) [ 2 ] Location Cambridge, Massachusetts Campus Urban Website seas.harvard.edu The Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences ( SEAS ) is the engineering school of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences at Harvard University .

It offers degrees in engineering and applied sciences to graduate students admitted directly to SEAS, and to undergraduates admitted first to Harvard College . Previously the Lawrence Scientific School and then the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, the Paulson School assumed its current structure in 2007.

David C. Parkes has been its dean since 2023.

[ 3 ] SEAS is housed in Harvard's Science and Engineering Complex (SEC) in the Allston neighborhood of Boston directly across the Charles River from Harvard's main campus in Cambridge [ 4 ] and adjacent to the Harvard Business School and Harvard Innovation Labs .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Abbott Lawrence , a businessman, politician, and philanthropist whose gift of $50,000 in 1847 inspired the school's founding Lawrence Scientific School [ edit ] Harvard's efforts to provide formal education in advanced science and engineering began in 1847, when Massachusetts industrialist Abbott Lawrence gave Harvard $50,000 (equivalent to $1,400,000 in 2023) to form what became known as the Lawrence Scientific School . In making his gift, Lawrence asked: [ 6 ] But where can we send those who intend to devote themselves to the practical applications of science? Our country abounds in men of action. Hard hands are ready to work upon our hard materials; and where shall sagacious heads be taught to direct those hands?

James Emmanuel Jr. was the first dean of the school, which hosted astronomers, architects, naturalists, engineers, mathematicians, and even philosophers.

By the late 19th century, the School faced increasing competition from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and was constrained by the uncertain views about its role and status by the long-serving Harvard President Charles William Eliot . Eliot was involved in at least five unsuccessful attempts to absorb MIT into Harvard.

[ 7 ] [ better source needed ] As a result of such uncertainty, the Lawrence Scientific School became less of an independent entity, losing its influence and students to other parts of the university.

In 1891, the industrialist Gordon McKay designated the Lawrence Scientific School his primary beneficiary; there are now 40 McKay professorships.

In 1906, the Lawrence School's scientific and engineering programs were incorporated into Harvard College and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , and it ceased to exist as an independent entity.

Re-establishment [ edit ] In 1914, a merger of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard's Applied Science departments was formally announced [ 8 ] and was to begin "when the Institute will occupy its splendid new buildings in Cambridge." [ 9 ] However, in 1917, the merger with MIT was canceled due to a decision by the State Judicial Court, [ further explanation needed ] so Harvard President Abbott Lawrence Lowell moved to establish the Harvard Engineering School independently instead.

[ 10 ] In 1934, the School began offering graduate-level and professional programs in engineering. During World War II , Harvard participated in the V-12 Navy College Training Program to provide training for commissioned officers. In 1942, the undergraduate Department of Engineering Sciences changed to the Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Physics to reflect an increased emphasis on applied physics. Harvard President James Bryant Conant created what was known as "Conant's Arsenal", a research hub for defense-related engineering projects including radar jamming , night vision, aerial photography, sonar , explosives, napalm, and atomic bomb research.

[ 11 ] One notable project from this era was the Harvard Mark I computer; one of the first programs to run on the Mark I was initiated on March 29, 1944, by John von Neumann , who worked on the Manhattan Project at the time, and needed to determine whether implosion was a viable choice to detonate the atomic bomb that would be used a year later.

[ 12 ] By 1945, Harvard income from government contracts was $33.5 million, the third highest among U.S. universities.

[ 13 ] Later history [ edit ] Between 1946 and 1949, the Graduate School of Engineering merged its faculty with the Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Physics into the Division of Engineering Sciences within the Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences . It was renamed several times: Division of Applied Science (1951), Division of Engineering and Applied Physics (1955), Division of Applied Sciences (1975), Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences (1996).

[ 14 ] It was often informally called The Division.

In 2007, the Harvard Corporation and Overseers voted for the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences to become the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS).

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In 2015, Francis J. Doyle III , former director of the Institute for Collaborative Biotechnologies , was appointed dean.

[ 17 ] That year, the school was also renamed the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences following a $400 million gift by Harvard Business School alumnus John A. Paulson .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Academic overview [ edit ] Undergraduates can pursue programs in computer science (AB and as a secondary field), engineering sciences (AB and SB), biomedical engineering (AB), electrical engineering (SB), environmental science and engineering (AB), mechanical engineering (SB), and applied mathematics (AB and as a secondary field). SB options for environmental science and engineering as well as biomedical engineering are also available through the engineering sciences program; ABET accreditation is offered for all of the traditional engineering disciplines. Prospective undergraduates must apply to Harvard College (Harvard's undergraduate college encompassing all concentrations): once enrolled, Harvard College students may declare a SEAS concentration in their sophomore year.

[ 20 ] At the graduate level, the School offers master's and PhD degrees in areas including applied mathematics, applied physics, bioengineering , data science , chemical engineering , computational science and engineering, computer science, electrical engineering , design engineering, applied computation, environmental science and engineering, as well as materials science and mechanical engineering . In addition, graduate students may pursue collaborative options such as Medical Engineering and Medical Physics (with Harvard–MIT Program in Health Sciences and Technology ) and Systems, Synthetic, and Quantitative Biology (with Harvard Medical School ).

As of January 2020, the School had 148 faculty members.

[ 21 ] The faculty has particularly close ties (including joint appointments) with the FAS departments of Physics, Earth and Planetary Science, as well as Chemistry and Chemical Biology. The campus provides 600,000 square feet (56,000 m 2 ) of interconnected labs, classrooms, clusters, and offices in six buildings.

[ 22 ] SEAS is expected to expand into the new Science and Engineering Complex (SEC) under construction in Allston, across the Charles River from Harvard's main location in Cambridge.

[ 23 ] The SEC will be adjacent to the Enterprise Research Campus in synergy with Harvard Business School and Harvard Innovation Labs to encourage technology- and life science-focused startups as well as collaborations with mature companies.

[ 5 ] Areas of significant research focus include applied mathematics, applied physics, bioengineering, geophysics, computer science, electrical engineering, artificial intelligence, mechanical engineering, and computational neuroscience.

[ 24 ] Research highlights [ edit ] Early 20th century [ edit ] 1919 – George Washington Pierce (PhD, 1900), Rumford Professor of Physics and director of Harvard's Cruft High-Tension Electrical Laboratory invented an oscillator that enabled a given radio station to stay "fixed" at a proper frequency and allowed multiple telephone calls to occur over a single line.

1938 – A cyclotron was constructed at the Graduate School of Engineering's Gordon McKay Engineering Laboratory  to support research in biology and medicine as well as physics. It was projected to be the world's largest such facility. In 1942, it was sent to Los Alamos for work on the Manhattan Project to develop an atomic bomb.

1944 – Howard Aiken '37 (PhD) developed the Mark I series of computers, the first large-scale automatic digital computer in the U.S. Around the same time, a new generation of technically trained students began to share their knowledge well beyond Harvard's campus. Alumnus and donor Allen E. Puckett SB '39, SM '41 created an endowed professorship at SEAS, went on to define modern aerodynamics, served as CEO of Hughes Aircraft Company , and won the National Medal of Honor in Technology.

1952 – Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), the scientific foundation for MRI (used in modern medical imaging systems), was pioneered by Nicolaas Bloembergen , Edward Purcell , and Robert Pound . Purcell won the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery.

[ 25 ] 1995 to 2006 [ edit ] Stopping light – Lene Hau and her colleagues created a new form of matter, a Bose-Einstein Condensate , to slow light to 17 meters per second and later to bring a light beam to a complete stop, then restart it again.

[ 26 ] Unbreakable hyper-encryption – Michael O. Rabin embedded messages in rapidly moving streams of random digital bits in ways that cannot be decoded, even with unlimited computing power.

Black silicon – Eric Mazur 's group created a new material that efficiently traps light and has potential use in solar cells, global warming sensors and ultra-thin television screens.

The mathematics of nature – L. Mahadevan and colleagues discovered how the Venus flytrap snaps up its prey in a mere tenth of a second by actively shifting the curved shape of its mouth-like leaves.

Atmospheric modeling – Loretta J. Mickley, Dan Jacob and colleagues found that the frequency of cold fronts bringing cool, clear air out of Canada during the summer months declined by about 20 percent. These cold fronts are responsible for breaking up the hot, stagnant air that builds up regularly in summer, generating high levels of ground level ozone pollution.

High speed nanowire circuits – Donhee Ham and Charles Lieber made robust circuits from minuscule nanowires that align themselves on a chip of glass during low-temperature fabrication, creating rudimentary electronic devices that offer performance without high-temperature production or high-priced silicon.

Double emulsions – A new microfluidics-based device made by David A. Weitz and colleagues at Harvard University and Unilever makes precisely controlled double emulsions in a single step. Double emulsions, or droplets inside droplets, could be useful for encapsulating products such as drugs, cosmetics, or food additives.

2007 and beyond [ edit ] Applied physicist Lene Hau caused a light pulse disappeared from one cold cloud then was retrieved from another cloud nearby. In the process, light was converted into matter then back into light.

A research team led by Mike Aziz and Earth and Planetary Sciences' Kurt House invented an engineered weathering process that might mitigate climate change .

Bioengineers including David Edwards collaborated with public health researchers at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health to develop a novel spray-drying method for delivering a tuberculosis vaccine that could help prevent the related spread of HIV/AIDS in the developing world.

Working with a team of Dutch researchers and software developers, SEAS computer scientists used a novel peer-to-peer video sharing application to explore a model for e-commerce that uses bandwidth as a global currency.

Rob Wood's team launched a robotic fly that could be used in everything from surveillance to chemical sensing.

MIT's Technology Review named the creation of light-focusing optical antennas (that could lead to DVDs that hold hundreds of movies) as one of their Top 10 emerging technologies for 2007.

Kit Parker's lab found that an elastic film coated with a single layer of cardiac muscle cells can semi-autonomously engage in lifelike gripping, pumping, walking and swimming.

Nan Sun and Donhee Ham built what may be the smallest complete nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) system to date in a 0.1-kilogram (0.22 lb) package.

[ 27 ] Engineers and applied physicists demonstrated the first room-temperature electrically pumped semiconductor laser source of terahertz (THz) radiation, also known as T-rays.

A team composed of Harvard students and alumni was among the winners of the World Bank's Lighting Africa 2008 Development Marketplace competition, held in Accra, Ghana. The innovation, microbial fuel cell -based lighting systems suitable for Sub-Saharan Africa, netted the group a $200,000 prize.

[ 28 ] In collaboration with SiEnergy Systems, materials scientists at SEAS have demonstrated the first macro-scale thin-film solid-oxide fuel cell (SOFC).

[ 29 ] An interdisciplinary research effort investigated digitized text corpuses containing about 4% of all books ever printed in English, between 1800 and 2000. It was co-founded and co-directed by Erez Aiden and Jean-Baptiste Michel, whose prototype was instrumental in creating Google Ngram Viewer .

Notable alumni [ edit ] See also: Category:Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences alumni Howard H. Aiken (AM '37, PhD '39) - computer scientist and designer of the Harvard Mark I Hardy Cross (MCE '11) - American structural engineer and developer of the moment distribution method for structural analysis of statically indeterminate structures Howard Wilson Emmons (PhD '38) -  mechanical engineer considered "the father of modern fire science" for his contribution to the understanding of flame propagation and fire dynamics, helped design the first supersonic wind tunnel , identified a signature of the transition to turbulence in boundary layer flows (now known as "Emmons spots"), and was the first to observe compressor stall in a gas turbine compressor Simon Newcomb (SB 1858) - Rear Admiral in the United States Navy and a leader in mathematical astronomy Charles Sanders Peirce (SB 1862) -  known as the "father of pragmatism " Trip Adler (AB '06) - CEO and co-founder of digital library and document sharing platform Scribd Robert Berger (PhD '65) - invented the first aperiodic tiling Fred Brooks (PhD '56) - Turing Award winner, managed the development of IBM 's System/360 family of computers and the OS/360 software support package, and wrote about the process in the well-regarded book The Mythical Man-Month Don Coppersmith (SM '75, PhD '77) - developed Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm for rapid matrix multiplication Danny Cohen (PhD '69) - internet pioneer, developed the first real-time visual flight simulator and the Cohen-Sutherland line clipping algorithm E. Allen Emerson (PhD '81) - Turing Award winner for developing model checking John Fawcett (AB '99) - entrepreneur and co-founder of hedge fund software companies Tamale Software and Quantopian Danielle Feinberg (AB '96) - cinematographer and Director of Photography for Lighting at Pixar Animation Studios Shih Choon Fong (PhD '73) - founding president of the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Paul Graham (SM '88, PhD '90) - Y Combinator cofounder, introduced the Blub paradox Jesse Grupper (born 1997) - Olympic rock climber Martha Crawford Heitzmann (PhD '97) - former head of research at French nuclear power conglomerate Areva , senior vice president of research at L'Oréal Tony Hsieh (AB '95) - internet entrepreneur and venture capitalist , CEO of online shoe and clothing shop Zappos Marco Iansiti (AB '83, PhD '88) - microelectronics engineer and Harvard Business School professor Kenneth E. Iverson (PhD '54) - Turing Award winner for developing the APL programming language Richard M. Karp (AB '55, PhD '59) - Turing Award winner for contributions to the theory of NP-completeness Iris Mack (PhD '86) - applied mathematician in quantitative finance , MIT professor, and author Marvin Minsky (AB '50) - Turing Award winner for co-founding the field of artificial intelligence Robert Tappan Morris (AB '87, SM '93, PhD '99) - creator of the Morris Worm , the first computer worm on the internet and first person convicted under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act , co-founded Y-Combinator , professor at MIT Dennis Ritchie (AB '63, PhD '68) - Turing Award winner, created the C programming language and Unix operating system Don Ross (PhD '53) - recipient of the Navy Distinguished Civilian Service Award , made important developments in reduction of submarine noise Donald Rubin (SM '66, PhD '70) - statistician known for the Rubin Causal Model Steven Salzberg (PhD '89) - computational biologist who made significant contributions to gene finding and sequence alignment bioinformatics algorithms, notably GLIMMER , MUMmer , and Bowtie Alfred Spector (AB '76) - co-founder of Transarc , former vice president of research at Google , and CTO of Two Sigma Investments Richard Stallman (AB '74) - founder of the Free Software Foundation Guy L. Steele Jr.

(AB '75) - made significant contributions to the design and documentation of several programming languages Marius Vassiliou (AB '78) - computational physicist known for introducing Rokhlin's fast multipole method to computational electromagnetics An Wang (PhD '48) - invented magnetic core memory Stephanie Wilson (SB '88) - NASA astronaut Jane Willis (AB '91, JD '94) - member of the MIT Blackjack Team Tai Tsun Wu (SM '54, PhD '56) - physicist known for significant contributions in high-energy nuclear physics and statistical mechanics Harold Zirin (SB '50, PhD '53) - astrophysicist known as "Captain Corona" See also [ edit ] Engineering Glossary of engineering References [ edit ] ^ "The Numbers" . Archived from the original on April 10, 2018 . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ a b c "School Overview" .

Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences . Harvard University . Retrieved March 15, 2022 .

^ "Q&A with Dean Parkes" . Harvard. 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 9 March 2024 .

^ O'Rourke, Brigid (April 10, 2020).

"SEAS moves opening of Science and Engineering Complex to spring semester '21" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 18 April 2020 .

^ a b "Our Campus" . Retrieved December 20, 2019 .

^ "Abbott Lawrence" .

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences . Harvard. 18 March 2013 . Retrieved January 27, 2017 .

^ Alexander, Philip N.

"MIT-Harvard Rivalry Timeline" .

MIT Music and Theater Arts News . Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 2014-07-14 . Retrieved 2014-07-07 .

^ "Tech Alumni Holds Reunion. Record attendance, novel features. Cooperative plan with Harvard announced by Pres. Maclaurin. Gov. Walsh Brings Best Wishes of the State". Boston Daily Globe. 1914-01-11. p. 117.

Maclaurin quoted: "in future Harvard agrees to carry out all its work in engineering and mining in the buildings of Technology under the executive control of the president of Technology, and, what is of the first importance, to commit all instruction and the laying down of all courses to the faculty of Technology, after that faculty has been enlarged and strengthened by the addition to its existing members of men of eminence from Harvard's Graduate School of Applied Science." ^ "Harvard-Tech Merger. Duplication of Work to be Avoided in Future. Instructors Who Will Hereafter be Members of Both Faculties". Boston Daily Globe. 1914-01-25. p. 47.

^ President's Reports for 1917-18 ^ Ireland, Corydon (10 November 2011).

"Harvard Goes to War" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 30 March 2017 .

^ Cohen, Bernard (2000). Howard Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-2625317-9-5 .

^ Downs, Donald Alexander; Murtazashvili, Ilia (2012).

Arms and the University: Military Presence and the Civic Education of Non-Military Students . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521192323 .

^ Faust, Drew (2007-09-20).

"Launch of Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (speech)" .

Harvard University, Office of the President . Retrieved 2024-03-09 .

^ "Harvard proposes to transform Engineering Division into a school" .

Harvard Gazette . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved June 24, 2008 .

^ Harvard News Office.

"Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences votes to change the name Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences to School of Engineering and Applied Sciences" . News.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2012-10-18 .

^ "A new dean for SEAS" . Harvard. May 14, 2015 . Retrieved December 21, 2019 .

^ "Harvard receives its largest gift" . 3 June 2015.

^ "John Paulson Gives $400 Million to Harvard for Engineering School" .

The New York Times . 4 June 2015.

^ "Liberal Arts & Sciences" . Retrieved 2019-12-07 .

^ "School Overview" . Retrieved March 16, 2020 .

^ "School Overview" . Retrieved December 8, 2019 .

^ Haili, Ruth A.; Jia, Amy L. (October 22, 2019).

"SEAS Students Conflicted About Allston Expansion" . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 25 October 2019 .

^ "FACULTY & RESEARCH" . Retrieved December 21, 2019 .

^ "Edward Purcell" .

Magnet Academy . National High Magnetic Field Laboratory . Retrieved 22 December 2019 .

^ "Lene Hau" .

^ Sun, Nan; Yoon, Tae-Jong; Lee, Hakho; Andress, William; Weissleder, Ralph; Ham, Donhee (Jan 2011). "Palm NMR and 1-chip NMR".

IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits .

46 (1): 342– 352.

Bibcode : 2011IJSSC..46..342S .

doi : 10.1109/JSSC.2010.2074630 .

S2CID 10471266 .

^ "Undergraduates develop 'dirt-powered' microbial fuel cells to light Africa" .

Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences . Retrieved 22 December 2019 .

^ Jazkarta (2011-04-03).

"Materials scientists at Harvard demonstrate the first macro-scale thin-film solid-oxide fuel cell — Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences" . Seas.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013 . Retrieved 2012-10-18 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Artists Museum of Modern Art 42°22′21.67″N 71°07′06.73″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3726861°N 71.1185361°W ﻿ / 42.3726861; -71.1185361 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_John_A._Paulson_School_of_Engineering_and_Applied_Sciences&oldid=1303609620 " Categories : Engineering universities and colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1847 Harvard University schools Universities and colleges in Cambridge, Massachusetts University subdivisions in Massachusetts 1847 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences Computer science institutes Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences 3 languages Add topic

