Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Friar 1.2 Death 2 Thought 3 Influence 4 Works 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange 19 languages العربية Asturianu Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Ido Italiano مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Roman Catholic theologian (1877–1964) For 18th- to 19th- century Roman Catholic saint and priest, see Maurice-Marie-Matthieu Garrigou .

Not to be confused with Gustave Garrigou or Félix Garrigou .

The Reverend Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange OP Garrigou-Lagrange as a young priest Born Gontran-Marie Garrigou Lagrange ( 1877-02-21 ) 21 February 1877 Auch , France Died 15 February 1964 (1964-02-15) (aged 86) Rome , Italy Burial place Campo Verano Education University of Bordeaux (medicine) University of Paris (philosophy) Church Catholic Church Ordained September 28, 1902 (priest) Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Réginald Marie Garrigou-Lagrange OP ( French: [gaʁigu lagʁɑ̃ʒ] ; 21 February 1877 – 15 February 1964) was a French Dominican friar , philosopher and theologian . Garrigou-Lagrange was a neo-Thomist theologian, recognized along with Édouard Hugon and Martin Grabmann as distinguished theologians of the 20th century.

[ 1 ] As professor at the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas , he taught dogmatic and spiritual theology in Rome from 1909 to 1959. There he wrote The Three Ages of the Interior Life ( Les trois âges de la vie intérieure) in 1938.

Life [ edit ] Gontran-Marie Garrigou Lagrange was born in Auch , near Toulouse , France on 21 February 1877. His father François Garrigou-Lagrange, was a civil servant. Lagrange was the relative of Henri Lasserre, a historian, through his mother, Cleménce Lasserre and his paternal grand-uncle was Maurice-Marie-Matthieu Garrigou . Although Lagrange's family was Catholic, the young boy didn't show signs of remarkable piety as was seen in the late nineteenth century of those who would later become saints.

He went to many different schools but one of them was the lycée at Tarbes in which he studied philosophy for about a year. While studying at Tarbes, he wrote an essay on the problem of pain, in the essay he mentions the intellectual, moral and artistic advantages of suffering, but not the religious significance of suffering.

[ 2 ] After completing his final years in school, he began apprehending a vocation in medicine and thus he commenced his medical studies at the University of Bordeaux in 1896. While studying medicine at Bordeaux , he experienced what he described as a religious conversion after reading Life, Science, and Art by the Breton writer Ernest Hello (1828–85). He would later recall to his Dominican confrere, Rosaire Gagnebet: I was able to glimpse how the doctrine of the Catholic Church is the absolute Truth concerning God and his intimate life and concerning the human person, his origin and his supernatural destiny. I saw in a wink of an eye that it was not a truth relative to our time and place but an absolute truth that will not change but will become more and more apparent up to the time when we see God face to face. A ray of light shone before my eyes and made clear the words of the Lord: "The heavens and the earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away." I understood that this truth must bear fruit like the grain of wheat in good soil..." [ 3 ] [ 2 ] Friar [ edit ] Lagrange went through a discernment process, which led him to discern many religious orders but culminated in him joining the Dominican Order ; he joined the Dominicans of the Paris province at Amiens in the fall of 1897. Father Constant, a novice master, who plausibly educated Garrigou during his time in the novitiate, was renowned to be an austere friar, but "one who greatly loved the Order and knew how to lead others to love it." In the Dominican Order, it was requisite for a novice to become a priest to continue his journey as a friar, thus after he finished his novitiate the young novice went to the studium in Flavigny to begin his philosophical and theological studies under Ambroise Gardeil [ fr ] to prepare for the priesthood. Lagrange and Gardeil shared a close relationship which would last until Gardeil died in 1938. Lagrange was ordained a priest on September 28, 1902.

While at the Sorbonne, Garrigou was able to attend lectures that included Emile Durkheim , Gabriel Séailles , and Lucien Levy-Bruhl; later in life, he would recall that he had been present at a lecture where Alfred Loisy rehearsed his trademark theme; "Jesus preached the kingdom of God, and it was the Church that came". As fate would have it, it was at the Sorbonne in which Garrigou would meet the young Bergsonian –  destined to become a major proponent of Thomism – Jacques Maritain where they would have a good relationship throughout the 1930s to 1940s. While Garrigou was teaching the history of philosophy, the studium moved many times because of the anti-clerical laws of the administration of Emile Combes, which affected Garrigou's political outlook.

In 1906, the deteriorating health of Etienne Hugueny caused him to resign from his post and Garrigou was called to ascend to the chair of dogmatic theology at Le Saulchoir. This change was a decisive moment in Garrigou's life which would allow him to devote himself to the study of philosophy which he would relish. As a subsequent result of this change, Garrigou commenced his approfondissement (in-depth study) in the works of Saint Thomas Aquinas and other Thomists who would guide him throughout his life. It was here where Garrigou wrote his first book, Le sens commun, la philosophie de l'être et les formules dogmatiques , a critique of Eduard Le Roy's attempt to interpret the dogmas of the church with a Bergsonian hermeneutic which led Le Roy to downplay the Church's emphasis on radical dogmatic continuity throughout history. In 1909, Master General Hyacinthe Cormier recognized his abilities and assigned him to the Angelicum where he continued teaching dogmatic theology until his retirement in 1959. In 1917 a special professorship in ascetical and mystical theology was created for him at the Angelicum , the first of its kind anywhere in the world.

[ 4 ] Death [ edit ] As Garrigou began to lose energy, he was moved to the priory of Santa Sabina in Rome subsequently moved to the Fraternitè Sacerdotale Canadienne and died there on 15 February 1964. Benoît Lavaud said: He leaves us in parting, along with his monumental written oeuvre, an admirable example of religious life and of fidelity to his vocation, to work and to the love of the truth, to apostolic zeal, docility to the Church, to abandon to the will of the Lord whom he served for so long and who just called him to Himself: Euge, serve bone." [ 5 ] Thought [ edit ] He is best known for his spiritual theology. His magnum opus in the field is The Three Ages of the Interior Life (Les trois ages de la vie int é rieure), [ 6 ] in which he propounded the thesis that infused contemplation and the resulting mystical life are in the normal way of holiness of Christian perfection. This influenced the section entitled "Chapter V: The Universal Call to Holiness in the Church" in the Second Vatican Council 's Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, Lumen gentium .

[ 7 ] He synthesized the highly abstract writings of St. Thomas Aquinas with the experiential writings of St. John of the Cross , attempting to show they are in perfect harmony with each other.

[ 8 ] Father Garrigou-Lagrange, the leading proponent of "strict observance Thomism ", attracted wider attention when in 1946 he wrote against the Nouvelle théologie theological movement, criticizing elements of it as Modernist .

[ 9 ] He is also said to be the drafter of Pope Pius XII 's 1950 encyclical Humani generis , subtitled "Concerning Some False Opinions Threatening to Undermine the Foundations of Catholic Doctrine".

[ 10 ] In politics, like many neo-scholastic theologians of his time, Garrigou-Lagrange was a strong supporter of the far-right movement Action Française and he also sympathized with Vichy France . In 1941 he praised the French collaborationist regime and its Chief of State Pétain in a letter written to his former disciple Jacques Maritain : "I am entirely with the Marshal , I see him as the Father of the patrie , blessed with a good sense verging on genius, and as a truly providential man".

[ 11 ] Maritain described Garrigou-Lagrange as "valiantly fighting for Vichy," while Maritain's anti-Vichy student Yves Simon wrote of Garrigou-Lagrange, "If I did not hold the sacerdotal role in such respect I would write to him that I would hold him responsible if some misfortune comes to any of my Jewish friends".

[ 12 ] Indeed, Garrigou-Lagrange went so far as to declare in a letter that for a Catholic to support de Gaulle would be a mortal sin.

[ 13 ] However, as Matthew K. Minerd, Ph.D., states in an interview, Garrigou-Lagrange's support for the Vichy regime reflected a Catholic reaction against the French Revolution and the Republic, especially its anti-clericalism. Furthermore, in Garrigou-Lagrange's remarks on Pétain, Dr. Minerd has not found a single antisemitic statement. Garrigou-Lagrange also admitted a lack of engagement with political questions and acknowledged that politics was his weakest area.

[ 14 ] Influence [ edit ] L'Osservatore Romano of 9–10 December 1950 lists Garrigou-Lagrange among the names of the preparatory commission for the definition of the Assumption of Mary .

[ 15 ] Garrigou-Lagrange taught many Catholic theologians during his academic career at the Angelicum . He also supervised the doctoral research of Marie-Dominique Chenu , who was ordained in 1919 and completed his doctorate in theology in 1920 with a dissertation entitled De contemplatione .

[ 16 ] In the period between World War II and the Cold War Garrigou-Lagrange was the "torchbearer of orthodox Thomism " against Modernism.

[ 17 ] In 1926 he served as the definitive consulter to Pope Pius XI in declaring John of the Cross a doctor of the church.

[ 18 ] He is commonly held to have influenced the decision in 1942 to place the privately circulated book Une école de théologie: le Saulchoir (Étiolles 1937) by Marie-Dominique Chenu , O.P.

, on the Vatican's Index Librorum Prohibitorum as the culmination of a polemic within the Dominican Order between the Angelicum supporters of speculative scholasticism and the French revival Thomists who were more attentive to historical hermeneutics.

[ 19 ] Garrigou-Lagrange gave the retreat in Paris which attracted Yves Congar to leave the diocesan seminary in order to join the Dominicans.

[ 20 ] Later, Congar's methodology was suspected of Modernism because it seemed to derive more from religious experience than from syllogistic analysis.

[ 21 ] Garrigou-Lagrange also supervised the doctoral research of Maurice Zundel who completed his dissertation in 1927 with a dissertation entitled L'Influence du nominalisme sur la pensée chrétienne .

[ 22 ] Perhaps the most famous of his students was the future Pope John Paul II , who was supervised by Garrigou-Lagrange for his doctoral research in the mid-1940s at the Angelicum , and whose encyclical Fides et Ratio is attributed to his training under Garrigou-Lagrange.

Garrigou-Lagrange died on 15 February 1964 in Rome. The International Dominican Foundation (IDF) established Réginald de Rocquois Foundation in his memory at Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas where he taught most of his career, which grants annual Réginald de Rocquois scholarships.

[ 23 ] Works [ edit ] He produced 28 books and hundreds of articles. Among the most famous works are: Commentaries on the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas The One God , commentary on Summa Theologica I.1-26.

PDF.

The Trinity and God the Creator , commentary on Summa Theologica I.27-119.

PDF.

Beatitude (1951), commentary on Summa Theologica I-II.1-54.

Grace (1947), commentary on Summa Theologica I-II.109-114.

PDF .

The Theological Virtues - Vol. 1: Faith (1948, English retranslation scheduled for 2018), commentary on Summa Theologica II-II.1-16.

Christ the Saviour (1945), commentary on Summa Theologica III.1-26, 31-59.

PDF.

De Eucharistia (1943, English trans. scheduled for 2018) Theological works Christian Perfection and Contemplation according to St Thomas Aquinas and St John of the Cross (1923) God, His Existence and Nature: A Thomistic Solution of Certain Agnostic Antinomies (1914) See also Pierre Duhem 's appendix to it: " Note sure la valeur des principes de l'inertie et de la conservation de l'énergie " Life Everlasting The Sense of Mystery: Clarity and Obscurity in the Intellectual Life (trans. 2017, publ. by Emmaus Academic), French original: Le sens du mystère et le clair-obsur intellectuel (1934) Life Everlasting and Immensity of the Soul (1947) The Love of God and the Cross of Jesus (1929) Predestination (1936) scanned version .

The Priest in Union with Christ (1948) Providence (1932) Our Saviour and His Love for Us (1933) The Three Ages of the Interior Life : Prelude of Eternal Life (1938), synthesis of Christian Perfection and Contemplation and Love of God and the Cross of Jesus ( online ) The Three Ways of the Spiritual Life (1938) Essenza e attualità del tomismo (1945) (in Italian) On Divine Revelation: The Teaching of the Catholic Faith (trans. 2022, publ. by Emmaus Academic), Latin original: De Revelatione per Ecclesiam Catholicam proposita (final edition in 1950) Principles of Catholic Apologetics , translated (in abridged form) and rearranged by Thomas Joseph Walshe from Fr. Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange's De Revelatione ( see below ) Marian works The Mother of the Saviour and our Interior Life (1948).

scanned version .

Philosophical works Reality: A Synthesis of Thomistic Thought PDF.

ePub.

Free Audiobook.

Le sens commun: la philosophie de l'être et les formules dogmatiques (4th ed., 1936).  English translation as Thomistic Common Sense: The Philosophy of Being and the Development of Doctrine (2021, Emmaus Academic) Le realism du principe de finalité (1932).  English translation as The Order of Things: The Realism of the Principle of Finality (2020, Emmaus Academic) Philosophizing in Faith: The Beginning and End of Wisdom Volume of collected, annotated, and translated articles, published by Cluny Media in 2019 Works in Latin (originals) De Revelatione per Ecclesiam Catholicam proposita – Theologia Fundamentalis secundum S. Thomae Doctrinam ( Volume I & Volume II ) Works in Spanish (translated) Dios: Su existencia solución tomista de las antinomias agnósticas ( Volumen I & Volumen II ) El realismo del principio de finalidad El Salvador y su amor por nosotros El Sentido Común (Original in French: Le sens commun ) El Sentido del Misterio La Madre del Salvador y nuestra vida interior La Predestinacion de los Santos y la Gracia La providencia y la confianza en Dios La Santificacion del Sacerdote La síntesis tomista Las tres edades de la vida interior La Unión del sacerdote con Cristo Sacerdote y Victima La vida eterna y La profundidad del alma Other Complete bibliography Nearly all his works in Latin, English, French, Italian, and Spanish are downloadable here.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Consecration and entrustment to Mary References [ edit ] ^ Romero Carrasquillo, Francisco J. (16 June 2007).

"Maritain's Thought and Fr. Garrigou-Lagrange" .

Ite ad Thomam: "Go to Thomas!" . Retrieved 17 June 2013 .

^ a b Gagnebet, Marie-Rosaire (1965).

"L'Oeuvre du P. Garrigou-Lagrange: Itineraire intellectuel et spirituel vers Dieu" .

Angelicum .

42 (1/2): 9– 10.

JSTOR 44620127 .

^ The Sacred Monster of Thomism by Richard Peddicord

(Physical book on Amazon, not to be confounded with the online pdf since they aren't the same.) ^ Michael L. Coulter; Richard S. Myers; Joseph A. Varacalli (2012).

Encyclopedia of Catholic Social Thought, Social Science, and Social Policy: Supplement . Scarecrow Press. pp. 124–.

ISBN 978-0-8108-8266-9 .

^ Lavaud, 'Le Pere Garrigou-Lagrange," 199 ^ The Three Ages of the Interior Life Online text.

^ Mullady, Brian (2 April 2009).

"Rehabilitation of Garrigou-Lagrange" . Retrieved 26 July 2012 .

^ "A saint in Heaven", by Fr. Thomas Crean, http://www.christendom-awake.org/pages/thomas-crean/saint-in-heaven.htm Accessed 4-10-2012 ^ Garrigou-Lagrange, Reginald (1946).

"La nouvelle théologie où va-t-elle ?" .

Angelicum .

23 (3/4): 126– 145.

ISSN 1123-5772 .

JSTOR 44622585 .

^ "No one has ever found a 'smoking gun' proving that Garrigou-Lagrange shared in ghost-writing Humani generis or has ever fixed his exact contribution. But, as noted above, it is plain that he had a major role in its gestation." "Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange: Defending the Faith from Pascendi dominici gregis to Humani generis ",  Michael Kerlin, US Catholic Historian , Vol. 25, No. 1, Winter, 2007, 111.

^ Shortall, Sarah (2021).

Soldiers of God in a Secular World: Catholic Theology and Twentieth-Century . Harvard University Press. p. 93.

ISBN 9780674269613 .

^ Hellman, John (1988).

"The Road to Vichy: Yves R. Simon's Lonely Fight Against Fascism" .

Crisis Magazine .

6 (5).

^ Hellman, John (1988).

"Jacques Maritain and the Rise of Fascism" (PDF) .

Étudiennes maritainiennes/Maritain Studies .

4 : 33–43 (at p. 35).

doi : 10.5840/maritain198845 .

^ "Five Best Books by Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange OP" .

Five Books for Catholics . 25 November 2024 . Retrieved 19 July 2025 .

^ Accessed 2-6-2013 ^ Praeambula Fidei: Thomism And the God of the Philosophers, Ralph McInerny, 2006, https://books.google.com/books?id=3FY1gtVu37sC&pg=PA108 Accessed 24 May 2012; Nouvelle Théologie and Sacramental Ontology: A Return to Mystery, Hans Boersma, 2009, 136 https://books.google.com/books?id=514HmFl5y9AC&pg=PA136 Accessed 24 May 2012 ^ "Treccani - la cultura italiana | Treccani, il portale del sapere" .

www.treccani.it . Retrieved 10 September 2013 .

^ "Garrigou-Lagrange . Il tomista d'assalto" .

www.avvenire.it . 15 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/le-eredita-2-i-postumi-della-crisi-modernista_(Cristiani-d'Italia)/ Accessed 10 September 2013; Y. Congar, Chrétiens désunis. Principes d'un œcuménisme catholique, Paris 1937; The HarperCollins Encyclopedia of Catholicism , 304, https://books.google.com/books?id=7DmZB8fy_wcC&pg=PA303 Accessed November 13, 2012; https://books.google.com/books?id=3FY1gtVu37sC&pg=PA38 Accessed 10 September 2013 ^ Fergus Kerr, Twentieth-Century Catholic Theologians , (Blackwell, 2007), p10.

^ http://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/le-eredita-2-i-postumi-della-crisi-modernista_(Cristiani-d'Italia)/ Accessed 10 September 2013; Y. Congar, Chrétiens désunis. Principes d'un œcuménisme catholique, Paris 1937; The HarperCollins Encyclopedia of Catholicism , 304, https://books.google.com/books?id=7DmZB8fy_wcC&pg=PA303 Accessed November 13, 2012 ^ "Maurice Zundel: Biographie" . Archived from the original on 25 August 2013 . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .

Accessed 26 August 2013 ^ "IDF Serving the Dominican Order and the Church" (PDF) . IDF News, International Dominican Foundation. July 2012 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ The server is not always on, so if the link times out, try again later.

Further reading [ edit ] Garrigou-Lagrange, Réginald (2013).

The Essence & Topicality of Thomism .

ISBN 9781304416186 .

Nichols, Aidan (2008).

Reason with piety: Garrigou-Lagrange in the service of Catholic thought . Naples, FL: Sapientia Press of Ave Maria University.

ISBN 9781932589498 .

Peddicord, Richard (2004).

The sacred monster of Thomism : an introduction to the life and legacy of Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange . South Bend Ind.: St. Augustine's Press.

ISBN 978-1-58731-752-1 .

External links [ edit ] " A Saint in Heaven " by Fr. Thomas Crean, O.P.

Audiobook of his Reality , digitally read at a fast pace Complete bibliography of all his works (in Italian) The Last Battle of Lagrange by Fr. Albert Kallio, O.P.

An obituary, by his disciple, Fr Marie-Rosaire Gagnebet, O.P.

(in French) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Traditionalist Catholicism Issues Liturgy Preconciliar rites after the Second Vatican Council Tridentine Mass List of communities using the Tridentine Mass Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Traditionis custodes Liturgical use of Latin Mass of Paul VI Doctrine Modernism Pascendi Dominici gregis Syllabus of Errors Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Dignitatis humanae Ecumenism Events Second Vatican Council Écône consecrations Giuseppe Siri conspiracy theory Movements within the Catholic Church Institutes and societies Canons Regular of Saint John Cantius Fraternity of Saint Vincent Ferrer Institute of Christ the King Sovereign Priest Institute of the Good Shepherd Priestly Fraternity of Saint Peter Servants of the Holy Family Sons of the Most Holy Redeemer Slaves of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (Still River, Massachusetts) Jurisdictions Personal Apostolic Administration of Saint John Mary Vianney Associations Canons Regular of the New Jerusalem Juventutem Latin Mass Society of England and Wales Militia Templi Notre-Dame de Chrétienté Tradition, Family, Property Alleanza Cattolica Una Voce People Romano Amerio Mother Angelica Paul Aulagnier Louis-Marie de Blignières Raymond Leo Burke Gérard Calvet Charles A. Coulombe Michael Davies Gommar DePauw Christopher Ferrara Maria-Anna Galitzine Wilhelm Imkamp Peter Joseph Jugis Blaise Kurz Philippe Laguérie Taylor Marshall Malachi Martin Roberto de Mattei Chad Ripperger Athanasius Schneider Alexander Tschugguel Princess Elisabeth von Thurn und Taxis Gloria, Princess of Thurn and Taxis Gilles Wach John Zuhlsdorf Excommunicated but later reconciled Leonard Feeney Bernard Fellay Alfonso de Galarreta Ginés Jesús Hernández Licínio Rangel Bernard Tissier de Mallerais Ngô Đình Thục Independent movements Independent, but no public renunciation of papal legitimacy Groups Operating with partial papal faculties Society of Saint Pius X Affiliated religious orders Canonical situation Faculties Fraternité Notre-Dame Priestly Society of Saint Josaphat Slaves of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (Richmond, New Hampshire) SSPX Resistance People Marcel Lefebvre Antônio de Castro Mayer Richard Williamson Nicholas Gruner Sedeprivationist Groups Istituto Mater Boni Consilii Orthodox Roman Catholic Movement People Guérard des Lauriers Robert McKenna Donald Sanborn Sedevacantist Groups Congregation of Mary Immaculate Queen Sociedad Sacerdotal Trento ( Los TECOS ) Most Holy Family Monastery Feeneyism Society of Saint Pius V People Oswald Baker Daniel Q. Brown Moisés Carmona Anthony Cekada Daniel Dolan Hutton Gibson Clarence Kelly Mark Pivarunas Joaquín Sáenz y Arriaga Francis Schuckardt Carlo Maria Viganò Conclavist or Mysticalist Groups Palmarian Catholic Church Ukrainian Orthodox Greek Catholic Church Apostles of Infinite Love People Clemente Domínguez y Gómez Lucian Pulvermacher David Bawden v t e Modernism in the Catholic Church Issues Biblical exegesis Historical-critical exegesis of the Bible Biblical inerrancy Synoptic problem Quest for the historical Jesus Thomism Social doctrine People Prosper Alfaric Pierre Batiffol Maurice Blondel Joseph Bonsirven Henri Brémond Ernesto Buonaiuti Louis Duchesne Antonio Fogazzaro Marcel Hébert Albert Houtin Friedrich von Hügel Lucien Laberthonnière Lucien Lacroix Marie-Joseph Lagrange Alfred Loisy Eudoxe Irénée Mignot Romolo Murri Maude Petre Fernand Portal Antonin Sertillanges Joseph Turmel George Tyrrell Anti-modernist reaction Pope Pius IX Quanta cura Syllabus of Errors Pope Leo XIII Pontifical Biblical Commission Pope Pius X Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Oath Against Modernism Sodalitium Pianum Twenty-four Thomistic theses Louis Billot Umberto Benigni Rafael Merry del Val José de Calasanz Vives y Tutó Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange Publications Annales de philosophie chrétienne La Justice sociale La Quinzaine Revue du clergé français Temps présent Le Sillon ( Marc Sangnier ) Protestant equivalents Fundamentalist–Modernist controversy Historians Giuseppe Alberigo Pierre Colin Avery Dulles Étienne Fouilloux Maurilio Guasco François Laplanche René Marlé Jean-Marie Mayeur Émile Poulat Christoph Theobald Catholicism portal Vatican City portal Name Media Category Templates WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Réginald_Garrigou-Lagrange&oldid=1301377477 " Categories : 1877 births 1964 deaths 19th-century French Catholic theologians 19th-century French male writers 19th-century French non-fiction writers 19th-century French philosophers 20th-century Christian mystics 20th-century French Catholic theologians 20th-century French male writers 20th-century French non-fiction writers 20th-century French philosophers Academic staff of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas Aristotelian philosophers Catholic philosophers Critics of Freemasonry Dominican theologians French anti-communists French Christian mystics French Dominicans French male non-fiction writers French philosophers of religion French religious writers French Roman Catholic writers Fundamental theologians Roman Catholic mystics Thomists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with French IPA Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange 19 languages Add topic

