Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings 3 Legal reform 4 Other sayings 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pittacus of Mytilene 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher and politician Pittacus Bust of Pittacus, Roman copy of a Greek original of the Late Classical period, Louvre Born c.

640 BC Mytilene Died 568 BC (aged c.

72) Pittacus ( / ˈ p ɪ t ə k ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Πιττακός ; c.

640 – 568 BC) was an ancient Mytilenean military general and one of the Seven Sages of Greece .

Biography [ edit ] Pittacus was a native of Mytilene and son of Hyrradius. He became a Mytilenaean general who, with his army, was victorious in the battle against the Athenians and their commander Phrynon . In consequence of this victory, the Mytilenaeans held Pittacus in the greatest honour and presented the supreme power into his hands. After ten years of reign, he resigned his position and the city and constitution were brought into good order.

When the Athenians were about to attack Sigeion , Pittacus challenged their general to a single combat, with the understanding that the result should decide the war, and much bloodshed be thereby avoided. The challenge was accepted, and he killed his enemy with a broad sword. He was then chosen ruler of his city and governed for ten years, during which time he made laws in poetry, one of which was to this effect: "A crime committed by a person when drunk should receive double the punishment that it would merit if the offender were sober." His great motto was this: "Whatever you do, do it well." [ 1 ] Polyaenus in his Stratagems wrote that Pittacus had secretly concealed a net under his shield. He caught Phrynon with the net, dragged him down and killed him. According to Polyaenus, this stratagem of Pittacus gave rise to the use of nets in duels between gladiators .

[ 2 ] Some authors mention that he had a son called Tyrrhaeus. The legend says that his son was killed and when the murderer was brought before Pittacus, he dismissed the man and said, "Pardon is better than repentance." Of this matter, Heraclitus says that he had the murderer into his power and then released him, saying, "Pardon is better than punishment." Pittacus said that "[It] is a hard thing to be a good man." In Plato 's Protagoras , Socrates discusses this saying at length with Protagoras, and Prodicus of Ceos calls " barbarian " the Aeolic dialect that Pittacus spoke: "He didn't know to distinguish the words correctly, being from Lesbos, and having been raised with a barbarian dialect." [ 3 ] He flourished around the forty-second Olympiad . Having lived for more than seventy years, he died in the third year of the fifty-second Olympiad (568 BC).

Writings [ edit ] The Suda claims that Pittacus wrote a prose work about laws and also an elegiac poem of 600 lines. No trace of these works has survived.

[ 4 ] Legal reform [ edit ] Pittacus instituted a law stating that crimes committed in drunkenness should be punished twofold; [ 5 ] that was directed predominantly against the aristocrats , who were more often guilty of drunk and violent behaviour. As such, it was greatly appreciated by the common people.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Other sayings [ edit ] "Forgiveness is better than revenge." [ 8 ] "Whatever you do, do it well." "Even the gods cannot strive against necessity." "Power shows the man." "Do not say beforehand what you are going to do; for if you fail, you will be laughed at." "Do not reproach a man with his misfortunes, fearing lest Nemesis may overtake you." "Forbear to speak evil not only of your friends, but also of your enemies." "Cultivate truth, good faith, experience, cleverness, sociability, and industry." "Know thine opportunity." References [ edit ] ^ As quoted by Diogenes Laërtius , i. 77.

^ Polyaenus, Stratagems, 1.25.1 ^ Plato (February 2009).

Protagoras . Arc Manor.

ISBN 978-1604506365 .

^ Suda π 1659 ^ Aristotle , Politics 1274b 18–23 ^ McGlew, 1993: 95 n. 16.

^ Jon Ploug Jørgensen, The taming of the  aristoi - an ancient Greek civilizing process?

History of the Human Sciences : July 2014 vol. 27 no. 3, pg 45 ^ As quoted in Hancock, Thomas (1826), The Principles of Peace , p. 211 Sources [ edit ] Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Seven Sages: Pittacus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:1. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Burton, H. W. (1877).

The History of Norfolk, Virginia . Norfolk, VA: Norfolk Virginian Job Print. p. 244.

Given, Charles Stewart (1905).

A Fleece of Gold: Five Lessons from the Fable of Jason and the Golden Fleece . Cincinnati, OH: Jennings & Graham.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

"Pittacus" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Pittacus at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Pittacus of Mytilene at Wikiquote v t e Seven Sages of Greece Cleobulus of Lindos Solon of Athens Chilon of Sparta Bias of Priene Thales of Miletus Pittacus of Mytilene Periander of Corinth ( Myson of Chenae ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Greece Poland Vatican People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pittacus_of_Mytilene&oldid=1290512821 " Categories : 640s BC births 560s BC deaths Ancient Mytileneans Archaic tyrants Seven Sages of Greece 7th-century BC Greek philosophers 6th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 07:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pittacus of Mytilene 36 languages Add topic

