Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Difference from transcription 3 Challenges 4 Adopted 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Transliteration 77 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conversion of a text from one script to another Not to be confused with Translation , literary translation , or loan translation .

"Transliterate" redirects here. For the concept of being literate in all media, see Transliteracy . For the Wikipedia template, see Template:Transliteration .

See also: Literal translation This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Transliteration" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Translation Types Legal Literary Bible Quran Kural Linguistic validation Medical Regulatory Technical Interpretation Cultural Word-for-word Sense-for-sense Homophonic Theory Translation studies Skopos theory Translation project Translation criticism Equivalence Contrastive linguistics Polysystem theory Technologies CAT Machine translation Mobile translation Translation management system Dubbing Subtitling Pre-editing Postediting Multimedia translation Localization Glocalization Internationalization and localization Language localization Video game localization Dub localization Website localization Software localization Institutional Associations Awards Organizations Schools Related topics Untranslatability Transcription Transliteration Video relay service (VRS) Telephone interpreting Language barrier Fan translation ( of video games ) Fansub Fandub Scanlation Journalistic translation Books and magazines on translation Bible translations by language Translated books List of most translated works Translators Kural translations by language v t e Transliteration is a type of conversion of a text from one script to another that involves swapping letters (thus trans- + liter- ) in predictable ways, such as Greek ⟨ α ⟩ → ⟨ a ⟩ and ⟨ χ ⟩ → the digraph ⟨ ch ⟩ , Cyrillic ⟨ д ⟩ → ⟨ d ⟩ , Armenian ⟨ ն ⟩ → ⟨ n ⟩ or Latin ⟨ æ ⟩ → ⟨ ae ⟩ .

[ 1 ] For instance, for the Greek term ⟨ Ελληνική Δημοκρατία ⟩ , which is usually translated as ' Hellenic Republic ', the usual transliteration into the Latin script ( romanization ) is ⟨Hellēnikḗ Dēmokratía⟩ ; and the Russian term ⟨ Российская Республика ⟩ , which is usually translated as ' Russian Republic ', can be transliterated either as ⟨Rossiyskaya Respublika⟩ or alternatively as ⟨Rossijskaja Respublika⟩ .

Transliteration is the process of representing or intending to represent a word, phrase, or text in a different script or writing system. Transliterations are designed to convey the pronunciation of the original word in a different script, allowing readers or speakers of that script to approximate the sounds and pronunciation of the original word. Transliterations do not change the pronunciation of the word. Thus, in the Greek above example, ⟨λλ⟩ is transliterated ⟨ll⟩ though it is pronounced exactly the same way as [l] , or the Greek letters, ⟨λλ⟩ .

⟨Δ⟩ is transliterated ⟨D⟩ though pronounced as [ð] , and ⟨η⟩ is transliterated ⟨ē⟩ , though it is pronounced [i] (exactly like ⟨ι⟩ ) and is not long .

Transcription , conversely, seeks to capture sound, but phonetically approximate it into the new script; ⟨ Ελληνική Δημοκρατία ⟩ corresponds to [eliniˈci ðimokraˈtia] in the International Phonetic Alphabet . While differentiation is lost in the case of [i] , note the allophonic realization of /k/ as a palatalized [c] when preceding front vowels /e/ and /i/ .

Angle brackets ⟨ ⟩ may be used to set off transliteration, as opposed to slashes / / for phonemic transcription and square brackets for phonetic transcription. Angle brackets may also be used to set off characters in the original script. Conventions and author preferences vary.

Definitions [ edit ] Systematic transliteration is a mapping from one system of writing into another, typically grapheme to grapheme. Most transliteration systems are one-to-one , so a reader who knows the system can reconstruct the original spelling.

Transliteration, which adapts written form without altering the pronunciation when spoken out, is opposed to letter transcription , which is a letter by letter conversion of one language into another writing system . Still, most systems of transliteration map the letters of the source script to letters pronounced similarly in the target script, for some specific pair of source and target language. Transliteration may be very close to letter-by-letter transcription if the relations between letters and sounds are similar in both languages.

For many script pairs, there are one or more standard transliteration systems. However, unsystematic transliteration is common, as for Burmese , for instance.

Difference from transcription [ edit ] In Modern Greek , the letters ⟨η, ι, υ⟩ and the letter combinations ⟨ει, oι, υι⟩ are pronounced [i] (except when pronounced as semivowels ), and a modern transcription renders them as ⟨i⟩. However, a transliteration distinguishes them; for example, by transliterating them as ⟨ē, i, y⟩ and ⟨ei, oi, yi⟩. (As the ancient pronunciation of ⟨η⟩ was [ɛː] , it is often transliterated as ⟨ē⟩.) On the other hand, ⟨αυ, ευ, ηυ⟩ are pronounced /af, ef, if/ , and are voiced to [av, ev, iv] when followed by a voiced consonant – a shift from Ancient Greek /au̯, eu̯, iu̯/ . A transliteration would render them all as ⟨au, eu, iu⟩ no matter the environment these sounds are in, reflecting the traditional orthography of Ancient Greek, yet a transcription would distinguish them, based on their phonemic and allophonic pronunciations in Modern Greek. Furthermore, the initial letter ⟨h⟩ reflecting the historical rough breathing ⟨ ̔⟩ in words such as ⟨Hellēnikḗ⟩ would intuitively be omitted in transcription for Modern Greek, as Modern Greek no longer has the /h/ sound.

Greek word Transliteration Transcription English translation Ελληνική Δημοκρατία Hellēnikḗ Dēmokratía Elliniki Dimokratia ' Hellenic Republic ' Ελευθερία Eleuthería Eleftheria ' Freedom, Liberty ' Ευαγγέλιο Euangélio Evangelio ' Gospel ' των υιών tōn hyiṓn ton ion ' of the sons ' Challenges [ edit ] A simple example of difficulties in transliteration is the Arabic letter qāf . It is pronounced, in literary Arabic, approximately like English [k], except that the tongue makes contact not on the soft palate but on the uvula , but the pronunciation varies between different dialects of Arabic . The letter is sometimes transliterated into "g", sometimes into "q" or " ' " (for in Egypt it is silent) and rarely even into "k" in English.

[ 2 ] Another example is the Russian letter "Х" (kha) . It is pronounced as the voiceless velar fricative /x/ , like the Scottish pronunciation of ⟨ch⟩ in "lo ch ". This sound is not present in most forms of English and is often transliterated as "kh" as in Nikita Khrushchev . Many languages have phonemic sounds, such as click consonants , which are quite unlike any phoneme in the language into which they are being transliterated.

Some languages and scripts present particular difficulties to transcribers. These are discussed on separate pages. Examples of languages and writing systems and methods of transliterating include: This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Ancient Near East Transliterating cuneiform languages Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian ( see also Egyptian hieroglyphs ) Hieroglyphic Luwian Armenian language Armenian alphabet Romanization of Armenian Avestan Brahmic family Bengali–Assamese script Romanisation of Assamese Romanisation of Bengali Devanagari Devanagari transliteration Kannada script Malayalam script Romanization of Malayalam Meitei script Mon–Burmese script Romanization of Burmese Pali Tamil script Tibetan script Wylie transliteration Tibetan pinyin Romanization of Dzongkha Tocharian Celtic languages Chinese language Bopomofo Chinese characters Transcription into Chinese characters Romanization of Chinese Pinyin (official) Cyrillization of Chinese Click languages of Africa Khoisan languages Bantu languages English language English alphabet Hebraization of English French language French alphabet Cyrillization of French Georgian language Georgian scripts Romanization of Georgian Greek language Linear B Greek alphabet Romanization of Greek Greeklish Hmong language Pahawh Hmong Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Japanese language Japanese writing system Romanization of Japanese Hepburn romanization Cyrillization of Japanese Khmer language Khmer script Romanization of Khmer Korean language Hangul / Chosŏn'gŭl Romanization of Korean Cyrillization of Korean Mongolian language Mongolian Cyrillic alphabet Mongolian script SASM/GNC romanization Northwest Caucasian languages Abkhaz language Circassian languages Adyghe language Kabardian language Pashto Pashto alphabet Persian language Persian alphabet Romanization of Persian Cyrillization of Persian Persian chat alphabet Semitic languages Amharic Geʽez script Arabic Arabic alphabet Romanization of Arabic Arabic chat alphabet Hebrew Hebrew alphabet Romanization of Hebrew Ugaritic Ugaritic alphabet Slavic languages written in the Cyrillic or Glagolitic alphabets Romanization of Belarusian Romanization of Bulgarian Romanization of Russian Romanization of Macedonian Romanization of Serbian Romanization of Ukrainian Tai languages Lao language Lao script Romanization of Lao Thai language Thai script Romanization of Thai Turkic language Old Turkic Old Turkic script Azerbaijani language Azerbaijani alphabets Kazakh language Kazakh alphabets Kyrgyz language Kyrgyz alphabets Turkmen language Turkmen alphabet Uyghur language Uyghur alphabets Uzbek language Uzbek alphabet Urdu language Urdu alphabet ( Nastaliq ) Romanization of Urdu Adopted [ edit ] Buckwalter transliteration Devanagari transliteration Hans Wehr transliteration International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration Scientific transliteration of Cyrillic Transliteration of Ancient Egyptian Transliterations of Manchu Wylie transliteration See also [ edit ] Cyrillization International Components for Unicode ISO 15924 Latin script List of ISO transliterations Orthographic transcription Phonemic orthography Phonetic transcription Romanization Spread of the Latin script Substitution cipher Transcription (linguistics) References [ edit ] ^ "Transliteration" . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ "Language log" .

External links [ edit ] Look up transliteration in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Listen to this article ( 4 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 13 April 2005 ( 2005-04-13 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) International Components for Unicode transliteration services Archived 2017-11-17 at the Wayback Machine ICU User Guide: Transforms Transliteration history Archived 2007-12-13 at the Wayback Machine – history of the transliteration of Slavic languages into Latin alphabets.

Transliteration of Non-Latin scripts – Collection of transliteration tables for many non-Latin scripts maintained by Thomas T. Pedersen.

Unicode Transliteration Guidelines United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names (UNGEGN) – working group on Romanization Systems.

Library of Congress: Romanization Tables Localtyping.com implements google transliteration library and also allows to create To-Do Lists in English and Transliterated Languages.

24x7offshoring.com Transliterationenglish.

Usage of Transliterations – condensed description of the definition of transliteration and its usage.

G. Gerych.

Transliteration of Cyrillic Alphabets.

Ottawa University, April 1965. 126 pp. – historical overview of the concept of transliteration and its evolution and application Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7x5xp
Cached time: 20250814215256
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.610 seconds
Real time usage: 0.838 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2416/1000000
Revision size: 15325/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 75486/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11964/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33458/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.425/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20443332/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  728.045      1 -total
 15.53%  113.058     26 Template:Angbr
 15.10%  109.921      7 Template:Lang
 14.88%  108.308     26 Template:Nowrap
 14.44%  105.104      1 Template:Reflist
 14.09%  102.610      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.92%   94.052      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.76%   85.622      1 Template:Translation_sidebar
 11.30%   82.250      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.53%   76.645      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30342:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215256 and revision id 1299857768. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transliteration&oldid=1299857768 " Category : Transliteration Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from October 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with plain IPA Pages with Greek IPA Dynamic lists Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 21:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transliteration 77 languages Add topic

