Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Twelve hours: Babylonian and Roman division of the day 1.2 Middle East 1.3 Middle Ages and early modern times 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Civil time 10 languages Eesti 한국어 Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Statutory local time in some given area This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Civil time" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In modern usage, civil time refers to statutory time as designated by civilian authorities. Modern civil time is generally national standard time in a time zone at a fixed offset from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), possibly adjusted by daylight saving time during part of the year.  UTC is calculated by reference to atomic clocks and was adopted in 1972.

[ 1 ] Older systems use telescope observations.

In traditional astronomical usage, civil time was mean solar time reckoned from midnight . Before 1925, the astronomical time 00:00:00 meant noon, twelve hours after the civil time 00:00:00 which meant midnight.

HM Nautical Almanac Office in the United Kingdom used Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) for both conventions, leading to ambiguity [ clarification needed ] , whereas the Nautical Almanac Office at the United States Naval Observatory used GMT for the pre-1925 convention and Greenwich Civil Time (GCT) for the post-1924 convention until 1952. In 1928, the International Astronomical Union introduced the term Universal Time for GMT beginning at midnight.

[ 2 ] In modern usage, GMT is no longer a formal standard reference time: it is now a name for the time zone UTC+00:00 . Universal Time is now determined by reference to distant celestial objects: UTC is derived from International Atomic Time (TAI), and is adjusted by leap seconds to compensate for variations in the rotational velocity of the Earth.

[ 3 ] Civil Times around the world are all defined by reference to UTC. In many jurisdictions, legislation has not been updated and still refers to GMT; this is taken to mean UTC+0.

History [ edit ] The division of the day into times of day has existed since the beginning of the calendar.

Twelve hours: Babylonian and Roman division of the day [ edit ] People in Antiquity divided the day into twelve hours , but these were reckoned from sunrise rather than midnight.

Babylonian hours were of equal length, while Roman temporal hours varied depending on the season.

The Horae , literally "the hours," were the original Greek goddesses who oversaw regulated life. They were the patron goddesses of the various times of day. In Greek tradition, the twelve hours were counted from just before sunrise to just after sunset.

Roman daytimes were called hora (hours), with the morning hour as hora prima . The night was divided into four sections called vigilia (night watch), two before midnight and two after.

[ 4 ] The Romans originally counted the morning hours backwards: "3 a. m." or "3 hours ante meridiem" meant "three hours before noon", in contrast to the modern meaning "three hours after midnight".

This ancient division has survived in the Liturgy of the Hours : Prime , Terce , Sext , and Nones are named after the first, third, sixth and ninth hours of the day. The Matins , the nocturnal prayer is, according to the Rule of Saint Benedict , to be prayed at the "eighth hour of the night", which corresponds to about 2 am.

The Spanish siesta derives its name from the Latin hora sexta for the sixth hour (noon).

Middle East [ edit ] In Semitic language cultures, the day traditionally begins at nightfall. This is still important today for the beginning of Shabbat and Islamic holidays .

A division of days has survived from Persian, following the Babylonian beginning of the day: The rōsgār (times of day) are hāwan (morning), uapihwin (afternoon), usērin (evening), ēbsrūsrim (sunset to midnight), and ushahin (midnight to dawn). The last two are collectively called shab (night).

Middle Ages and early modern times [ edit ] The modern division of the day into twenty-four hours of equal length ( Italian hours ) first appeared in the 14th century with the invention of the mechanical wheel clock and its widespread use in turret clocks .

With the onset of industrialization , working hours became tied to the clock rather than to daylight.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Local time – Time measured in a specific place Solar time – Calculation of elapsed time by the apparent position of the sun Civil calendar – Calendar used within a country for civil, official, or administrative purposes Category:Time by country Category:Time zones References [ edit ] ^ "Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) (CCTF/09-32)" (PDF) .

Bureau International des Poids et Mesures . p. 3 . Retrieved 5 October 2022 .

^ McCarthy, Dennis D.

; Seidelmann, P. Kenneth (2009).

Time : from Earth rotation to atomic physics . P. Kenneth Seidelmann. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH. p. 17.

ISBN 978-3-527-40780-4 .

OCLC 429605165 .

^ "Standard-frequency and time-signal emissions" (PDF) . Coordinated universal time (UTC). Rec. ITU-R TF.460-6.

^ The Roman Calendar - www.die-roemer-online.de, after: Johannes Irmscher , Renate Johne (eds.): Lexicon of Antiquity . Wilhelm Heyne Verlag, Munich 1962.

^ Andrej, Isabella (1993).

"Der 'blaue Montag' – Eine Form des Widerstandes gegen die industrielle Arbeitszeitdisziplinierung" [The 'blue monday' – a form of resistance to industrial disciplining of working hours].

Seminar Neue Geschichte WS 1993/94: Arbeit und Arbeiterkämpfe in Europa 18. bis 20. Jahrhundert [ Labor and Workers' Struggles in Europe, 18th to 20th Century ] (in German). Institute for Advanced Studies Vienna.

External links [ edit ] Time Scales v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_time&oldid=1300908577 " Category : Time scales Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2015 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2012 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 02:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civil time 10 languages Add topic

