Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early career 3 White House Chief of Staff 4 U.S. House of Representatives (1979–1989) Toggle U.S. House of Representatives (1979–1989) subsection 4.1 Elections 4.2 Tenure 4.2.1 Leadership 4.2.2 Votes 4.3 Committee assignments 5 Secretary of Defense (1989–1993) Toggle Secretary of Defense (1989–1993) subsection 5.1 Early tenure 5.2 Budgetary practices 5.3 Political climate and agenda 5.4 International situations 5.4.1 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait 5.4.1.1 U.S. and world reaction 5.4.1.2 Military action 5.4.1.3 Aftermath 6 Private sector career 7 2000 presidential election 8 Vice presidency (2001–2009) Toggle Vice presidency (2001–2009) subsection 8.1 First term (2001–2005) 8.1.1 Iraq War 8.2 Second term (2005–2009) 8.2.1 Disclosure of documents 8.2.2 CIA leak scandal 8.2.3 Assassination attempt 8.2.4 Policy formulation 9 Post–vice presidency (2009–present) Toggle Post–vice presidency (2009–present) subsection 9.1 Political activity 9.2 Views on President Obama 9.3 Memoir 9.4 Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America 9.5 Views on President Trump 10 Public perception and legacy 11 In popular culture 12 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 12.1 Health problems 12.2 Hunting incident 13 Works 14 Notes 15 References 16 Bibliography 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Dick Cheney 88 languages العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vice President of the United States from 2001 to 2009 "Richard Cheney" redirects here. For other uses, see Richard Cheney (disambiguation) .

Dick Cheney Official portrait, 2003 46th Vice President of the United States In office January 20, 2001 – January 20, 2009 President George W. Bush Preceded by Al Gore Succeeded by Joe Biden 17th United States Secretary of Defense In office March 21, 1989 – January 20, 1993 President George H. W. Bush Deputy Donald J. Atwood Jr.

Preceded by Frank Carlucci Succeeded by Les Aspin House Minority Whip In office January 3, 1989 – March 20, 1989 Leader Robert H. Michel Preceded by Trent Lott Succeeded by Newt Gingrich Chair of the House Republican Conference In office June 4, 1987 – January 3, 1989 Leader Robert H. Michel Preceded by Jack Kemp Succeeded by Jerry Lewis Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Wyoming 's at-large district In office January 3, 1979 – March 20, 1989 Preceded by Teno Roncalio Succeeded by Craig L. Thomas 7th White House Chief of Staff In office November 21, 1975 – January 20, 1977 President Gerald Ford Preceded by Donald Rumsfeld Succeeded by Hamilton Jordan (1979) White House Deputy Chief of Staff In office December 18, 1974 – November 21, 1975 President Gerald Ford Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Landon Butler Personal details Born Richard Bruce Cheney ( 1941-01-30 ) January 30, 1941 (age 84) Lincoln, Nebraska , U.S.

Political party Republican Spouse Lynne Vincent ​ ( m.

1964) ​ Children Liz Mary Education University of Wyoming ( BA , MA ) Signature Dick Cheney's voice Cheney, while in the House of Representatives, speaks on the first day of the Iran–Contra hearings Recorded May 5, 1987 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Richard Bruce Cheney ( / ˈ tʃ eɪ n i / CHAY -nee ; [ a ] born January 30, 1941) is an American former politician and businessman who served as the 46th vice president of the United States from 2001 to 2009 under President George W. Bush . He has been called the most powerful vice president in American history .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Cheney previously served as White House Chief of Staff for President Gerald Ford , the U.S. representative for Wyoming's at-large congressional district from 1979 to 1989, and as the 17th United States secretary of defense in the administration of President George H. W. Bush .

Born in Lincoln, Nebraska , Cheney grew up there and in Casper, Wyoming .

[ 6 ] He attended Yale University before earning a Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts in political science from the University of Wyoming . He began his political career as an intern for Congressman William A. Steiger , eventually working his way into the White House during the Nixon and Ford administrations. He served as White House chief of staff from 1975 to 1977. In 1978, he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives , and represented Wyoming's at-large congressional district from 1979 to 1989, briefly serving as House minority whip in 1989. He was appointed Secretary of Defense during the presidency of George H. W. Bush , and held the position for most of Bush's term from 1989 to 1993.

[ 7 ] As secretary, he oversaw Operation Just Cause in 1989 and Operation Desert Storm in 1991. While out of office during the Clinton administration , he was the chairman and CEO of Halliburton from 1995 to 2000.

In July 2000 , Cheney was chosen by presumptive Republican presidential nominee George W. Bush as his running mate in the 2000 presidential election . They defeated their Democratic opponents, incumbent vice president Al Gore and senator Joe Lieberman . In 2004 , Cheney was reelected to his second term as vice president with Bush as president, defeating their Democratic opponents Senators John Kerry and John Edwards . During Cheney's tenure as vice president, he played a leading behind-the-scenes role in the George W. Bush administration 's response to the September 11 attacks and coordination of the Global War on Terrorism . He was an early proponent of invading Iraq , alleging that the Saddam Hussein regime possessed weapons of mass destruction program and had an operational relationship with Al-Qaeda ; however, neither allegation was ever substantiated. He also pressured the intelligence community to provide intelligence consistent with the administration's rationales for invading Iraq. Cheney was often criticized for the Bush administration's policies regarding the campaign against terrorism, for his support of wiretapping by the National Security Agency (NSA) and for his endorsement of the U.S.'s " enhanced interrogation " torture program.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] He publicly disagreed with President Bush's position against same-sex marriage in 2004, [ 12 ] but also said it is "appropriately a matter for the states to decide".

[ 13 ] Cheney ended his vice presidential tenure as a deeply unpopular figure in American politics with an approval rating of 13 percent.

[ 14 ] His peak approval rating in the wake of the September 11 attacks was 68 percent.

[ 15 ] Since leaving the vice presidency, Cheney has been critical of modern Republican leadership, including Donald Trump , going as far as to endorse Trump's challenger in 2024 , Democrat Kamala Harris .

[ 16 ] He is the oldest living former U.S. vice president, following the death of Walter Mondale in 2021, as well as the most recent Vice President not to run for President.

Early life and education Cheney was born in Lincoln, Nebraska, the son of Marjorie Lorraine (née Dickey) and Richard Herbert Cheney. He is of predominantly English, as well as Welsh , Irish, and French Huguenot ancestry. His father was a soil conservation agent for the U.S. Department of Agriculture and his mother was a softball star in the 1930s; [ 17 ] Cheney was one of three children.
He attended Calvert Elementary School [ 18 ] [ 19 ] before his family moved to Casper, Wyoming , [ 20 ] where he attended Natrona County High School .

He attended Yale University , but by his own account had problems adjusting to the college, and dropped out.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Among the influential teachers from his days in New Haven was H. Bradford Westerfield , whom Cheney repeatedly credited with having helped to shape his approach to foreign policy .

[ 23 ] He later attended the University of Wyoming , where he earned both a Bachelor of Arts and a Master of Arts in political science . He subsequently started, but did not finish, doctoral studies in political science at the University of Wisconsin–Madison .

[ 24 ] In November 1962, at the age of 21, Cheney was convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI). He was arrested for DWI again the following year.

[ 25 ] Cheney said that the arrests made him "think about where I was and where I was headed. I was headed down a bad road if I continued on that course." [ 26 ] In 1964, he married Lynne Vincent , his high school sweetheart, whom he had met at age 14.

When Cheney became eligible for the draft , during the Vietnam War , he applied for and received five draft deferments. In 1989, The Washington Post writer George C. Wilson interviewed Cheney as the next secretary of defense ; when asked about his deferments, Cheney reportedly said, "I had other priorities in the '60s than military service." [ 27 ] Cheney testified during his confirmation hearings in 1989 that he received deferments to finish a college career that lasted six years rather than four, owing to sub-par academic performance and the need to work to pay for his education. Upon graduation, Cheney was eligible for the draft, but at the time, the Selective Service System was not inducting married men.

[ 28 ] On October 26, 1965, the draft was expanded to include married men without children; Cheney's first daughter, Elizabeth , was born 9 months and two days later.

[ 29 ] [ 28 ] Cheney's fifth and final deferment granted him "3-A" status, a "hardship" deferment available to men with dependents. In January 1967, Cheney turned 26 and was no longer eligible for the draft.

[ 29 ] In 1966 Cheney dropped out of the doctoral program at the University of Wisconsin to work as staff aide for Governor Warren Knowles .

[ 30 ] In 1968 Cheney was awarded an American Political Science Association congressional fellowship and moved to Washington.

[ 30 ] Early career White House Chief of Staff Cheney, 1976 Cheney's political career began in 1969, as an intern for Congressman William A. Steiger during the Richard Nixon Administration. He then joined the staff of Donald Rumsfeld , who was then Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity from 1969 to 1970.

[ 25 ] He held several positions in the years that followed: White House Staff Assistant in 1971, Assistant Director of the Cost of Living Council from 1971 to 1973, and Deputy Assistant to the president from 1974 to 1975. As deputy assistant, Cheney suggested several options in a memo to Rumsfeld, including use of the US Justice Department , that the Ford administration could use to limit damage from an article, published by The New York Times , in which investigative reporter Seymour Hersh reported that Navy submarines had tapped into Soviet undersea communications as part of a highly classified program, Operation Ivy Bells .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] White House Chief of Staff See also: Halloween Massacre Cheney was Assistant to the President and White House Deputy Chief of Staff under Gerald Ford from December 1974 to November 1975.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] When Rumsfeld was named Secretary of Defense , Cheney became White House Chief of Staff , succeeding Rumsfeld.

[ 25 ] He later was campaign manager for Ford's 1976 presidential campaign .

[ 36 ] U.S. House of Representatives (1979–1989) Representative Cheney in 1984 Elections In 1978, Cheney was elected to represent Wyoming in the U.S. House of Representatives and succeeded retiring Democratic Congressman Teno Roncalio , having defeated his Democratic opponent, Bill Bagley. Cheney was re-elected five times, serving until 1989.

[ citation needed ] Tenure Leadership In 1987, he was elected Chairman of the House Republican Conference . The following year, he was elected House Minority Whip .

[ 37 ] He served for two and a half months before he was appointed Secretary of Defense instead of former U.S. Senator John G. Tower , whose nomination had been rejected by the U.S. Senate in March 1989.

[ 38 ] Votes Cheney meets with President Ronald Reagan , July 1983.

He voted against the creation of the U.S. Department of Education , citing his concern over budget deficits and expansion of the federal government, and claiming that the department was an encroachment on states' rights .

[ 39 ] He voted against funding Head Start , but reversed his position in 2000.

[ 40 ] Cheney initially opposed establishing a national holiday in honor of Martin Luther King Jr.

in 1979, but supported creation of Martin Luther King Jr. Day five years later, in 1983.

[ 41 ] Cheney supported Bob Michel 's (R-IL) bid to become Republican Minority Leader.

[ 42 ] In April 1980, Cheney endorsed Governor Ronald Reagan for president, becoming one of Reagan's earliest supporters.

[ 43 ] In 1986, after President Ronald Reagan vetoed a bill to impose economic sanctions on South Africa for its policy of apartheid , Cheney was one of 83 Representatives to vote against overriding Reagan's veto.

[ 44 ] In later years, he articulated his opposition to unilateral sanctions against many different countries, stating "they almost never work" [ 45 ] and that in that case they might have ended up hurting the people instead.

[ 46 ] In 1986, Cheney, along with 145 Republicans and 31 Democrats, voted against a non-binding Congressional resolution calling on the South African government to release Nelson Mandela from prison, after the Democrats defeated proposed amendments that would have required Mandela to renounce violence sponsored by the African National Congress (ANC) and requiring it to oust the communist faction from its leadership; the resolution was defeated. Appearing on CNN , Cheney addressed criticism for this, saying he opposed the resolution because the ANC "at the time was viewed as a terrorist organization and had a number of interests that were fundamentally inimical to the United States." [ 47 ] Committee assignments Originally declining, U.S. Congressman Barber Conable persuaded Cheney to join the moderate Republican Wednesday Group in order to move up the leadership ranks. He was elected Chairman of the Republican Policy Committee from 1981 to 1987. Cheney was the Ranking Member of the Select Committee to investigate the Iran-Contra Affair .

[ 25 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] He promoted Wyoming's petroleum and coal businesses as well.

[ 50 ] Secretary of Defense (1989–1993) Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, 1989–1993 Secretary of Defense Cheney delivering a speech before the launch of destroyer USS Arleigh Burke President George H. W. Bush nominated Cheney for the office of Secretary of Defense immediately after the U.S. Senate failed to confirm John Tower for that position.

[ 51 ] The senate confirmed Cheney by a vote of 92 to 0 [ 51 ] and he served in that office from March 1989 to January 1993. He directed the United States invasion of Panama and Operation Desert Storm in the Middle East. In 1991, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Bush.

[ 37 ] [ 30 ] Later that year, he received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards .

[ 52 ] Cheney has said his time at the Pentagon was the most rewarding period of his public service career, calling it "the one that stands out." [ 53 ] In 2014, Cheney recounted that when he met with President George H. W. Bush to accept the offer, he passed a painting in the private residence entitled The Peacemakers, which depicted President Lincoln, General Grant, and William Tecumseh Sherman . "My great-grandfather had served under William Tecumseh Sherman throughout the war," Cheney said, "and it occurred to me as I was in the room as I walked in to talk to the President about becoming Secretary of Defense, I wondered what he would have thought that his great-grandson would someday be in the White House with the President talking about taking over the reins of the U.S. military." [ 54 ] Early tenure Cheney worked closely with Pete Williams , Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs , and Paul Wolfowitz , Under Secretary of Defense for Policy , from the beginning of his tenure. He focused primarily on external matters, and left most of the internal DoD management to Deputy Secretary of Defense Donald Atwood .

[ 38 ] Budgetary practices Secretary Cheney with President George H. W. Bush, 1991 Cheney's most immediate issue as Secretary of Defense was the Department of Defense budget. Cheney deemed it appropriate to cut the budget and downsize the military, following the Reagan Administration 's peacetime defense buildup at the height of the Cold War .

[ 55 ] As part of the fiscal year 1990 budget, Cheney assessed the requests from each of the branches of the armed services for such expensive programs as the Avenger II Naval attack aircraft, the B-2 stealth bomber, the V-22 Osprey tilt-wing helicopter , the Aegis destroyer and the MX missile , totaling approximately $4.5 billion in light of changed world politics.

[ 38 ] Cheney opposed the V-22 program, which Congress had already appropriated funds for, and initially refused to issue contracts for it before relenting.

[ 56 ] When the 1990 Budget came before Congress in the summer of 1989, it settled on a figure between the Administration's request and the House Armed Services Committee 's recommendation.

[ 38 ] In subsequent years under Cheney, the proposed and adopted budgets followed patterns similar to that of 1990. Early in 1991, he unveiled a plan to reduce military strength by the mid-1990s to 1.6 million, compared with 2.2 million when he entered office. Cheney's 1993 defense budget was reduced from 1992, omitting programs that Congress had directed the Department of Defense to buy weapons that it did not want, and omitting unrequested reserve forces.

[ 38 ] Over his four years as Secretary of Defense, Cheney downsized the military and his budgets showed negative real growth, despite pressures to acquire weapon systems advocated by Congress. The Department of Defense's total obligational authority in current dollars declined from $291 billion to $270 billion. Total military personnel strength decreased by 19 percent, from about 2.2 million in 1989 to about 1.8 million in 1993.

[ 38 ] Notwithstanding the overall reduction in military spending, Cheney directed the development of a Pentagon plan to ensure U.S. military dominance in the post-Cold War era.

[ 57 ] Political climate and agenda Cheney publicly expressed concern that nations such as Iraq , Iran , and North Korea , could acquire nuclear components after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. The end of the Cold War, the fall of the Soviet Union, and the disintegration of the Warsaw Pact obliged the first Bush Administration to reevaluate the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's (NATO's) purpose and makeup. Cheney believed that NATO should remain the foundation of European security relationships and that it would remain important to the United States in the long term; he urged the alliance to lend more assistance to the new democracies in Eastern Europe.

[ 38 ] Cheney's views on NATO reflected his skepticism about prospects for peaceful social development in the former Eastern Bloc countries, where he saw a high potential for political uncertainty and instability. He felt that the Bush Administration was too optimistic in supporting General Secretary of the CPSU Mikhail Gorbachev and his successor, Russian President Boris Yeltsin .

[ 38 ] Cheney not only wanted the break-up of the USSR but also of Russia itself.

[ 58 ] Cheney worked to maintain strong ties between the United States and its European allies.

[ 59 ] Cheney persuaded the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to allow bases for U.S. ground troops and war planes in the nation. This was an important element of the success of the Gulf War , as well as a lightning-rod for Islamists , such as Osama bin Laden , who opposed having non-Muslim armies near their holy sites.

[ 60 ] International situations Using economic sanctions and political pressure, the United States mounted a campaign to drive Panamanian ruler General Manuel Antonio Noriega from power after he fell from favor.

[ 38 ] In May 1989, after Guillermo Endara had been duly elected President of Panama , Noriega nullified the election outcome, drawing intensified pressure. In October, Noriega suppressed a military coup , but in December, after soldiers of the Panamanian army killed a U.S. serviceman, the United States invasion of Panama began under Cheney's direction. The stated reason for the invasion was to seize Noriega to face drug charges in the United States, protect U.S. lives and property, and restore Panamanian civil liberties .

[ 61 ] Although the mission was controversial, [ 62 ] U.S. forces achieved control of Panama and Endara assumed the presidency; Noriega was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992.

[ 63 ] In 1991, the Somali Civil War drew the world's attention. In August 1992, the United States began to provide humanitarian assistance , primarily food, through a military airlift. At President Bush's direction, Cheney dispatched the first of 26,000 U.S. troops to Somalia as part of the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), designed to provide security and food relief.

[ 38 ] Cheney's successors as Secretary of Defense, Les Aspin and William J. Perry , had to contend with both the Bosnian and Somali issues.

Iraqi invasion of Kuwait On August 1, 1990, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein sent the invading Iraqi forces into neighboring Kuwait , a small petroleum-rich state long claimed by Iraq as part of its territory. This invasion sparked the initiation of the Persian Gulf War and it brought worldwide condemnation.

[ 64 ] An estimated 140,000 Iraqi troops quickly took control of Kuwait City and moved on to the Saudi Arabia /Kuwait border.

[ 38 ] The United States had already begun to develop contingency plans for the defense of Saudi Arabia by the U.S. Central Command , headed by General Norman Schwarzkopf , because of its important petroleum reserves.

U.S. and world reaction Cheney meets with Prince Sultan, Minister of Defence and Aviation in Saudi Arabia to discuss how to handle the invasion of Kuwait , December 1, 1990.

Cheney and Schwarzkopf oversaw planning for what would become a full-scale U.S. military operation. According to General Colin Powell , Cheney "had become a glutton for information, with an appetite we could barely satisfy. He spent hours in the National Military Command Center peppering my staff with questions." [ 38 ] Shortly after the Iraqi invasion, Cheney made the first of several visits to Saudi Arabia where King Fahd requested U.S. military assistance. The United Nations took action as well, passing a series of resolutions condemning Iraq's invasion of Kuwait; the UN Security Council authorized "all means necessary" to eject Iraq from Kuwait, and demanded that the country withdraw its forces by January 15, 1991.

[ 64 ] By then, the United States had a force of about 500,000 stationed in Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf . Other nations, including Britain, Canada, France, Italy, Syria , and Egypt , contributed troops, and other allies, most notably Germany and Japan, agreed to provide financial support for the coalition effort, named Operation Desert Shield .

[ 38 ] On January 12, 1991, Congress authorized Bush to use military force to enforce Iraq's compliance with UN resolutions on Kuwait.

[ 64 ] Military action Bush meets with Robert Gates , General Colin Powell , Secretary Cheney, and others about the situation in the Persian Gulf and Operation Desert Shield , January 15, 1991.

The first phase of Operation Desert Storm , which began on January 17, 1991, was an air offensive to secure air superiority and attack Iraqi forces, targeting key Iraqi command and control centers, including the cities of Baghdad and Basra . Cheney turned most other Department of Defense matters over to Deputy Secretary Atwood and briefed Congress during the air and ground phases of the war.

[ 38 ] He flew with Powell to the region to review and finalize the ground war plans.

[ 64 ] After an air offensive of more than five weeks, Coalition forces launched the ground war on February 24. Within 100 hours, Iraqi forces had been routed from Kuwait and Schwarzkopf reported that the basic objective – expelling Iraqi forces from Kuwait – had been met on February 27.

[ 65 ] After consultation with Cheney and other members of his national security team, Bush declared a suspension of hostilities.

[ 64 ] On working with this national security team, Cheney has said, "there have been five Republican presidents since
Eisenhower. I worked for four of them and worked closely with a fifth – the Reagan years when I was part of the House leadership. The best national security team I ever saw was that one. The least friction, the most cooperation, the highest degree of trust among the principals, especially." [ 66 ] Aftermath A total of 147 U.S. military personnel died in combat, and another 236 died as a result of accidents or other causes.

[ 38 ] [ 65 ] Iraq agreed to a formal truce on March 3, and a permanent cease-fire on April 6.

[ 38 ] There was subsequent debate about whether Coalition forces should have driven as far as Baghdad to oust Saddam Hussein from power. Bush agreed that the decision to end the ground war when they did was correct, but the debate persisted as Hussein remained in power and rebuilt his military forces.

[ 38 ] Arguably the most significant debate concerned whether U.S. and Coalition forces had left Iraq too soon.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] In an April 15, 1994, interview with C-SPAN, Cheney was asked if the U.S.-led Coalition forces should have moved into Baghdad. Cheney replied that occupying and attempting to take over the country would have been a "bad idea" and would have led to a "quagmire", explaining that: [If] we'd gone to Baghdad we would have been all alone. There wouldn't have been anybody else with us. There would have been a U.S. occupation of Iraq. None of the Arab forces that were willing to fight with us in Kuwait were willing to invade Iraq. Once you got to Iraq and took it over, took down Saddam Hussein's government, then what are you going to put in its place? That's a very volatile part of the world, and if you take down the central government of Iraq, you could very easily end up seeing pieces of Iraq fly off: part of it, the Syrians would like to have to the west, part of it – eastern Iraq – the Iranians would like to claim, they fought over it for eight years. In the north you've got the Kurds, and if the Kurds spin loose and join with the Kurds in Turkey, then you threaten the territorial integrity of Turkey. It's a quagmire if you go that far and try to take over Iraq. The other thing was casualties. Everyone was impressed with the fact we were able to do our job with as few casualties as we had. But for the 146 Americans killed in action, and for their families – it wasn't a cheap war. And the question for the president, in terms of whether or not we went on to Baghdad, took additional casualties in an effort to get Saddam Hussein, was how many additional dead Americans is Saddam worth? Our judgment was, not very many, and I think we got it right.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Cheney regarded the Gulf War as an example of the kind of regional problem the United States was likely to continue to face in the future: [ 71 ] We're always going to have to be involved [in the Middle East]. Maybe it's part of our national character, you know we like to have these problems nice and neatly wrapped up, put a ribbon around it. You deploy a force, you win the war and the problem goes away. But it doesn't work that way in the Middle East. It never has, and isn't likely to in my lifetime.

Private sector career Between 1987 and 1989, during his last term in Congress, Cheney was on the board of the Council on Foreign Relations foreign policy organization.

[ 72 ] With the inauguration of the new Democratic administration under President Bill Clinton in January 1993 , Cheney joined the American Enterprise Institute . He also served a second term as a Council on Foreign Relations director from 1993 to 1995.

[ 72 ] From October 1, 1995 [ 73 ] to July 25, 2000, [ 74 ] he was chairman of the board and chief executive officer of Halliburton , a Fortune 500 company. Cheney resigned as CEO on the same day he was announced as George Bush's vice-presidential pick in the 2000 election.

[ 75 ] Cheney's record as CEO was subject to some dispute among Wall Street analysts. A 1998 merger between Halliburton and Dresser Industries attracted the criticism of some Dresser executives for Halliburton's lack of accounting transparency.

[ 76 ] Halliburton shareholders pursued a class-action lawsuit alleging that the corporation artificially inflated its stock price during this period, though Cheney was not named as an individual defendant in the suit. In June 2011, the United States Supreme Court reversed a lower court ruling and allowed the case to continue in litigation.

[ 77 ] Cheney was named in a December 2010 corruption complaint filed by the Nigerian government against Halliburton, which the company settled for $250 million .

[ 78 ] During Cheney's term, Halliburton changed its accounting practices regarding revenue realization of disputed costs on major construction projects.

[ 79 ] Cheney resigned as CEO of Halliburton on July 25, 2000. As vice president, he argued that this step, along with establishing a trust and other actions, removed any conflict of interest .

[ 80 ] Cheney's net worth, estimated to be between $19 million and $86 million, [ 81 ] is largely derived from his post at Halliburton.

[ 82 ] His 2006 gross joint income with his wife was nearly $8.82 million.

[ 83 ] He was also a member of the board of advisors of the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA) before becoming vice president.

[ 60 ] 2000 presidential election See also: 2000 United States presidential election and Presidential transition of George W. Bush The Bush–Cheney ticket won the 2000 presidential election with 271 electoral votes but with only 47.9% of the popular vote, less than their opposition ticket, Gore–Lieberman, which received 48.3%.

In early 2000, while CEO of Halliburton, Cheney headed Governor of Texas George W. Bush 's vice-presidential search committee. On July 25, after reviewing Cheney's findings, Bush surprised some pundits by asking Cheney himself to join the Republican ticket.

[ 25 ] [ 84 ] Halliburton reportedly reached agreement on July 20 to allow Cheney to retire, with a package estimated at $20 million.

[ 85 ] A few months before the election Cheney put his home in Dallas up for sale and changed his drivers' license and voter registration back to Wyoming. This change was necessary to allow Texas' presidential electors to vote for both Bush and Cheney without contravening the Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which forbids electors from voting for "an inhabitant of the same state with themselves" [ 86 ] for both president and vice president.
Cheney campaigned against Al Gore 's running mate, Joseph Lieberman , in the 2000 presidential election. While the election was undecided, the Bush-Cheney team was not eligible for public funding to plan a transition to a new administration, prompting Cheney to open a privately funded transition office in Washington. This office worked to identify candidates for all important positions in the cabinet.

[ 87 ] According to Craig Unger , Cheney advocated Donald Rumsfeld for the post of Secretary of Defense to counter the influence of Colin Powell at the State Department, and tried unsuccessfully to have Paul Wolfowitz named to replace George Tenet as director of the Central Intelligence Agency .

[ 88 ] Vice presidency (2001–2009) Main article: Vice presidency of Dick Cheney First term (2001–2005) Cheney watching the initial 9/11 attack Following the September 11, 2001, attacks , Cheney remained physically apart from Bush for security reasons. For a period, Cheney stayed at a variety of undisclosed locations, out of public view.

[ 89 ] Cheney later revealed in his memoir In My Time that these "undisclosed locations" included his official vice presidential residence, his home in Wyoming, and Camp David .

[ 90 ] He also utilized a heavy security detail, employing a motorcade of 12 to 18 government vehicles for his daily commute from the vice presidential residence at Number One Observatory Circle to the White House.

[ 91 ] On the morning of June 29, 2002, Cheney served as acting president from 7:09 a.m. to 9:24 a.m., under the terms of the 25th Amendment to the Constitution, while Bush underwent a colonoscopy .

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Iraq War See also: Iraq War Cheney speaks to US troops at Camp Anaconda , Iraq, in 2008.

Following 9/11, Cheney was instrumental in providing a primary justification for a renewed war against Iraq. Cheney helped shape Bush's approach to the " War on Terror ", making numerous public statements alleging Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction , [ 94 ] and making several personal visits to CIA headquarters, where he questioned mid-level agency analysts on their conclusions.

[ 95 ] Cheney continued to allege links between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda , even though President Bush received a classified President's Daily Brief on September 21, 2001, indicating the U.S. intelligence community had no evidence linking Saddam Hussein to the September 11 attacks and that "there was scant credible evidence that Iraq had any significant collaborative ties with Al Qaeda." [ 96 ] Furthermore, in 2004, the 9/11 Commission concluded that there was no "collaborative relationship" between Iraq and al-Qaeda.

[ 97 ] By 2014, Cheney continued to misleadingly claim that Saddam "had a 10-year relationship with al Qaeda." [ 98 ] Following the US invasion of Iraq, Cheney remained steadfast in his support of the war, stating that it would be an "enormous success story", [ 99 ] and made many visits to the country. He often criticized war critics , calling them "opportunists" who were peddling "cynical and pernicious falsehoods" to gain political advantage while US soldiers died in Iraq. In response, Senator John Kerry asserted, "It is hard to name a government official with less credibility on Iraq [than Cheney]." [ 100 ] In a March 24, 2008, extended interview conducted in Ankara, Turkey, with ABC News correspondent Martha Raddatz on the fifth anniversary of the original U.S. military assault on Iraq, Cheney responded to a question about public opinion polls showing that Americans had lost confidence in the war by simply replying "So?" [ 101 ] This remark prompted widespread criticism, including from former Oklahoma Republican Congressman Mickey Edwards , a long-time personal friend of Cheney.

[ 102 ] Second term (2005–2009) See also: 2004 United States presidential election The Bush–Cheney ticket won the 2004 presidential election with 50.7% of the popular vote and 286 electoral votes.

Bush and Cheney were re-elected in the 2004 presidential election , running against John Kerry and his running mate, John Edwards . During the election, the pregnancy of his daughter Mary and her sexual orientation as a lesbian became a source of public attention for Cheney in light of the same-sex marriage debate.

[ 103 ] Cheney has since stated that he is in favor of gay marriages personally, but that each individual U.S. state should decide whether to permit it or not.

[ 104 ] Cheney's former chief legal counsel, David Addington , [ 105 ] became his chief of staff and remained in that office until Cheney's departure from office.

John P. Hannah served as Cheney's national security adviser.

[ 106 ] Until his indictment and resignation [ 107 ] in 2005, I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby Jr.

served in both roles.

[ 108 ] On the morning of July 21, 2007, Cheney once again served as acting president, from 7:16 am to 9:21 am. Bush transferred the power of the presidency prior to undergoing a medical procedure, requiring sedation, and later resumed his powers and duties that same day.

[ 109 ] After his term began in 2001, Cheney was occasionally asked if he was interested in the Republican nomination for the 2008 presidential election . However, he always maintained that he wished to retire upon the expiration of his term and he did not run in the 2008 presidential primaries . The Republicans nominated Arizona Senator John McCain .

[ 110 ] Disclosure of documents Cheney was a prominent member of the National Energy Policy Development Group (NEPDG), [ 111 ] commonly known as the Energy Task Force , composed of energy industry representatives, including several Enron executives. After the Enron scandal , the Bush administration was accused of improper political and business ties. In July 2003, the Supreme Court ruled that the US Department of Commerce must disclose NEPDG documents, containing references to companies that had made agreements with the previous Iraqi government to extract Iraq's petroleum.

[ 112 ] Beginning in 2003, Cheney's staff opted not to file required reports with the National Archives and Records Administration office charged with assuring that the executive branch protects classified information, nor did it allow inspection of its record keeping.

[ 113 ] Cheney refused to release the documents, citing his executive privilege to deny congressional information requests.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Media outlets such as Time magazine and CBS News questioned whether Cheney had created a "fourth branch of government" that was not subject to any laws.

[ 116 ] A group of historians and open-government advocates filed a lawsuit in the US District Court for the District of Columbia , asking the court to declare that Cheney's vice-presidential records are covered by the Presidential Records Act of 1978 and cannot be destroyed, taken or withheld from the public without proper review.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] CIA leak scandal Main article: Plame affair See also: CIA leak grand jury investigation and United States v. Libby Handwritten note above Joe Wilson 's editorial by Cheney referring to the covert agent before the leak took place On October 18, 2005, The Washington Post reported that the vice president's office was central to the investigation of the Valerie Plame CIA leak scandal, for Cheney's former chief of staff, Lewis "Scooter" Libby , was one of the figures under investigation.

[ 121 ] Libby resigned his positions as Cheney's chief of staff and assistant on national security affairs later in the month after he was indicted.

In February 2006, The National Journal reported that Libby had stated before a grand jury that his superiors, including Cheney, had authorized him to disclose classified information to the press regarding intelligence on Iraq's weapons.

[ 122 ] That September, Richard Armitage , former Deputy Secretary of State, publicly announced that he was the source of the revelation of Plame's status. Armitage said he was not a part of a conspiracy to reveal Plame's identity and did not know whether one existed.

[ 123 ] On March 6, 2007, Libby was convicted on four felony counts for obstruction of justice, perjury , and making false statements to federal investigators.

[ 124 ] In his closing arguments, independent prosecutor Patrick Fitzgerald said that there was "a cloud over the vice president", [ 125 ] an apparent reference to Cheney's interview with FBI agents investigating the case, which was made public in 2009.

[ 126 ] Cheney lobbied President George W. Bush vigorously and unsuccessfully to grant Libby a full presidential pardon up to the day of Barack Obama's inauguration, likening Libby to a "soldier on the battlefield".

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Libby was subsequently pardoned by President Donald Trump in April 2018.

[ 129 ] Assassination attempt Main article: Attempted assassination of Dick Cheney Vice President Cheney speaks to the press flanked by fellow Republicans Mitch McConnell (left) and Trent Lott (right), April 2007.

On February 27, 2007, at about 10 am, a suicide bomber killed 23 people and wounded 20 more outside Bagram Airfield in Afghanistan during a visit by Cheney. The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack and declared that Cheney was its intended target. They also claimed that Osama bin Laden supervised the operation.

[ 130 ] The bomb went off outside the front gate while Cheney was inside the base and half a mile away. He reported hearing the blast, saying "I heard a loud boom... The Secret Service came in and told me there had been an attack on the main gate." [ 131 ] The purpose of Cheney's visit to the region had been to press Pakistan for a united front against the Taliban.

[ 132 ] Policy formulation Cheney shakes hands with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak at the Presidential Palace in Cairo , May 2007.

Cheney has been characterized as the most powerful and influential Vice President in history.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Both supporters and critics of Cheney regard him as a shrewd and knowledgeable politician who knows the functions and intricacies of the federal government. A sign of Cheney's active policy-making role was then-House Speaker Dennis Hastert 's provision of an office near the House floor for Cheney [ 135 ] in addition to his office in the West Wing , [ 136 ] his ceremonial office in the Old Executive Office Building, [ 137 ] and his Senate offices (one in the Dirksen Senate Office Building and another off the floor of the Senate).

[ 135 ] [ 138 ] Cheney has actively promoted an expansion of the powers of the presidency, saying that the Bush administration's "challenges to the laws which Congress passed after Vietnam and Watergate to contain and oversee the executive branch – the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act , the Presidential Records Act , the Freedom of Information Act and the War Powers Resolution – are 'a restoration, if you will, of the power and authority of the president.'" [ 139 ] [ 140 ] In June 2007, The Washington Post summarized Cheney's vice presidency in a Pulitzer Prize -winning [ 141 ] four-part series, based in part on interviews with former administration officials. The articles characterized Cheney not as a "shadow" president, but as someone who usually has the last words of counsel to the president on policies, which in many cases would reshape the powers of the presidency. When former Vice President Dan Quayle suggested to Cheney that the office was largely ceremonial, Cheney reportedly replied, "I have a different understanding with the president." The articles described Cheney as having a secretive approach to the tools of government, indicated by the use of his own security classification and three man-sized safes in his offices.

[ 142 ] The articles described Cheney's influence on decisions pertaining to detention of suspected terrorists and the legal limits that apply to their questioning, especially what constitutes torture .

[ 143 ] U.S. Army Colonel Lawrence Wilkerson , who served as Colin Powell's chief of staff when he was both Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the same time Cheney was Secretary of Defense, and then later when Powell was Secretary of State , stated in an in-depth interview that Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld established an alternative program to interrogate post-9/11 detainees because of their mutual distrust of CIA .

[ 144 ] The Washington Post articles, principally written by Barton Gellman , further characterized Cheney as having the strongest influence within the administration in shaping budget and tax policy in a manner that assures "conservative orthodoxy." [ 145 ] They also highlighted Cheney's behind-the-scenes influence on the Bush administration's environmental policy to ease pollution controls for power plants, facilitate the disposal of nuclear waste, open access to federal timber resources, and avoid federal constraints on greenhouse gas emissions , among other issues. The articles characterized his approach to policy formulation as favoring business over the environment.

[ 146 ] Cheney walks with Saudi Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdulaziz , May 2007.

In June 2008, Cheney allegedly attempted to block efforts by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to strike a controversial US compromise deal with North Korea over the communist state's nuclear program.

[ 147 ] In July 2008, a former Environmental Protection Agency official stated publicly that Cheney's office had pushed significantly for large-scale deletions from a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report on the health effects of global warming "fearing the presentation by a leading health official might make it harder to avoid regulating greenhouse gases." [ 148 ] In October, when the report appeared with six pages cut from the testimony, the White House stated that the changes were made due to concerns regarding the accuracy of the science. However, according to the former senior adviser on climate change to Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Stephen Johnson , Cheney's office was directly responsible for nearly half of the original testimony being deleted.

[ 148 ] In his role as President of the U.S. Senate , Cheney broke with the Bush Administration Department of Justice , and signed an amicus brief to the United States Supreme Court in the case of Heller v. District of Columbia that successfully challenged gun laws in the nation's capital on Second Amendment grounds.

[ 149 ] On February 14, 2010, in an appearance on ABC 's This Week , Cheney reiterated his support of waterboarding and for the torture of captured terrorist suspects, saying, "I was and remain a strong proponent of our enhanced interrogation program ." [ 150 ] Post–vice presidency (2009–present) In 2008 Cheney purchased a home on Chain Bridge Road in McLean, Virginia , part of the Washington suburbs, which he tore down for a replacement structure.

[ 151 ] He also maintains homes in Wyoming and on Maryland's Eastern Shore.

[ 152 ] Political activity Cheney speaking at CPAC in February 2011 In July 2012, Cheney used his Wyoming home to host a private fundraiser for Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney , which netted over $4 million in contributions from attendees for Romney's campaign.

[ 153 ] Cheney is the subject of the documentary film The World According to Dick Cheney , which premiered March 15, 2013, on the Showtime television channel.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] Cheney was also reported to be the subject of an HBO television mini-series based on Barton Gellman 's 2008 book Angler [ 157 ] and the 2006 documentary The Dark Side , produced by the Public Broadcasting Service .

[ 95 ] Cheney maintained a visible public profile after leaving office, [ 158 ] being especially critical of Obama administration policies on national security.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] In May 2009, Cheney spoke of his support for same-sex marriage , becoming one of the most prominent Republican politicians to do so. Speaking to the National Press Club , Cheney stated: "People ought to be free to enter into any kind of union they wish, any kind of arrangement they wish. I do believe, historically, the way marriage has been regulated is at a state level. It's always been a state issue, and I think that's the way it ought to be handled today." [ 162 ] In 2012, Cheney reportedly encouraged several Maryland state legislators to vote to legalize same-sex marriage in that state.

[ 163 ] Although, by custom, a former vice president unofficially receives six months of protection from the United States Secret Service , President Obama reportedly extended the protection period for Cheney.

[ 164 ] On July 11, 2009, CIA Director Leon Panetta told the Senate and House intelligence committees that the CIA withheld information about a secret counter-terrorism program from Congress for eight years on direct orders from Cheney. Intelligence and Congressional officials have said the unidentified program did not involve the CIA interrogation program and did not involve domestic intelligence activities. They have said the program was started by the counter-terrorism center at the CIA shortly after the attacks of September 11, 2001, but never became fully operational, involving planning and some training that took place off and on from 2001 until 2009.

[ 165 ] The Wall Street Journal reported, citing former intelligence officials familiar with the matter, that the program was an attempt to carry out a 2001 presidential authorization to capture or kill al Qaeda operatives.

[ 166 ] Cheney attending his daughter Liz's ceremonial congressional swearing-in ceremony in January 2017 Cheney has said that the Tea Party Movement is a "positive influence on the Republican Party" and that "I think it's much better to have that kind of turmoil and change in the Republican Party than it would be to have it outside." [ 167 ] In May 2016, Cheney endorsed Donald Trump as the Republican nominee in the 2016 presidential election .

[ 168 ] That November, his daughter Liz won election to the House of Representatives (to his former congressional seat). When she was sworn into office in January 2017, Cheney said he believed she would do well in the position and that he would only offer advice if requested.

[ 169 ] That March, Cheney said that Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections could be considered "an act of war".

[ 170 ] Views on President Obama Cheney attending the state funeral of George H. W. Bush in December 2018 On December 29, 2009, four days after the attempted bombing of an international passenger flight from the Netherlands to United States , Cheney criticized President Barack Obama : "[We] are at war and when President Obama pretends we aren't, it makes us less safe. ... Why doesn't he want to admit we're at war? It doesn't fit with the view of the world he brought with him to the Oval Office. It doesn't fit with what seems to be the goal of his presidency – social transformation – the restructuring of American society." [ 171 ] In response, White House Communications Director Dan Pfeiffer wrote on the official White House blog the following day, "[I]t is telling that Vice President Cheney and others seem to be more focused on criticizing the Administration than condemning the attackers. Unfortunately too many are engaged in the typical Washington game of pointing fingers and making political hay, instead of working together to find solutions to make our country safer." [ 172 ] [ 173 ] During a February 14, 2010, appearance on ABC 's This Week , Cheney reiterated his criticism of the Obama administration's policies for handling suspected terrorists, criticizing the "mindset" of treating "terror attacks against the United States as criminal acts as opposed to acts of war".

[ 150 ] In a May 2, 2011, interview with ABC News, Cheney praised the Obama administration for the covert military operation in Pakistan that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden .

[ 174 ] In 2014, during an interview with Sean Hannity , he called Obama a "weak President" after Obama announced his plans to pull forces out of Afghanistan.

[ 175 ] Memoir Main article: In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir Cheney in 2012, promoting his book In August 2011, Cheney published his memoir, In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir , written with Liz Cheney . The book outlines Cheney's recollections of 9/11 , the War on Terrorism , the 2001 War in Afghanistan , the run-up to the 2003 Iraq War , so-called " enhanced interrogation techniques " and other events.

[ 176 ] According to Barton Gellman , the author of Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency , Cheney's book differs from publicly available records on details surrounding the NSA surveillance program .

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America Main article: Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America In 2015, Cheney published another book, Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America , again co-authored with his daughter Liz . The book traces the history of U.S. foreign policy and military successes and failures from Franklin Roosevelt 's administration through the Obama administration . The authors tell the story of what they describe as the unique role the United States has played as a defender of freedom throughout the world since World War II .

[ 179 ] Drawing upon the notion of American exceptionalism , the co-authors criticize Barack Obama 's and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton 's foreign policies, and offer what they see as the solutions needed to restore American greatness and power on the world stage in defense of freedom.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] Views on President Trump Cheney has criticized modern Republican leadership.

[ 182 ] In May 2016, Cheney said he would support Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election .

[ 183 ] In May 2018, Cheney supported Trump's decision to withdraw from the Iran Nuclear Deal .

[ 184 ] Cheney criticized the Trump administration at the American Enterprise Institute World Forum alongside Vice President Mike Pence in March 2019. Questioning his successor on Trump's commitment to NATO and tendency to announce policy decisions on Twitter before consulting senior staff members, Cheney commented, "It seems, at times, as though your administration’s approach has more in common with Obama’s foreign policy than traditional Republican foreign policy." [ 185 ] On the one-year anniversary of the 2021 United States Capitol attack , Cheney joined his daughter Liz Cheney at the Capitol and participated in the remembrance events.

[ 186 ] His daughter was the only Republican member of the House or Senate to attend the events, despite the events being open for attendance by all others.

[ 187 ] He later appeared in a 2022 primary campaign ad for Liz in which he called Trump a "coward" and a "threat to our republic" due to his attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election . That year, Liz ran for her Wyoming congressional seat against Trump-backed primary challenger Harriet Hageman , who ultimately won by over 30%.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] On September 6, 2024, Cheney released a public statement confirming that he intends to cast his vote in the 2024 presidential election for Democratic nominee Kamala Harris . The previous day, his daughter Liz had told a crowd of Cheney's intention to do so.

[ 190 ] In his statement, Cheney opined, In our nation's 248-year history, there has never been an individual who is a greater threat to our republic than Donald Trump. He tried to steal the last election using lies and violence to keep himself in power after the voters had rejected him. He can never be trusted with power again. As citizens, we each have a duty to put country above partisanship to defend our Constitution. That is why I will be casting my vote for Vice President Kamala Harris.

[ 190 ] Public perception and legacy The Dick Cheney Federal Building in Casper, Wyoming [ 191 ] [ 192 ] Cheney's early public opinion polls were more favorable than unfavorable, reaching his peak approval rating in the wake of the September 11 attacks at 68 percent.

[ 15 ] However, polling numbers for both him and the president gradually declined in their second terms, [ 15 ] [ 193 ] with Cheney reaching his lowest point shortly before leaving office at 13 percent.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Cheney's Gallup poll figures are mostly consistent with those from other polls: [ 15 ] [ 195 ] April 2001 – 63% approval, 21% disapproval January 2002 – 68% approval, 18% disapproval January 2004 – 56% approval, 36% disapproval January 2005 – 50% approval, 40% disapproval January 2006 – 41% approval, 46% disapproval July 2007 – 30% approval, 60% disapproval March 2009 – 30% approval, 63% disapproval In April 2007, Cheney was awarded an honorary doctorate of public service by Brigham Young University , where he delivered the commencement address.

[ 196 ] His selection as commencement speaker was controversial. The college board of trustees issued a statement explaining that the invitation should be viewed "as one extended to someone holding the high office of vice president of the United States rather than to a partisan political figure".

[ 197 ] BYU permitted a protest to occur so long as it did not "make personal attacks against Cheney, attack (the) BYU administration, the church or the First Presidency ".

[ 198 ] Cheney has been cited as the most powerful vice president in American history.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He has been compared to Darth Vader , a characterization originated by his critics, but which was later adopted humorously by Cheney himself as well as by members of his family and staff.

[ 199 ] As a result of Cheney having admitted that he "signed off" on the so-called " enhanced interrogation techniques " program, [ 200 ] [ 201 ] some public officials, as well as several media outlets and advocacy groups, have called for his prosecution under various anti-torture and war crimes statutes.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] In Jon Meacham 's book Destiny and Power: The American Odyssey of George Herbert Walker Bush , published in November 2015, the 41st president, although also laudatory of Cheney, is in part critical of the former vice president, whom Bush describes as "having his own empire" and "very hard-line." [ 204 ] In popular culture A Dick Cheney impersonator at the 2010 Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear In Eminem 's 2002 single " Without Me ", where the lines "I know that you got a job, Ms. Cheney / But your husband's heart problem's complicated" refer to his health problems .

In The Day After Tomorrow , the character Raymond Becker (played by Kenneth Welsh ) is intended to be a criticism of Dick Cheney.

In W.

(2008), a biographical comedy-drama film directed by Oliver Stone , he is portrayed by Richard Dreyfuss .

[ 205 ] In War Dogs (2016), where the line "God bless Dick Cheney's America" refers to his support of American military presence in Iraq.

In Who Is America?

(2018), a political satire series, Sacha Baron Cohen pranked Cheney into signing a makeshift waterboard kit .

[ 206 ] In Vice (2018), a biographical comedy-drama film written and directed by Adam McKay , Cheney is portrayed by Christian Bale , [ 207 ] for which the latter won a Golden Globe and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor .

In Mrs. America (2020), a historical drama television miniseries produced by FX , Cheney is portrayed by Andrew Hodwitz.

[ 208 ] Bob Rivers did a parody cover called "Cheney's Got a Gun" [ 209 ] In an episode entitled "Dick Cheney" during the first-season run of the dramedy Patriot aired on Amazon Prime , protagonist John Lakeman shoots his rival with a shotgun while the two were conducting a duck hunt, referencing events surrounding the Dick Cheney hunting accident .

Personal life Cheney is a member of the United Methodist Church [ 210 ] and was the first Methodist vice president to serve under a Methodist president.

[ 211 ] Cheney's brother, Bob, is a former civil servant at the Bureau of Land Management .

[ 212 ] His wife, Lynne , was chair of the National Endowment for the Humanities from 1986 to 1996. She is now a public speaker, author, and a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute .

The couple have two daughters, Elizabeth ("Liz") and Mary Cheney , and seven grandchildren. Liz, a former congresswoman from Wyoming, is married to Philip J. Perry , a former General Counsel of the Department of Homeland Security . Mary, a former employee of the Colorado Rockies baseball team and the Coors Brewing Company , was a campaign aide to the Bush re-election campaign; she lives in Great Falls, Virginia , with her wife Heather Poe.

[ 213 ] Cheney has publicly supported gay marriage since leaving the vice presidency.

[ 214 ] Health problems Cheney's long histories of cardiovascular disease and periodic need for urgent health care raised questions of whether he was medically fit to serve in public office.

[ 215 ] Having smoked approximately three packs of cigarettes per day for nearly 20 years, [ 216 ] Cheney had his first of five heart attacks on June 18, 1978, [ 217 ] at age 37. Subsequent heart attacks in 1984, 1988, on November 22, 2000, and on February 22, 2010, resulted in moderate contractile dysfunction of his left ventricle .

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] [ clarification needed ] He underwent four-vessel coronary artery bypass grafting in 1988, coronary artery stenting in November 2000, urgent coronary balloon angioplasty in March 2001, and the implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator in June 2001.

[ 218 ] On September 24, 2005, Cheney underwent a six-hour endo- vascular procedure to repair popliteal artery aneurysms bilaterally, a catheter treatment technique used in the artery behind each knee.

[ 220 ] The condition was discovered at a regular physical in July, and was not life-threatening.

[ 221 ] Cheney was hospitalized for tests after experiencing shortness of breath five months later. In late April 2006, an ultrasound revealed that the clot was smaller.

[ 220 ] On March 5, 2007, Cheney was treated for deep-vein thrombosis in his left leg at George Washington University Hospital after experiencing pain in his left calf. Doctors prescribed blood-thinning medication and allowed him to return to work.

[ 222 ] CBS News reported that during the morning of November 26, 2007, Cheney was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation and underwent treatment that afternoon.

[ 220 ] On July 12, 2008, Cheney underwent a cardiological exam; doctors reported that his heartbeat was normal for a 67-year-old man with a history of heart problems. As part of his annual checkup, he was administered an electrocardiogram and radiological imaging of the stents placed in the arteries behind his knees in 2005. Doctors said that Cheney had not experienced any recurrence of atrial fibrillation and that his special pacemaker had neither detected nor treated any arrhythmia .

[ 223 ] On October 15, 2008, Cheney returned to the hospital briefly to treat a minor irregularity.

[ 224 ] On January 19, 2009, Cheney strained his back "while moving boxes into his new house". As a consequence, he was in a wheelchair for two days, including his attendance at the 2009 United States presidential inauguration .

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] On February 22, 2010, Cheney was admitted to George Washington University Hospital after experiencing chest pains. A spokesperson later said Cheney had experienced a mild heart attack after doctors had run tests.

[ 219 ] On June 25, 2010, Cheney was admitted to George Washington University Hospital after reporting discomfort.

[ 227 ] In early-July 2010, Cheney was outfitted with a left-ventricular assist device (LVAD) at Inova Fairfax Heart and Vascular Institute to compensate for worsening congestive heart failure .

[ 228 ] The device pumped blood continuously through his body.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] He was released from Inova on August 9, 2010, [ 231 ] and had to decide whether to seek a full heart transplant .

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] This pump was centrifugal and as a result he remained alive without a pulse for nearly fifteen months.

[ 234 ] On March 24, 2012, Cheney underwent a seven-hour heart transplant procedure at Inova Fairfax Hospital in Woodburn, Virginia . He had been on a waiting list for more than 20 months before receiving the heart from an anonymous donor.

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] Cheney's principal cardiologist, Jonathan Reiner, advised his patient that "it would not be unreasonable for an otherwise healthy 71-year-old man to expect to live another 10 years" with a transplant, saying in a family-authorized interview that he considered Cheney to be otherwise healthy.

[ 237 ] Hunting incident Main article: Dick Cheney hunting accident On February 11, 2006, Cheney accidentally shot Harry Whittington , a then-78-year-old Texas attorney, while participating in a quail hunt at Armstrong ranch in Kenedy County, Texas .

[ 238 ] Secret Service agents and medical aides, who were traveling with Cheney, came to Whittington's assistance and treated his birdshot wounds to his right cheek, neck, and chest. An ambulance standing by for the Vice President took Whittington to nearby Kingsville before he was flown by helicopter to Corpus Christi Memorial Hospital . On February 14, 2006, Whittington had a non-fatal heart attack and atrial fibrillation due to at least one lead-shot pellet lodged in or near his heart.

[ 239 ] Because of the small size of the birdshot pellets , doctors decided to leave up to 30 pieces of the pellets lodged in his body rather than try to remove them.

The Secret Service stated that they notified the sheriff about one hour after the shooting. Kenedy County Sheriff Ramone Salinas III stated that he first heard of the shooting at about 5:30 pm.

[ 240 ] The next day, ranch owner Katharine Armstrong informed the Corpus Christi Caller-Times of the shooting.

[ 241 ] Cheney had a televised interview with MSNBC News about the shooting on February 15. Both Cheney and Whittington have called the incident an accident. Early reports indicated that Cheney and Whittington were friends and that the injuries were minor. Whittington has since told The Washington Post that he and Cheney were not close friends but acquaintances. When asked if Cheney had apologized, Whittington declined to answer.

[ 242 ] The sheriff's office released a report on the shooting on February 16, 2006, and witness statements on February 22, indicating that the shooting occurred on a clear sunny day, and Whittington was shot from 30 or 40 yards (30 or 40 m) away while searching for a downed bird. Armstrong, the ranch owner, claimed that all in the hunting party were wearing blaze-orange safety gear and none had been drinking.

[ 243 ] However, Cheney has acknowledged that he had one beer four or five hours prior to the shooting.

[ 244 ] Although Kenedy County Sheriff's Office documents support the official story by Cheney and his party, re-creations of the incident produced by George Gongora and John Metz of the Corpus Christi Caller-Times indicated that the actual shooting distance was closer than the 30 yards claimed.

[ 245 ] The incident hurt Cheney's popularity standing in the polls.

[ 246 ] According to polls on February 27, 2006, two weeks after the accident, Dick Cheney's approval rating had dropped 5 percentage points to 18%.

[ 247 ] The incident became the subject of a number of jokes and satire.

[ 248 ] Works Clausen, Aage R.; Cheney, Richard B. (March 1970).

"A Comparative Analysis of Senate–House Voting on Economic and Welfare Policy, 1953–1964*" .

American Political Science Review .

64 (1): 138– 152.

doi : 10.2307/1955618 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1955618 .

S2CID 154337342 .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2017 . Retrieved June 8, 2017 – via Cambridge Core.

Cheney, Richard B.; Cheney, Lynne V.

(1983).

Kings of the Hill: Power and Personality in the House of Representatives . New York: Continuum.

ISBN 0-8264-0230-5 .

Cheney, Dick (1997).

Professional Military Education: An Asset for Peace and Progress . Directed and edited by Bill Taylor. Washington, D.C.: Center for Strategic & International Studies.

ISBN 0-89206-297-5 .

OCLC 36929146 .

Cheney, Dick; et al. (with Liz Cheney ) (2011).

In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir . New York: Threshold Editions.

ISBN 978-1-4391-7619-1 .

Cheney, Dick; Reiner, Jonathan; et al. (with Liz Cheney ) (2013).

Heart: An American Medical Odyssey . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 978-1-4767-2539-0 .

Cheney, Dick; Cheney, Liz (2015).

Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-5011-1541-7 .

Notes ^ In his early life the vice president himself pronounced his family name as / ˈ tʃ iː n i / CHEE -nee , the pronunciation used by his family. After moving east he adopted the pronunciation / ˈ tʃ eɪ n i / CHAY -nee favored by the media and public-at-large.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] References ^ Cheney Holds News Briefing with Republican House Leaders , Aired on CNN December 5, 2000 Archived March 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ The Cheney Government in Exile Archived December 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Alliance for a Strong America Commercial, 2014 on YouTube ^ a b "Cheney: A VP With Unprecedented Power" .

NPR.org . January 15, 2009.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2009 . Retrieved January 13, 2013 .

^ a b Reynolds, Paul (October 29, 2006).

"The most powerful vice-president ever?" . United Kingdom: BBC News.

Archived from the original on November 29, 2010 . Retrieved January 13, 2013 .

^ Cheney: The Untold Story of America's Most Powerful and Controversial Vice President , p. 11 ^ "Richard B. Cheney – George H. W. Bush Administration" . Office of the Secretary of Defense – Historical Office.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2019 . Retrieved February 7, 2017 .

^ "Prewar Iraq Intelligence: A Look at the Facts" .

NPR.org . NPR. November 23, 2005.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2008 . Retrieved January 13, 2013 .

^ "Cheney Pushed U.S. to Widen Eavesdropping" .

The New York Times . May 14, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2014 . Retrieved January 13, 2013 .

^ "Cheney offended by Amnesty criticism Rights group accuses U.S. of violations at Guantanamo Bay" .

CNN . May 21, 2005.

Archived from the original on October 12, 2008 . Retrieved January 13, 2013 .

^ Rosenberg, Carol (December 4, 2019).

"What the C.I.A.'s Torture Program Looked Like to the Tortured" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 7, 2024 .

^ "Cheney at odds with Bush on gay marriage – politics" .

NBC News . August 25, 2004.

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

^ Kaufman, Marc and Allen, Mike. “ Cheney splits with Bush on gay marriage ban ”, Washington Post via Boston Globe (August 25, 2004).

^ Friedersdorf, Conor (August 30, 2011).

"Remembering Why Americans Loathe Dick Cheney" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on November 18, 2017 . Retrieved March 4, 2024 .

^ a b c d Carroll, Joseph (July 18, 2007).

"Americans' Ratings of Dick Cheney Reach New Lows" .

The Gallup Organization .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2008 . Retrieved December 22, 2007 .

^ Lebowitz, Megan (September 7, 2024).

"Former Vice President Dick Cheney says he will vote for Harris" .

NBC News . Retrieved September 9, 2024 .

^ "Interview With Lynne Cheney" .

CNN . September 20, 2003.

Archived from the original on December 6, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2007 .

^ "Bio on Kids' section of White House site" .

White House .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2009 . Retrieved October 23, 2006 .

^ "Calvert Profile" (PDF) .

Lincoln Public Schools . May 15, 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 2, 2006 . Retrieved October 23, 2006 .

^ "Official US Biography" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2009 . Retrieved October 23, 2006 – via National Archives .

^ Cheney, Dick, with Liz Cheney.

In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir, pp. 26–28. Simon and Schuster, 2011.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Kaiser, Robert G. (August 29, 2011).

"Review: In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir by Dick Cheney" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2014 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Martin, Douglas (January 27, 2008).

"H. Bradford Westerfield, 79, Influential Yale Professor" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2009 . Retrieved January 28, 2008 .

^ "A Newsletter for Alumni and Friends of the Department" (PDF) .

North Hall News .

University of Wisconsin–Madison : 4. Fall 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 10, 2006 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ a b c d e McCollough, Lindsay G. (Producer); Gellman, Barton (Narrator).

The Life and Career of Dick Cheney .

The Washington Post (Narrated slideshow) . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ Lemann, Nicholas (May 7, 2001).

"The Quiet Man" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2004 . Retrieved August 2, 2006 .

^ "Profile of Dick Cheney" .

ABC News . January 6, 2006.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2014 . Retrieved November 2, 2013 .

^ a b Noah, Timothy (March 18, 2004).

"How Dick Cheney dodged the draft" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2018 . Retrieved August 4, 2015 .

^ a b Seelye, Katharine Q. (May 1, 2004).

"Cheney's Five Draft Deferments During the Vietnam Era Emerge as a Campaign Issue" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2011 . Retrieved December 11, 2007 .

^ a b c "Dick Cheney Fast Facts" .

CNN . September 21, 2013.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2020 . Retrieved January 5, 2020 .

^ Lowell Bergman; Marlena Telvick (February 13, 2007).

"Dick Cheney's Memos from 30 Years Ago" .

Frontline: News War . Public Broadcasting System.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2007 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Taibbi, Matt (April 2, 2007).

"Cheney's Nemesis" .

Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on April 19, 2007 . Retrieved September 10, 2010 .

^ "Photographs – Richard Cheney as an Assistant to President Ford" .

www.fordlibrarymuseum.gov .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2021 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ "Richard Cheney as an Assistant to President Ford" . Gerald R. Ford Presidential Library and Museum. August 26, 2002.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved September 14, 2015 .

^ "New Aide to Ford Rumsfeld Protege" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2022 . Retrieved April 15, 2021 .

^ "People in the News: Dick Cheney" . Chiff.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2005 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ a b "The Board of Regents" .

Smithsonian Institution . Archived from the original on February 9, 2008 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q "Richard B. Cheney: 17th Secretary of Defense" . United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original on April 1, 2004 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Dick Cheney on Education" .

On the Issues .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2004 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ McIntyre, Robert S. (July 28, 2000).

"Dick Cheney, Fiscal Conservative?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 24, 2004 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ Saira Anees (April 4, 2008).

"The Complicated History of John McCain and MLK Day" . ABC.

Archived from the original on May 25, 2008 . Retrieved October 22, 2015 .

Dick Cheney...voted for the holiday. (Cheney had voted against it in 1978.) ^ Jonathan Martin.

"A political junkie's guide to Dick Cheney's memoir" . Politico.

Archived from the original on March 9, 2012 . Retrieved May 6, 2012 .

^ "Reagan gains backing of 36 House Republicans" . Associated Press. p. 10.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Booker, Salih (2001).

"The Coming Apathy: Africa Policy Under a Bush Administration" . Archived from the original on September 18, 2004 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ "Defending Liberty in a Global Economy" .

Cato Institute . June 23, 1998. Archived from the original on September 18, 2004 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ Rosenbaum, David E. (July 28, 2000).

"Cheney Slips in Explaining A Vote on Freeing Mandela" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2004 . Retrieved March 19, 2008 .

^ "Cheney defends voting record, blasts Clinton on talk-show circuit" .

CNN . July 30, 2000. Archived from the original on April 2, 2007 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ "The Times-News" . July 11, 2012. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019 – via Google News Archive Search.

^ Sean Wilintz (July 9, 2007).

"Mr. Cheney's Minority Report" .

The New York Times .

Princeton, New Jersey .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2014.

^ "Calm After Desert Storm" .

Hoover Institution . Summer 1993. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ a b Taggart, Charles Johnson (1990). "Cheney, Richard Bruce".

1990 Britannica Book of the Year . Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica , Inc. p. 85.

ISBN 0-85229-522-7 .

^ "Jefferson Awards Foundation" .

Jeffersonawards.org . Archived from the original on November 24, 2010 . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

^ "Vice President Dick Cheney: Personal Reflections on his Public Life" .

YouTube .

Conversations with Bill Kristol . October 12, 2014 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ "Dick Cheney on Conversations with Bill Kristol" .

Conversationswithbillkristol.org .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

^ Bartels, Larry M. (June 1, 1991).

"Constituency Opinion and Congressional Policy Making: The Reagan Defense Build Up" (PDF) .

The American Political Science Review .

85 (2): 457– 474.

doi : 10.2307/1963169 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

JSTOR 1963169 .

S2CID 28751110 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 9, 2019.

^ Charlie Savage (November 26, 2006).

"Hail to the chief: Dick Cheney's mission to expand – or 'restore' – the powers of the presidency" .

Boston Globe . Archived from the original on May 12, 2011 . Retrieved February 26, 2008 .

^ " "Prevent the Reemergence of a New Rival" – The Making of the Cheney Regional Defense Strategy, 1991–1992" .

National Security Archive . Archived from the original on March 3, 2008 . Retrieved November 28, 2011 .

^ Gates, Robert (2014).

Duty : Memoirs of a Secretary at War . Vintage Books. p. 97.

^ "Defense Department Report, Wednesday, October 14 (10/14/92)" (Press release). Department of Defense. October 14, 1992. Archived from the original on March 3, 2004 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ a b "President-elect G.W. Bush: Key Defense Appointments and Arms Control Policy" .

Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs (JINSA). December 18, 2000.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2007 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ "Panama: Invasion of Panama" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. p. 44. Archived from the original on April 27, 2008 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ Baker, Russell (January 3, 1990).

"Observer; Is This Justice Necessary?" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 16, 2008 . Retrieved December 12, 2007 .

^ Rohter, Larry (July 11, 1992).

"NORIEGA SENTENCED TO 40 YEARS IN JAIL ON DRUG CHARGES" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 5, 2025 .

^ a b c d e "The Gulf War: Chronology" . PBS.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ a b "The Gulf War: A Line in the Sand" .

Military.com . 2006.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2007 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Cheney, Dick (October 12, 2014).

"Conversations with Bill Kristol" . Youtube. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2014 .

^ "Aftermath of the Gulf War" . W.J. Rayment. Archived from the original on November 2, 2007 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ Strauss, Mark (March–April 2002). "Attacking Iraq".

Foreign Policy (129): 14– 19.

doi : 10.2307/3183385 .

ISSN 0015-7228 .

JSTOR 3183385 .

^ "Life and Career of Dick Cheney: American Profile Interview" .

C-SPAN . April 15, 1994. Archived from the original on October 26, 2008 . Retrieved October 25, 2007 .

^ Garfunkel, Jon (August 22, 2007).

"Cheney Video Hunt: The Tangled State of Archived News Footage Online" . Public Broadcasting System. Archived from the original on November 4, 2007 . Retrieved October 25, 2007 .

^ "Oral History: Richard Cheney" . Public Broadcasting System.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2007 . Retrieved October 25, 2007 .

^ a b "The Council on Foreign Relations from 1921 to 1996 – Historical Roster of Directors and Officers 2007" .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2008.

^ Myerson, Allen R. (August 11, 1995).

"Halliburton Picks Cheney To Be Chief" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ Sherri, Chunn (July 25, 2000).

"Cheney Resigns As Halliburton CEO" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ "Cheney to Join Bush on GOP Ticket" .

ABC News . July 25, 2000.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ Henriques, Diana B.; Bergman, Lowell; Oppel, Richard A. Jr.; Moss, Michael (August 24, 2000).

"The 2000 Campaign; Cheney Has Mixed Record In Business Executive Role" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2008.

^ Vincini, James (June 6, 2011).

"Halliburton Securities Fraud Lawsuit Reinstated" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on June 9, 2011 . Retrieved April 3, 2012 .

^ "Nigeria Withdraws Charges Against Cheney, Halliburton" .

Bloomberg BusinessWeek . Archived from the original on December 22, 2010 . Retrieved December 18, 2010 .

^ Berenson, Alex; Bergman, Lowell (May 22, 2002).

"Under Cheney, Halliburton Altered Policy On Accounting" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 7, 2008.

^ "Kerry Ad Falsely Accuses Cheney on Halliburton" .

Factcheck.org . September 30, 2004.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved October 9, 2019 .

^ "Cheney's Halliburton Ties Remain" .

CBS News . September 26, 2003.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2007 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Chatterjee, Pratap (June 9, 2011).

"Dick Cheney's Halliburton: a corporate case study" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on June 12, 2011 . Retrieved July 2, 2013 .

^ "Cheney income tops Bush 12-fold" .

Daily Times .

Lahore . April 16, 2006. Archived from the original on July 2, 2013 . Retrieved July 2, 2013 .

^ Horton, Scott (September 18, 2008).

"Six Questions for Bart Gellman, Author of Angler" .

Harper's Magazine .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2008 . Retrieved September 13, 2010 .

^ Henriques, Diana B.; Bergman, Lowell; Norris, Floyd (August 12, 2000).

"The 2000 Campaign: The Republican Running Mate – Cheney Is Said to Be Receiving $20 Million Retirement Package" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2008.

^ "Amendment XII. Election of President" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 17, 2019 .

^ Appleman, Eric M.

"The New Administration Takes Shape" .

George Washington University .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2004 . Retrieved November 13, 2007 .

^ Unger, Craig (November 9, 2007).

"How Cheney took control of Bush's foreign policy" .

Salon . Archived from the original on October 12, 2008 . Retrieved November 13, 2007 .

^ "The Running Mate" .

PBS . Archived from the original on February 9, 2008 . Retrieved January 2, 2008 .

^ Hartman, Rachel Rose (August 26, 2011).

"Cheney reveals his 'undisclosed location' " .

The Upshot . Yahoo.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2019 .

^ Gold, Victor (April 1, 2008).

Invasion of the Party Snatchers .

Sourcebooks , Inc. p.

79 .

ISBN 978-1-4022-1249-9 .

^ White House Press Secretary (June 22, 2002).

"Statement by the Press Secretary" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2011 . Retrieved January 9, 2008 – via National Archives .

^ "White House Physician Provides Update on Bush's Condition" . June 29, 2002.

Archived from the original on August 13, 2007 . Retrieved June 4, 2006 .

^ "Iraq: The War Card" . The Center for Public Integrity. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015 . Retrieved July 20, 2010 .

^ a b "Frontline: The Dark Side" .

Public Broadcasting System . June 20, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2007 . Retrieved February 6, 2008 .

^ Waas, Murray (November 22, 2005).

"Key Bush Intelligence Briefing Kept From Hill Panel" . National Journal Group Inc. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008 . Retrieved August 31, 2011 .

^ Pincus, Walter; Dana Milbank (June 17, 2004).

"Al Qaeda-Hussein Link Is Dismissed" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 17, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Kiely, Eugene (December 16, 2014).

"Cheney's Tortured Facts" .

FactCheck.org .

Archived from the original on August 16, 2019 . Retrieved June 5, 2019 .

^ "Cheney: Iraq will be 'enormous success story' " .

CNN . June 25, 2005.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2007 . Retrieved December 11, 2007 .

^ "Cheney calls war critics "opportunists" " .

NBC News . November 17, 2005.

Archived from the original on December 27, 2013 . Retrieved December 11, 2007 .

^ "Full Interview: Dick Cheney on Iraq" .

ABC News . March 24, 2008.

Archived from the original on March 13, 2014 . Retrieved March 11, 2013 .

^ Edwards, Mickey (March 22, 2008).

"Dick Cheney's Error: It's Government By the People" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved March 6, 2011 .

^ "Cheney describes same-sex marriage as state issue" .

CNN . August 25, 2004.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved August 2, 2006 .

^ "Cheney backs gay marriage, calls it state issue" .

NBC News . June 2, 2009.

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2019 .

^ "Frontline: Cheney's Law" . Public Broadcasting System. October 16, 2007.

Archived from the original on October 31, 2007 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Dreyfuss, Robert (April 17, 2006).

"Vice Squad" .

The American Prospect .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2007 . Retrieved February 29, 2008 .

^ "Indictment" Archived May 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine in United States of America vs. I. Lewis Libby, also known as "Scooter Libby" , United States Department of Justice , October 28, 2005; accessed December 10, 2007 ^ Jehl, Douglas (November 5, 2005).

"In Cheney's New Chief, a Bureaucratic Master" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2011.

^ "Bush has 5 polyps removed during colonoscopy" .

NBC News . July 21, 2007.

Archived from the original on September 9, 2013 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ Barnes, Fred (March 7, 2005).

"President Cheney?" .

The Weekly Standard . Vol. 10, no. 23. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ "Dick Cheney on Energy & Oil: Member of Bush's National Energy Policy Development Group" . National Energy Policy Report. May 2, 2001.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved January 2, 2008 .

^ "Judicial Watch, Inc. vs. National Energy Policy Development Group" .

Judicial Watch , Inc. 2004. Archived from the original on October 8, 2007 . Retrieved December 18, 2007 .

^ Michael Isikoff (December 24, 2007).

"Challenging Cheney" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on December 27, 2007 . Retrieved February 25, 2008 .

^ Ragavan, Chitra (February 8, 2007).

"Cheney Tangles With Agency on Secrecy" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2007.

^ Baker, Peter (June 22, 2007).

"Cheney Defiant on Classified Material" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2009 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ Duffy, Michael (June 22, 2007).

"The Cheney Branch of Government" .

Time . Archived from the original on October 28, 2007 . Retrieved July 19, 2007 .

^ Lee, Christopher (September 8, 2008).

"Lawsuit to Ask That Cheney's Papers Be Made Public" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2012 . Retrieved September 8, 2008 .

^ Lee, Christopher (September 21, 2008).

"Cheney Is Told to Keep Official Records" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2012 . Retrieved September 28, 2008 .

^ Breitman, Rachel (September 9, 2008).

"Advocacy Group Files Suit To Ensure That VP's Records Stay Public" .

The American Lawyer .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2008 . Retrieved September 9, 2008 .

^ Dean, John W. (September 3, 2010).

"What Will Become of Dick Cheney's Vice Presidential Records?" .

FindLaw Legal News and Commentary. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved September 28, 2010 .

^ Froomkin, Dan (October 24, 2006).

"Spinning the Course" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2006 . Retrieved October 24, 2006 .

^ Waas, Murray (February 9, 2006).

"Cheney 'Authorized' Libby to Leak Classified Information" .

National Journal . Archived from the original on January 29, 2013 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ Apuzzo, Matt (September 8, 2006).

"Armitage Says He Was Source on Plame" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2012 . Retrieved October 24, 2006 .

^ "Cheney's top aide indicted; CIA leak probe continues" .

CNN . October 29, 2005.

Archived from the original on October 5, 2007 . Retrieved January 2, 2008 .

^ Horton, Scott (November 2, 2009).

"Did Cheney Lie to the Plame Prosecutors?" .

Harpers Magazine .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2009 . Retrieved October 15, 2011 .

^ "CREW Lawsuit Results in Release of Notes of Cheney's FBI Interview in Wilson Leak Case" .

Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington . October 30, 2009. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011 . Retrieved October 15, 2011 .

^ Massimo Calibrisi; Michael Weisskopf (July 24, 2009).

"Inside Bush and Cheney's Final Days" .

Time . Archived from the original on February 4, 2013 . Retrieved October 15, 2011 .

^ Jim Rutenberg; Jo Becker (February 17, 2009).

"Aides Say No Pardon for Libby Irked Cheney" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2011 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Restuccia, Andrew; Gerstein, Josh (April 13, 2018).

"Trump issues pardon for Lewis 'Scooter' Libby" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2020 . Retrieved July 6, 2020 .

^ Johnson, Anna (April 26, 2007).

"Bin Laden is said to have supervised February Cheney-visit attack" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on October 25, 2007 . Retrieved December 13, 2007 .

^ "Cheney unhurt in blast outside Afghan base" .

CNN . Associated Press. February 27, 2007. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007 . Retrieved February 27, 2007 .

^ Graham, Stephen (February 26, 2007).

"Cheney Asks Musharraf to Fight al-Qaida" . CBS. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008 . Retrieved January 3, 2008 .

^ Walsh, Kenneth T. (October 5, 2003).

"The Man Behind the Curtain" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2007 . Retrieved January 11, 2009 .

^ Kuttner, Robert (February 25, 2004).

"Cheney's unprecedented power" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2009 . Retrieved January 11, 2009 .

^ a b "Cheney makes Capitol Hill rounds" .

CNN . January 5, 2001. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007 . Retrieved January 3, 2008 .

^ Froomkin, Dan (August 22, 2006).

"Inside the Real West Wing" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 30, 2008 . Retrieved January 3, 2008 .

^ "Old Executive Office Building" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on October 12, 2007 . Retrieved January 3, 2008 .

^ "Dirksen Senate Office Building" . United States Senate.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2007 . Retrieved January 3, 2008 .

^ Brazelon, Emily (November 18, 2007).

"All the President's Powers" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2008 . Retrieved November 18, 2007 .

^ Robin Lindley (January 7, 2008).

"The Return of the Imperial Presidency: An Interview with Charlie Savage" .

History News Network .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2008 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Howard Kurtz (April 7, 2008).

"Washington Post Wins 6 Pulitzers" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2008 . Retrieved April 7, 2008 .

^ Gellman, Barton; Becker, Jo (June 24, 2007).

"Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency – 'A Different Understanding With the President' " .

The Washington Post : A01. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008 . Retrieved January 17, 2008 .

^ Gellman, Barton; Becker, Jo (June 25, 2007).

"Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency – Pushing the Envelope on Presidential Power" .

The Washington Post . pp. A01. Archived from the original on July 14, 2007 . Retrieved January 17, 2008 .

^ Andy Worthington (August 24, 2009).

"An Interview with Col. Lawrence Wilkerson" . Future of Freedom Foundation. Archived from the original on August 30, 2009 . Retrieved March 7, 2011 .

^ Gellman, Barton; Becker, Jo (June 26, 2007).

"Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency – A Strong Push From Backstage" .

The Washington Post : A01. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008 . Retrieved January 17, 2008 .

^ "Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency – Leaving No Tracks" .

The Washington Post . June 27, 2007. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008 . Retrieved January 17, 2008 .

^ Sherwell, Philip (June 28, 2008).

"Dick Cheney 'tried to block North Korea Nuclear deal' " .

The Daily Telegraph . London. pp. A01. Archived from the original on July 2, 2008 . Retrieved August 5, 2008 .

^ a b Hebert, Josef (July 8, 2008).

"Cheney wanted cuts in climate testimony" .

Yahoo! News . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on July 12, 2008 . Retrieved July 8, 2008 .

^ Barnes, Robert (February 9, 2008).

"Cheney Joins Congress In Opposing D.C. Gun Ban; Vice President Breaks With Administration" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2011 . Retrieved July 21, 2012 .

^ a b " ' This Week' Transcript: Former Vice President Dick Cheney" .

This Week .

ABC . February 14, 2010.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2010 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ "Former U.S. VP, McLean Neighbor Dick Cheney Starts Marketing His Memoir" . August 25, 2011 . Retrieved July 15, 2024 .

^ Kamen, Al (January 30, 2008).

"The New Neighbors Sure Like Black SUVs" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2008 . Retrieved January 17, 2010 .

^ Parker, Ashley (July 13, 2012).

"Cheneys Host Fund Raiser for Romney in Wyoming" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2012 . Retrieved July 18, 2012 .

^ Harris, Aisha (February 15, 2013).

"Dick Cheney Doesn't Care About Being Loved" .

Slate Magazine .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2013 . Retrieved March 11, 2013 .

^ Noah, Timothy (March 14, 2013).

"Bravo, Dick: In a new documentary, Cheney gives a masterful performance" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on March 21, 2013.

^ Handy, Bruce (March 8, 2013).

"Dick Cheney: New Doc Shows the Genius, Chutzpah, and Blithely Twisted Nature of the Former Vice President" .

Vanity Fair .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2013 . Retrieved March 11, 2013 .

^ Dwyer, Devin (March 22, 2011).

"Hollywood Goes Republican? On the Big Screen: HBO to Produce Miniseries on Dick Cheney Vice Presidency" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2011 . Retrieved March 23, 2011 .

^ Riechmann, Deb (May 23, 2009).

"Don't call ex-Vice President Cheney a has-been" .

The Seattle Times News . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved February 19, 2010 .

^ Loven, Jennifer (May 22, 2009).

"President defends his position on closing Guantanamo prison" .

Lubbock Avalanche-Journal via AP . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on October 26, 2012 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ VandeHei, Jim; Mike, Allen (May 20, 2009).

"Obama, Cheney plan dueling speeches" .

Politico via Yahoo! News.

Archived from the original on May 24, 2009 . Retrieved May 30, 2009 .

^ Landay, Jonathan S.; Strobel, Warren P. (May 21, 2009).

"Cheney's speech ignored some inconvenient truths" .

McClatchy . Archived from the original on May 25, 2009 . Retrieved May 30, 2009 .

^ "Dick Cheney speaks out in favour of gay marriage" .

Pink News .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2009.

^ "Dick Cheney Lobbying for Gay Marriage" .

The Daily Beast . February 17, 2012.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2012 . Retrieved May 6, 2012 .

^ "Obama extends Cheney's Secret Service Protection" .

U.S. News & World Report . July 10, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 12, 2009.

^ Shane, Scott (July 11, 2009).

"Cheney Is Linked to Concealment of C.I.A. Project" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 15, 2014 . Retrieved August 6, 2009 .

^ Gorman, Siobhan (July 13, 2009).

"CIA Had Secret Al Qaeda Plan" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2015 . Retrieved August 6, 2009 .

^ Tal Kopan (October 21, 2013).

"Dick Cheney: Tea party 'positive' for GOP" . Politico.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2013.

^ "Dick Cheney will support Trump" . politico. May 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2020 . Retrieved June 14, 2020 .

^ Curry, Tom (January 3, 2017).

"Dick Cheney on New Rep. Cheney: 'If She Wants My Advice, She'll Ask for It' " . rollcall.com.

Archived from the original on April 22, 2017 . Retrieved April 21, 2017 .

^ Dick Cheney lashes out at Russia for "act of war" as neocons try outreach to liberals Archived April 1, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

Salon.com . March 29, 2017.

^ Allen, Mike (December 30, 2009).

"Dick Cheney: Barack Obama 'trying to pretend' " .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2010 . Retrieved January 4, 2010 .

^ Pfeiffer, Dan (December 30, 2009).

"The Same Old Washington Blame Game" .

whitehouse.gov . Archived from the original on December 3, 2009 . Retrieved January 4, 2010 .

^ Mooney, Alexander (December 30, 2009).

"Cheney, White House spar over terrorism" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 31, 2009 . Retrieved August 1, 2010 .

^ Karl, Johnathan (May 2, 2011).

"Dick Cheney Says 'Obama Deserves Credit' for Osama Bin Laden's Death" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2011 . Retrieved May 7, 2011 .

^ Kendall Breitman (May 29, 2014).

"Dick Cheney: President Obama 'very weak' " . Politico.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2014 . Retrieved June 1, 2014 .

^ In My Time | Book by Dick Cheney, Liz Cheney | Official Publisher Page . Simon & Schuster. August 30, 2011.

ISBN 9781439176191 . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

^ Gellman, Barton (August 29, 2011).

"In New Memoir, Dick Cheney Tries to Rewrite History" .

Time .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2011 . Retrieved October 27, 2011 .

^ Barton Gellman (September 12, 2011).

"The Power and the Zealotry" .

Time . Archived from the original on February 4, 2013 . Retrieved May 8, 2012 .

^ Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America, By Dick Cheney and Liz Cheney . Simon & Schuster. September 2015.

ISBN 9781442388314 .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2015 . Retrieved September 3, 2015 .

^ Harper, Jennifer (September 1, 2015).

"Dick Cheney: Tell children that America is 'the most powerful, good and honorable nation in history': New book provides insight into the true value of a mighty America" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved September 6, 2015 .

Retrieved September 6, 2015 ^ Warren, Michael (September 1, 2015).

"Cheney: Iran Deal Did Not Begin With Bush Administration" .

The Weekly Standard . Archived from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved September 3, 2015 .

^ Cillizza, Chris (January 7, 2022).

"Analysis: Dick Cheney just spoke a hard truth to his fellow Republicans about January 6" .

CNN . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ LoBianco, Tom (May 6, 2016).

"First on CNN: Cheney says he will support Trump" .

CNN . Retrieved August 4, 2022 .

^ " Dick Cheney: Fundamentally opposed Iran nuclear deal Archived May 20, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ". Fox News. May 10, 2018.

^ Johnson, Eliana (March 11, 2019).

"Cheney grills Pence on Trump's foreign policy" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2020 . Retrieved July 6, 2020 .

^ Sotomayor, Marianna; Kane, Paul (January 7, 2021).

"Dick Cheney returns to the House and receives a warm welcome . . . from Democrats" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2022 .

^ Multiple sources: Wilkie, Christina (January 7, 2022).

"With Republicans absent, Liz and Dick Cheney join Democrats to mark Jan. 6 attack anniversary" .

CNBC . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

Edmondson, Catie (January 6, 2022).

" 'A Reflection of Where Our Party Is': Republicans Avoid Jan. 6 Observances" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

^ Vakil, Caroline (August 4, 2022).

"Dick Cheney in new ad: No individual is 'greater threat to our republic' than Trump" .

The Hill . Nexstar Inc . Retrieved August 5, 2022 .

^ Bradner, Eric; Zeleny, Jeff (August 17, 2022).

"How Liz Cheney lost Wyoming's lone seat in the House" .

CNN . Retrieved August 18, 2022 .

^ a b Multiple sources: "In Rebuke of Donald Trump, Dick Cheney Says He Will Vote for Kamala Harris" .

WCPO 9 Cincinnati . Scripp's News. September 6, 2024 . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

Clayton, Abené; Yang, Maya; Clayton (now), Abené; Yang (earlier), Maya (September 6, 2024).

"Dick Cheney Confirms He Will Vote for Kamala Harris, Saying No 'Greater Threat' to US Than Donald Trump" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

^ "Cheney Building Dedication to be Held in Casper" (Press release). United States House of Representatives: Barbara Cubin. 1999. Archived from the original on March 28, 2004 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ "Public Law 105-277 (Section 113), 105th Congress, 21 October 1998" (PDF) .

U.S. Government Publishing Office .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 18, 2015 . Retrieved April 18, 2015 .

^ a b "Vice President Dick Cheney: Job Ratings" . The Polling Report. December 31, 2007. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008 . Retrieved December 31, 2006 .

^ "Bush's Final Approval Rating: 22 Percent" .

CBS News . February 11, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 22, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2013 .

^ Saad, Lidia (April 3, 2009).

"Little Change in Negative Images of Bush and Cheney – Favorable ratings for both are at or near their all-time lows" .

The Gallup Organization .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2009 . Retrieved April 3, 2009 .

^ "BYU to give Cheney honorary degree" .

Deseret News . April 25, 2006. Archived from the original on June 21, 2008 . Retrieved May 7, 2007 .

^ "BYU Invitation to Vice President Stirs Debate" .

Meridian .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . March 29, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ Buchanan, Adam (March 29, 2007).

"BYU to Allow Cheney Protest" .

Brigham Young University . Archived from the original on March 4, 2008 . Retrieved December 11, 2007 .

^ "Cheney: Being Darth Vader not so bad" .

NBC News . Associated Press. November 1, 2007.

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved May 27, 2011 .

^ Jason Leopold, "Cheney Admits He 'Signed Off' on Waterboarding of Three Guantanamo Prisoners" Archived December 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Atlantic Free Press , December 29, 2008 ^ "Senate Report: Rice, Cheney OK'd CIA use of waterboarding" .

CNN . April 23, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2018 . Retrieved December 9, 2015 .

^ Calls for prosecution: Center for Constitutional Rights : Senate Armed Services Committee Report Underscores Need for Prosecution Archived December 24, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Human Rights Watch : United States: Investigate Bush, Other Top Officials for Torture Archived April 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine The New York Times Editorial Board Prosecute Torturers and Their Bosses Archived July 17, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Sen.

Carl Levin : Levin Discusses Need for Torture Prosecutions Archived August 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Richard A. Clarke : Former Counterterrorism Czar Richard Clarke: Bush, Cheney Committed War Crimes Archived December 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine "Demands for war crimes prosecutions are now growing in the mainstream" Archived April 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Glenn Greenwald , Salon , December 18, 2008 ^ "No More Excuses: A Roadmap to Justice for CIA Torture" .

hrw.org .

Human Rights Watch . December 2015.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2015 . Retrieved December 2, 2015 .

^ Edelman, Adam (November 5, 2015).

"Rumsfeld swipes at George H.W. Bush after critical bio clips" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2015 . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

^ Zeitchik, Steven (May 22, 2008).

"Richard Dreyfuss heads to the White House" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Nielsen Business Media, Inc.

Archived from the original on May 24, 2008 . Retrieved January 12, 2019 .

^ Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 9, 2018).

"Sacha Baron Cohen Asks Dick Cheney To Sign Water Board Kit In New Clip From Mystery Showtime Series" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2018 . Retrieved October 11, 2018 .

^ Coyle, Jake (April 12, 2017).

"Christian Bale, Acton's Steve Carell cast in Dick Cheney biopic" .

Boston.com .

Associated Press . Retrieved May 28, 2023 .

^ Sulagna Misra (May 6, 2020).

"In "Jill," Mrs. America captures a painful turning point" .

The A.V. Club .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2020 . Retrieved May 6, 2020 .

^ "Cheney's Got a Gun" .

The Bob Rivers Show . January 13, 2003.

Archived from the original on March 4, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2021 .

^ Menende, Alberto J (December 12, 2006).

"United Methodists fill 62 seats in new Congress" . United States Marine Corps. Archived from the original on October 21, 2007 . Retrieved January 1, 2008 .

^ "How many U.S. Presidents/Senators/Representatives have been Methodist? Have we ever had a President and Vice President of the same denomination before?" .

Frequently Asked Questions – Questions About Methodism .

The United Methodist Archives Center at Drew University . Archived from the original on October 16, 2008 . Retrieved May 24, 2009 .

^ Lemann, Nicholas (April 30, 2001).

"The Quiet Man" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ "Vice President Cheney's legacy grows by one grandchild" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2008.

^ "Dick Cheney defends his silence on gay marriage in 2000" . Politico. Associated Press. July 30, 2012.

Archived from the original on August 1, 2012 . Retrieved May 12, 2014 .

^ Bruni, Frank (July 24, 2000).

"The 2000 Campaign: The Texas Governor; New Sign Bush Favors Cheney as No. 2" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2011 . Retrieved May 24, 2009 .

^ Lawrence K. Altman, M.D. (April 23, 2012).

"Cheney File Traces Heart Care Milestones" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2012 . Retrieved April 23, 2012 .

^ Bernstein, Jake; Dubose, Lou (September 4, 2008).

Vice: Dick Cheney and the Hijacking of the American Presidency . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4090-2353-1 .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2022 . Retrieved August 22, 2020 .

^ a b "Cheney's history of heart problems" .

CNN . July 2, 2001. Archived from the original on January 23, 2009 . Retrieved February 26, 2010 .

^ a b Camia, Catalina (February 23, 2010).

"Tests show Cheney suffered 'mild heart attack' " .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2010 . Retrieved February 26, 2010 .

^ a b c "V.P. Cheney Treated For Irregular Heartbeat" .

CBS News . November 26, 2007. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ Zebra (December 1, 2007).

"Health & Medical History of Richard "Dick" Cheney" . Dr. Zebra.com.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2009 . Retrieved January 10, 2008 .

^ Malveaux, Suzanne (March 5, 2007).

"Cheney treated for blood clot in his leg" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2009 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ "Doctors Clear Cheney on Health" .

The New York Times . Associated Press. July 13, 2008.

Archived from the original on May 11, 2011 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ Stout, David (October 15, 2008).

"Cheney Is Treated for an Irregular Heartbeat" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2014 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ "Vice-President Dick Cheney to watch Barack Obama inauguration in a wheelchair" .

The Australian . January 21, 2009. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012 . Retrieved February 27, 2010 .

^ "Cheney Wheelchair Bound for Inauguration" ( Flash video ) , The Washington Post , Associated Press, January 20, 2009, archived from the original on June 29, 2011 , retrieved February 24, 2011 ^ "Former VP Cheney hospitalized" .

NBC News . June 25, 2010.

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 25, 2010 .

^ "Cheney Has 'Bridge to Transplant' Heart Device Implanted" . Fox News Channel. July 15, 2010.

Archived from the original on July 16, 2010 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ "MSNBC's Rachel Maddow on Cheney's heart surgery" . MSNBC. Archived from the original on January 29, 2011.

^ Altman, Lawrence K. (July 19, 2010).

"A New Pumping Device Brings Hope for Cheney" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2011 . Retrieved July 19, 2010 .

^ Zakaria, Tabassum (August 9, 2010).

"Former VP Cheney released from Hospital" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2010.

^ Altman, Lawrence K.; Cooper, Helene; Schear, Michael D. (January 4, 2011).

"Cheney Is Back, With Heart Pump and New Outlook" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2011.

^ Jackson, David (May 9, 2011).

"Cheney ponders heart transplant" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2011.

^ Black, Rosemary (January 5, 2011).

" 'Former vice president Dick Cheney now has no pulse; Heart pump like artificial heart" .

Daily News . New York. Archived from the original on April 18, 2012.

^ "Cheney undergoes heart transplant surgery" . Fox News Channel. March 24, 2012.

Archived from the original on March 25, 2012 . Retrieved March 24, 2012 .

^ "Dick Cheney receives heart transplant – Political Hotsheet" .

CBS News . Archived from the original on March 25, 2012 . Retrieved May 6, 2012 .

^ Lawrence K. Altman; Denise Grady (March 26, 2012).

"For Cheney, Pros and Cons in New Heart" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2018 . Retrieved March 26, 2012 .

^ "Texas Cops Release Cheney Shooting Report" .

The Smoking Gun .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2009.

^ "Hunter shot by Cheney has heart attack" .

CNN . February 15, 2006.

Archived from the original on September 6, 2008.

^ "Cheney Cited for Breaking Hunting Law" .

CBS News . February 14, 2006.

Archived from the original on November 9, 2012 . Retrieved July 19, 2012 .

^ "Texas Parks and Wildlife Hunting Accident and Incident Report Form" .

The Smoking Gun . February 13, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 20, 2009 . Retrieved February 14, 2006 .

^ Farhi, Paul (October 14, 2010).

"Since Dick Cheney shot him, Harry Whittington's aim has been to move on" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ VandeHei, Jim; Moreno, Sylvia (February 14, 2006).

"White House Deferred to Cheney on Shooting" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2010 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ "Cheney: 'One of the worst days of my life' " .

CNN . February 16, 2006.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2009.

^ "Avid shooter simulates the accident, its injuries" .

Corpus Christi Caller-Times . February 14, 2006.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2012.

^ Riccardi, Nicholas; Gerstenzang, James (February 15, 2006).

"Hunter Suffers Setback as Criticism of Cheney Grows" .

The Nation . Los Angeles Times.

Archived from the original on December 1, 2008.

^ "Poll:Bush Ratings At All-Time Low" .

CBS News . February 27, 2006.

Archived from the original on December 16, 2008 . Retrieved October 8, 2008 .

^ Leibovich, Mark (February 14, 2006).

"After Cheney's Shooting Incident, Time to Unload" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

Bibliography Andrews, Elaine K. (2001).

Dick Cheney: A Life in Public Service . Brookfield, Conn: Millbrook Press.

ISBN 0-7613-2306-6 .

Baker, Peter (2013).

Days of Fire: Bush and Cheney in the White House . New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0385525183 .

Gellman, Barton (2008).

Angler: The Cheney Vice Presidency . New York: Penguin Press.

ISBN 978-1-59420-186-8 .

Goldstein, Joel K. (August 31, 2009).

Cheney, Vice Presidential Power and the War on Terror . Toronto: APSA Meeting Paper.

SSRN 1450601 .

Hayes, Stephen F.

(2007).

Cheney: The Untold Story of America's Most Powerful and Controversial Vice President . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-072346-0 .

Goldstein, Joel K. "The contemporary presidency: Cheney, vice presidential power, and the war on terror." Presidential Studies Quarterly 40.1 (2010): 102–139.

online Mann, James (2004).

Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet . New York: Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-670-03299-9 .

Nichols, John (2004).

Dick: The Man Who Is President . New York: New Press.

ISBN 1-56584-840-3 .

External links Dick Cheney at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource United States Congress.

"Dick Cheney (id: C000344)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Appearances on C-SPAN US Department of State from the Internet Archive The New York Times – Dick Cheney archives Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by Teno Roncalio Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Wyoming's at-large congressional district 1979–1989 Succeeded by Craig L. Thomas Preceded by Trent Lott House Minority Whip House Republican Whip 1989 Succeeded by Newt Gingrich Business positions Preceded by Thomas H. Cruikshank Chief Executive Officer of Halliburton 1995–2000 Succeeded by David J. Lesar Party political offices Preceded by Bud Shuster Chair of the House Republican Policy Committee 1981–1987 Succeeded by Jerry Lewis Preceded by Jack Kemp Chair of the House Republican Conference 1987–1989 Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 2000 , 2004 Succeeded by Sarah Palin Political offices Preceded by Position created White House Deputy Chief of Staff 1974–1975 Succeeded by Landon Butler Preceded by Donald Rumsfeld White House Chief of Staff 1975–1977 Vacant Title next held by Hamilton Jordan Preceded by Frank Carlucci United States Secretary of Defense 1989–1993 Succeeded by Les Aspin Preceded by Al Gore Vice President of the United States 2001–2009 Succeeded by Joe Biden U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial) Preceded by Al Gore as former vice president United States order of precedence former vice president Succeeded by Mike Pence as former vice president v t e Dick Cheney 46th Vice President of the United States (2001–2009) 7th White House Chief of Staff (1975-1977) 17th United States Secretary of Defense (1989–1993) U.S. Representative for WY–AL (1979–1989) 20th century career Cabinet White House Chief of Staff to Gerald Ford (1975-1977) Secretary of Defense to George H. W. Bush (1989-1993) U.S. House 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 House Minority Whip Private sector Halliburton Presidential elections 2000 campaign selection convention debate election transition 2004 campaign convention debate election Vice presidency ( timeline ) Transition 1st inauguration 2nd inauguration Timeline 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 January 2009 Domestic policy Legislation and programs Economic policy Foreign policy "War on Terror" Bush Doctrine Russia summits Slovenia Slovakia War in Afghanistan Patriot Act 2003 invasion of Iraq Status of Forces Agreement Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act USA Freedom Corps Department of Homeland Security Space policy Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty Dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy Email controversy Efforts to impeach Dick Cheney Obama transition Legacy and public image Agathidium cheneyi Dick Cheney hunting accident Exceptional: Why the World Needs a Powerful America In My Time: A Personal and Political Memoir Vice Family and personal life Lynne Cheney (wife) Liz Cheney (daughter) Mary Cheney (daughter) ← Al Gore Joe Biden → Category Articles related to Dick Cheney v t e White House chiefs of staff Steelman Adams Persons O'Donnell Jenkins Moyers Valenti M. Watson Jones Haldeman Haig Rumsfeld Cheney Jordan J. Watson J. Baker Regan H. Baker Duberstein Sununu Skinner J. Baker McLarty Panetta Bowles Podesta Card Bolten Emanuel Rouse Daley Lew McDonough Priebus Kelly Mulvaney Meadows Klain Zients Wiles v t e Members of the United States House of Representatives from Wyoming Territorial (1869–1890) Nuckolls Jones Steele Corlett Downey Post Carey One at-large seat (1890–present) Clark Coffeen Mondell Osborne Mondell Winter Carter Greever Horton McIntyre Barrett Harrison Thomson Harrison Roncalio Harrison Wold Roncalio D. Cheney Thomas Cubin Lummis L. Cheney Hageman v t e Minority whips of the U.S. House of Representatives Underwood Lloyd Dwight Burke Hamilton Oldfield McDuffie Bachmann Englebright Arends McCormack Arends McCormack Arends Michel Lott Cheney Gingrich Bonior Pelosi Hoyer Blunt Cantor Hoyer Scalise Clark v t e Republican Party whips of the U.S. House of Representatives Tawney Watson Dwight Burke Hamilton Knutson Vestal Bachmann Englebright Arends Michel Lott Cheney Gingrich DeLay Blunt Cantor McCarthy Scalise Emmer v t e Republican Conference chairs of the United States House of Representatives Morrill Schenck Banks Blair Maynard McCrary Hale Frye Robeson Cannon Henderson Grosvenor Cannon Hepburn Currier Greene Towner S. Anderson Hawley Luce Lehlbach Woodruff Hope Hoeven Ford Laird J. Anderson Devine Kemp D. Cheney Lewis Armey Boehner Watts Pryce Putnam Pence Hensarling McMorris Rodgers L. Cheney Stefanik McClain v t e United States secretaries of defense Forrestal Johnson Marshall Lovett Wilson McElroy T. Gates McNamara Clifford Laird Richardson Schlesinger Rumsfeld Brown Weinberger Carlucci Cheney Aspin Perry Cohen Rumsfeld R. Gates Panetta Hagel Carter Mattis Esper Austin Hegseth v t e Cabinet of President George H. W. Bush (1989–1993) Cabinet Vice President Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Secretary of State James Baker (1989–1992) Lawrence Eagleburger (1992–1993) Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady (1989–1993) Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney (1989–1993) Attorney General Dick Thornburgh (1989–1991) William Barr (1991–1993) Secretary of the Interior Manuel Lujan Jr.

(1989–1993) Secretary of Agriculture Clayton Yeutter (1989–1991) Ed Madigan (1991–1993) Secretary of Commerce Robert Mosbacher (1989–1992) Barbara Franklin (1992–1993) Secretary of Labor Elizabeth Dole (1989–1990) Lynn M. Martin (1991–1993) Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis W. Sullivan (1989–1993) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Jack Kemp (1989–1993) Secretary of Transportation Samuel K. Skinner (1989–1991) Andrew Card (1992–1993) Secretary of Energy James D. Watkins (1989–1993) Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos (1989–1990) Lamar Alexander (1991–1993) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Ed Derwinski (1989–1992) Cabinet-level Director of the Office of Management and Budget Richard Darman (1989–1993) Trade Representative Carla Anderson Hills (1989–1993) Counselor to the President None (1989–1992) Clayton Yeutter (1992–1993) v t e Cabinet of President George W. Bush (2001–2009) Cabinet Vice President Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Secretary of State Colin Powell (2001–2005) Condoleezza Rice ( 2005–2009 ) Secretary of the Treasury Paul H. O'Neill (2001–2002) John W. Snow (2003–2006) Henry Paulson (2006–2009) Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld (2001–2006) Robert Gates (2006–2009) Attorney General John Ashcroft (2001–2005) Alberto Gonzales (2005–2007) Michael Mukasey (2007–2009) Secretary of the Interior Gale Norton (2001–2006) Dirk Kempthorne (2006–2009) Secretary of Agriculture Ann Veneman (2001–2005) Mike Johanns (2005–2007) Ed Schafer (2008–2009) Secretary of Commerce Donald Evans (2001–2005) Carlos Gutierrez (2005–2009) Secretary of Labor Elaine Chao (2001–2009) Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy Thompson (2001–2005) Mike Leavitt (2005–2009) Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Mel Martínez (2001–2004) Alphonso Jackson (2004–2008) Steve Preston (2008–2009) Secretary of Transportation Norman Mineta (2001–2006) Mary E. Peters (2006–2009) Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham (2001–2005) Samuel Bodman (2005–2009) Secretary of Education Rod Paige (2001–2005) Margaret Spellings (2005–2009) Secretary of Veterans Affairs Anthony Principi (2001–2005) Jim Nicholson (2005–2007) James Peake (2007–2009) Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge (2003–2005) Michael Chertoff (2005–2009) Cabinet-level Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency Christine Todd Whitman (2001–2003) Mike Leavitt (2003–2005) Stephen L. Johnson (2005–2009) Director of the Office of Management and Budget Mitch Daniels (2001–2003) Joshua Bolten (2003–2006) Rob Portman (2006–2007) Jim Nussle (2007–2009) Trade Representative Robert Zoellick (2001–2005) Rob Portman (2005–2006) Susan Schwab (2006–2009) Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy John P. Walters (2001–2009) White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card (2001–2006) Joshua Bolten (2006–2009) v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams ( 1789–1797 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1797–1801 ) Aaron Burr ( 1801–1805 ) George Clinton ( 1805–1812 ) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Joe Biden ( 2009–2017 ) Mike Pence ( 2017–2021 ) Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) JD Vance ( 2025–present ) Category List Portals : 2000s Biography Conservatism Politics United States Wyoming Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People US Congress Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dick_Cheney&oldid=1306203144 " Categories : Dick Cheney 1941 births 2000 United States vice-presidential candidates 2004 United States vice-presidential candidates 20th-century American businesspeople 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century Methodists 20th-century Wyoming politicians 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century Methodists 21st-century vice presidents of the United States 21st-century Wyoming politicians Acting presidents of the United States American chief executives of energy companies American Enterprise Institute American hunters American male non-fiction writers American memoirists American people of English descent American people of French descent American people of Welsh descent American political writers American United Methodists Cheney family Ford administration personnel George H. W. Bush administration cabinet members George W. Bush administration cabinet members Grand Cordons of the Order of the Rising Sun Halliburton people Heart transplant recipients Living people Members of the Jewish Institute for National Security of America People associated with the 2000 United States presidential election People associated with the 2004 United States presidential election People associated with the September 11 attacks People from Jackson, Wyoming Politicians from Casper, Wyoming Politicians from Lincoln, Nebraska Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Republican Party (United States) vice presidential nominees Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Wyoming Republican Party vice presidents of the United States Texas Republicans United States congressional aides United States government officials of the Iraq War United States secretaries of defense University of Wyoming alumni Vice presidents of the United States White House chiefs of staff White House deputy chiefs of staff Writers from Lincoln, Nebraska Writers from Wyoming Wyoming Republicans 20th-century members of the United States House of Representatives Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun American anti-communists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Source attribution All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living people Use mdy dates from September 2024 Use American English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN S-bef: 'before' parameter includes the word 'created' This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dick Cheney 88 languages Add topic

