Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 1.1 Broadcasting 1.1.1 Broadcast audio reception 1.1.2 Broadcast television reception 1.2 Voice communications 1.2.1 Two-way voice communications 1.2.2 One-way voice communications 1.3 Data communication 1.4 Other applications 2 Principles Toggle Principles subsection 2.1 Reception 2.2 Bandpass filtering 2.3 Amplification 2.4 Demodulation 2.5 Automatic gain control (AGC) 3 Designs Toggle Designs subsection 3.1 Tuned radio frequency (TRF) receiver 3.2 The superheterodyne design 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Radio receiver 69 languages العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית کٲشُر Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tayal ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Wayuunaiki 吴语 ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Device for receiving radio transmissions A modern communications receiver , used in two-way radio communication stations to talk with remote locations by shortwave radio .

A clock radio , a bedside broadcast AM and FM radio receiver combined with an alarm clock. The clock can be set to turn on the radio in the morning, to wake the owner with audio from a broadcast radio station.

In radio communications , a radio receiver , also known as a receiver , a wireless , or simply a radio , is an electronic device that receives radio waves and converts the information carried by them to a usable form. It is used with an antenna . The antenna intercepts radio waves ( electromagnetic waves of radio frequency ) and converts them to tiny alternating currents which are applied to the receiver, and the receiver extracts the desired information. The receiver uses electronic filters to separate the desired radio frequency signal from all the other signals picked up by the antenna, an electronic amplifier to increase the power of the signal for further processing, and finally recovers the desired information through demodulation .

Radio receivers are essential components of all systems based on radio technology. The information produced by the receiver may be in the form of sound, video ( television ), or digital data .

[ 1 ] A radio receiver may be a separate piece of electronic equipment, or an electronic circuit within another device. The most familiar type of radio receiver for most people is a broadcast radio receiver , which reproduces sound transmitted by radio broadcasting stations, historically the first mass-market radio application. A broadcast receiver is commonly called a "radio". However radio receivers are very widely used in other areas of modern technology, in televisions , cell phones , wireless modems , radio clocks and other components of communications, remote control, and wireless networking systems.

Applications [ edit ] See also: Radio § Applications Broadcasting [ edit ] Broadcast audio reception [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Broadcast radio receiver .

[ edit ] A portable battery-powered AM/FM broadcast receiver, used to listen to audio broadcast by local radio stations .

The most familiar form of radio receiver is a broadcast radio receiver , often just called a broadcast receiver or simply a radio, as used for radio broadcasting . It receives audio programs intended for public reception transmitted by local radio stations . The sound is reproduced either by a loudspeaker in the radio or an earphone which plugs into a jack on the radio. The radio requires electric power , provided either by batteries inside the radio or a power cord which plugs into an electric outlet . All radios have a volume control to adjust the loudness of the audio, and some type of " tuning " control to select the radio station to be received.

Broadcast television reception [ edit ] Main article: Television Televisions receive a video signal representing a moving image, composed of a sequence of still images, and a synchronized audio signal representing the associated sound. The television channel received by a TV occupies a wider bandwidth than an audio signal, from 600 kHz to 6 MHz.

Terrestrial television receiver , broadcast television or just television (TV) - Televisions contains an integral receiver ( TV tuner ) which receives free broadcast television from local television stations on TV channels in the VHF and UHF bands.

Satellite TV receiver - a set-top box which receives subscription direct-broadcast satellite television , and displays it on an ordinary television . A rooftop satellite dish receives many channels all modulated on a K u band microwave downlink signal from a geostationary direct broadcast satellite 22,000 miles (35,000 km) above the Earth, and the signal is converted to a lower intermediate frequency and transported to the box through a coaxial cable. The subscriber pays a monthly fee.

Voice communications [ edit ] Two-way voice communications [ edit ] Main article: Two-way radio A two-way radio is an audio transceiver , a receiver and transmitter in the same device, used for bidirectional person-to-person voice communication. The radio link may be half-duplex , using a single radio channel in which only one radio can transmit at a time. so different users take turns talking, pressing a push to talk button on their radio which switches on the transmitter. Or the radio link may be full duplex , a bidirectional link using two radio channels so both people can talk at the same time, as in a cell phone.

Cellphone - a portable telephone that is connected to the telephone network by radio signals exchanged with a local antenna called a cell tower . Cellphones have highly automated digital receivers working in the UHF and microwave band that receive the incoming side of the duplex voice channel, as well as a control channel that handles dialing calls and switching the phone between cell towers. They usually also have several other receivers that connect them with other networks: a WiFi modem , a bluetooth modem, and a GPS receiver . The cell tower has sophisticated multichannel receivers that receive the signals from many cell phones simultaneously.

Cordless phone - a landline telephone in which the handset is portable and communicates with the rest of the phone by a short range duplex radio link, instead of being attached by a cord. Both the handset and the base station have radio receivers operating in the UHF band that receive the short range bidirectional duplex radio link.

Citizens band radio - a two-way half-duplex radio operating in the 27 MHz band that can be used without a license. They are often installed in vehicles and used by truckers and delivery services.

Walkie-talkie - a handheld short range half-duplex two-way radio.

Handheld scanner Scanner - a receiver that continuously monitors multiple frequencies or radio channels by stepping through the channels repeatedly, listening briefly to each channel for a transmission. When a transmitter is found the receiver stops at that channel. Scanners are used to monitor emergency police, fire, and ambulance frequencies, as well as other two way radio frequencies such as citizens band . Scanning capabilities have also become a standard feature in communications receivers, walkie-talkies, and other two-way radios.

Modern communications receiver, ICOM RC-9500 Communications receiver or shortwave receiver - a general purpose audio receiver covering the LF , MF , shortwave ( HF ), and VHF bands. Used mostly with a separate shortwave transmitter for two-way voice communication in communication stations, amateur radio stations, and for shortwave listening .

One-way voice communications [ edit ] Wireless microphone receiver - these receive the short range signal from wireless microphones used onstage by musical artists, public speakers, and television personalities.

Baby monitor. The receiver is on the left Baby monitor - this is a cribside appliance for parents of infants that transmits the baby's sounds to a receiver carried by the parents, so they can monitor the baby while they are in other parts of the house. Many baby monitors now have video cameras to show a picture of the baby.

Data communication [ edit ] Wireless (WiFi) modem - an automated short range digital data transmitter and receiver on a portable wireless device that communicates by microwaves with a nearby access point , a router or gateway, connecting the portable device with a local computer network ( WLAN ) to exchange data with other devices.

Bluetooth modem - a very short range (up to 10 m) 2.4-2.83 GHz data transceiver on a portable wireless device used as a substitute for a wire or cable connection, mainly to exchange files between portable devices and connect cellphones and music players with wireless earphones.

Microwave relay - a long-distance high bandwidth point-to-point data transmission link consisting of a dish antenna and transmitter that transmits a beam of microwaves to another dish antenna and receiver. Since the antennas must be in line-of-sight , distances are limited by the visual horizon to 30–40 miles. Microwave links are used for private business data, wide area computer networks (WANs), and by telephone companies to transmit distance phone calls and television signals between cities.

Satellite communications - Communication satellites are used for data transmission between widely separated points on Earth. Other satellites are used for search and rescue, remote sensing , weather reporting and scientific research. Radio communication with satellites and spacecraft can involve very long path lengths, from 35,786 km (22,236 mi) for geosynchronous satellites to billions of kilometers for interplanetary spacecraft. This and the limited power available to a spacecraft transmitter mean very sensitive receivers must be used.

Satellite transponder - A receiver and transmitter in a communications satellite that receives multiple data channels carrying long-distance telephone calls, television signals. or internet traffic on a microwave uplink signal from a satellite ground station and retransmits the data to another ground station on a different downlink frequency. In a direct broadcast satellite the transponder broadcasts a stronger signal directly to satellite radio or satellite television receivers in consumer's homes.

Satellite ground station receiver - communication satellite ground stations receive data from communications satellites orbiting the Earth. Deep space ground stations such as those of the NASA Deep Space Network receive the weak signals from distant scientific spacecraft on interplanetary exploration missions. These have large dish antennas around 85 ft (25 m) in diameter, and extremely sensitive radio receivers similar to radio telescopes . The RF front end of the receiver is often cryogenically cooled to −195.79 °C (−320 °F) by liquid nitrogen to reduce radio noise in the circuit.

Remote control - Remote control receivers receive digital commands that control a device, which may be as complex as a space vehicle or unmanned aerial vehicle , or as simple as a garage door opener . Remote control systems often also incorporate a telemetry channel to transmit data on the state of the controlled device back to the controller.

Radio controlled model and other models include multichannel receivers in model cars, boats, airplanes, and helicopters. A short-range radio system is used in keyless entry systems.

Other applications [ edit ] Radiolocation - This is the use of radio waves to determine the location or direction of an object.

Radar - a device that transmits a narrow beam of microwaves which reflect from a target back to a receiver, used to locate objects such as aircraft, spacecraft, missiles, ships or land vehicles. The reflected waves from the target are received by a receiver usually connected to the same antenna, indicating the direction to the target. Widely used in aviation, shipping, navigation, weather forecasting, space flight, vehicle collision avoidance systems , and the military.

Global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receiver, such as a GPS receiver used with the US Global Positioning System - the most widely used electronic navigation device. An automated digital receiver that receives simultaneous data signals from several satellites in low Earth orbit. Using extremely precise time signals it calculates the distance to the satellites, and from this the receiver's location on Earth. GNSS receivers are sold as portable devices, and are also incorporated in cell phones, vehicles and weapons, even artillery shells .

VOR receiver - navigational instrument on an aircraft that uses the VHF signal from VOR navigational beacons between 108 and 117.95 MHz to determine the direction to the beacon very accurately, for air navigation.

Wild animal tracking receiver - a receiver with a directional antenna used to track wild animals which have been tagged with a small VHF transmitter, for wildlife management purposes.

Other Telemetry receiver - this receives data signals to monitor conditions of a process. Telemetry is used to monitor missile and spacecraft in flight, well logging during oil and gas drilling , and unmanned scientific instruments in remote locations.

Measuring receiver - a calibrated, laboratory grade radio receiver used to measure the characteristics of radio signals. Often incorporates a spectrum analyzer .

Radio telescope - specialized antenna and radio receiver used as a scientific instrument to study weak radio waves from astronomical radio sources in space like stars, nebulas and galaxies in radio astronomy . They are the most sensitive radio receivers that exist, having large parabolic (dish) antennas up to 500 meters in diameter, and extremely sensitive radio circuits. The RF front end of the receiver is often cryogenically cooled by liquid nitrogen to reduce radio noise .

Principles [ edit ] Symbol for an antenna A radio receiver is connected to an antenna which converts some of the energy from the incoming radio wave into a tiny radio frequency AC voltage which is applied to the receiver's input. An antenna typically consists of an arrangement of metal conductors. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields of the radio wave push the electrons in the antenna back and forth, creating an oscillating voltage.

The antenna may be enclosed inside the receiver's case, as with the ferrite loop antennas of AM radios and the flat inverted F antenna of cell phones; attached to the outside of the receiver, as with whip antennas used on FM radios , or mounted separately and connected to the receiver by a cable, as with rooftop television antennas and satellite dishes .

Practical radio receivers perform three basic functions on the signal from the antenna: filtering , amplification , and demodulation : [ 2 ] Reception [ edit ] The signal strength of radio waves decreases the farther they travel from the transmitter, so a radio station can only be received within a limited range of its transmitter. The range depends on the power of the transmitter, the sensitivity of the receiver, atmospheric and internal noise , as well as any geographical obstructions such as hills between transmitter and receiver. AM broadcast band radio waves travel as ground waves which follow the contour of the Earth, so AM radio stations can be reliably received at hundreds of miles distance. Due to their higher frequency, FM band radio signals cannot travel far beyond the visual horizon; limiting reception distance to about 40 miles (64 km), and can be blocked by hills between the transmitter and receiver. However FM radio is less susceptible to interference from radio noise ( RFI , sferics , static) and has higher fidelity ; better frequency response and less audio distortion , than AM. So in countries that still broadcast AM radio, serious music is typically only broadcast by FM stations, and AM stations specialize in radio news , talk radio , and sports radio . Like FM, DAB signals travel by line of sight so reception distances are limited by the visual horizon to about 30–40 miles (48–64 km).

Bandpass filtering [ edit ] Main article: Bandpass filter Symbol for a bandpass filter used in block diagrams of radio receivers Radio waves from many transmitters pass through the air simultaneously without interfering with each other and are received by the antenna. These can be separated in the receiver because they have different frequencies ; that is, the radio wave from each transmitter oscillates at a different rate. To separate out the desired radio signal, the bandpass filter allows the frequency of the desired radio transmission to pass through, and blocks signals at all other frequencies.

The bandpass filter consists of one or more resonant circuits (tuned circuits). The resonant circuit is connected between the antenna input and ground. When the incoming radio signal is at the resonant frequency, the resonant circuit has high impedance and the radio signal from the desired station is passed on to the following stages of the receiver. At all other frequencies the resonant circuit has low impedance, so signals at these frequencies are conducted to ground.

Bandwidth and selectivity : See graphs. The information ( modulation ) in a radio transmission is contained in two narrow bands of frequencies called sidebands (SB) on either side of the carrier frequency (C) , so the filter has to pass a band of frequencies, not just a single frequency. The band of frequencies received by the receiver is called its passband (PB) , and the width of the passband in kilohertz is called the bandwidth (BW) . The bandwidth of the filter must be wide enough to allow the sidebands through without distortion, but narrow enough to block any interfering transmissions on adjacent frequencies (such as S2 in the diagram). The ability of the receiver to reject unwanted radio stations near in frequency to the desired station is an important parameter called selectivity determined by the filter. In modern receivers quartz crystal , ceramic resonator , or surface acoustic wave (SAW) filters are often used which have sharper selectivity compared to networks of capacitor-inductor tuned circuits.

Tuning : To select a particular station the radio is " tuned " to the frequency of the desired transmitter. The radio has a dial or digital display showing the frequency it is tuned to.

Tuning is adjusting the frequency of the receiver's passband to the frequency of the desired radio transmitter. Turning the tuning knob changes the resonant frequency of the tuned circuit . When the resonant frequency is equal to the radio transmitter's frequency the tuned circuit oscillates in sympathy, passing the signal on to the rest of the receiver.

The frequency spectrum of a typical radio signal from an AM or FM radio transmitter. It consists of a component (C) at the carrier wave frequency f C , with the modulation contained in narrow frequency bands called sidebands (SB) just above and below the carrier.

How the bandpass filter selects a single radio signal S1 from all the radio signals S2, S3 ...

received by the antenna. From top, the graphs show the voltage from the antenna applied to the filter V in , the transfer function of the filter T , and the voltage at the output of the filter V out as a function of frequency f . The transfer function T is the amount of signal that gets through the filter at each frequency: V out ( f ) = T ( f ) V in ( f ) {\displaystyle V_{\text{out}}(f)={\text{T}}(f)V_{\text{in}}(f)} Amplification [ edit ] Main article: Amplifier Symbol for an amplifier The power of the radio waves picked up by a receiving antenna decreases with the square of its distance from the transmitting antenna. Even with the powerful transmitters used in radio broadcasting stations, if the receiver is more than a few miles from the transmitter the power intercepted by the receiver's antenna is very small, perhaps as low as picowatts or femtowatts . To increase the power of the recovered signal, an amplifier circuit uses electric power from batteries or the wall plug to increase the amplitude (voltage or current) of the signal. In most modern receivers, the electronic components which do the actual amplifying are transistors .

Receivers usually have several stages of amplification: the radio signal from the bandpass filter is amplified to make it powerful enough to drive the demodulator, then the audio signal from the demodulator is amplified to make it powerful enough to operate the speaker. The degree of amplification of a radio receiver is measured by a parameter called its sensitivity , which is the minimum signal strength of a station at the antenna, measured in microvolts , necessary to receive the signal clearly, with a certain signal-to-noise ratio . Since it is easy to amplify a signal to any desired degree, the limit to the sensitivity of many modern receivers is not the degree of amplification but random electronic noise present in the circuit, which can drown out a weak radio signal.

Demodulation [ edit ] Main article: Demodulation Symbol for a demodulator After the radio signal is filtered and amplified, the receiver must extract the information-bearing modulation signal from the modulated radio frequency carrier wave . This is done by a circuit called a demodulator ( detector ). Each type of modulation requires a different type of demodulator an AM receiver that receives an ( amplitude modulated ) radio signal uses an AM demodulator an FM receiver that receives a frequency modulated signal uses an FM demodulator an FSK receiver which receives frequency-shift keying (used to transmit digital data in wireless devices) uses an FSK demodulator Many other types of modulation are also used for specialized purposes.

The modulation signal output by the demodulator is usually amplified to increase its strength, then the information is converted back to a human-usable form by some type of transducer . An audio signal , representing sound, as in a broadcast radio, is converted to sound waves by an earphone or loudspeaker . A video signal , representing moving images, as in a television receiver , is converted to light by a display .

Digital data , as in a wireless modem , is applied as input to a computer or microprocessor , which interacts with human users.

AM demodulation Main article: Envelope detector Envelope detector circuit How an envelope detector works The easiest type of demodulation to understand is AM demodulation, used in AM radios to recover the audio modulation signal, which represents sound and is converted to sound waves by the radio's speaker . It is accomplished by a circuit called an envelope detector (see circuit) , consisting of a diode (D) with a bypass capacitor (C) across its output.

See graphs. The amplitude modulated radio signal from the tuned circuit is shown at (A) . The rapid oscillations are the radio frequency carrier wave . The audio signal (the sound) is contained in the slow variations ( modulation ) of the amplitude (size) of the waves. If it was applied directly to the speaker, this signal cannot be converted to sound, because the audio excursions are the same on both sides of the axis, averaging out to zero, which would result in no net motion of the speaker's diaphragm.

(B) When this signal is applied as input V I to the detector, the diode (D) conducts current in one direction but not in the opposite direction, thus allowing through pulses of current on only one side of the signal. In other words, it rectifies the AC current to a pulsing DC current. The resulting voltage V O applied to the load R L no longer averages zero; its peak value is proportional to the audio signal.

(C) The bypass capacitor (C) is charged up by the current pulses from the diode, and its voltage follows the peaks of the pulses, the envelope of the audio wave. It performs a smoothing ( low pass filtering ) function, removing the radio frequency carrier pulses, leaving the low frequency audio signal to pass through the load R L . The audio signal is amplified and applied to earphones or a speaker.

Automatic gain control (AGC) [ edit ] Main article: Automatic gain control The signal strength ( amplitude ) of the radio signal from a receiver's antenna varies drastically, by orders of magnitude, depending on how far away the radio transmitter is, how powerful it is, and propagation conditions along the path of the radio waves.

[ 3 ] The strength of the signal received from a given transmitter varies with time due to changing propagation conditions of the path through which the radio wave passes, such as multipath interference ; this is called fading .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In an AM receiver, the amplitude of the audio signal from the detector, and the sound volume, is proportional to the amplitude of the radio signal, so fading causes variations in the volume. In addition as the receiver is tuned between strong and weak stations, the volume of the sound from the speaker would vary drastically. Without an automatic system to handle it, in an AM receiver, constant adjustment of the volume control would be required.

With other types of modulation like FM or FSK the amplitude of the modulation does not vary with the radio signal strength, but in all types the demodulator requires a certain range of signal amplitude to operate properly.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Insufficient signal amplitude will cause an increase of noise in the demodulator, while excessive signal amplitude will cause amplifier stages to overload (saturate), causing distortion (clipping) of the signal.

Therefore, almost all modern receivers include a feedback control system which monitors the average level of the radio signal at the detector, and adjusts the gain of the amplifiers to give the optimum signal level for demodulation.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 3 ] This is called automatic gain control (AGC). AGC can be compared to the dark adaptation mechanism in the human eye ; on entering a dark room the gain of the eye is increased by the iris opening.

[ 3 ] In its simplest form, an AGC system consists of a rectifier which converts the RF signal to a varying DC level, a lowpass filter to smooth the variations and produce an average level.

[ 5 ] This is applied as a control signal to an earlier amplifier stage, to control its gain. In a superheterodyne receiver, AGC is usually applied to the IF amplifier , and there may be a second AGC loop to control the gain of the RF amplifier to prevent it from overloading, too.

In certain receiver designs such as modern digital receivers, a related problem is DC offset of the signal. This is corrected by a similar feedback system.

Designs [ edit ] Main article: Radio receiver design Tuned radio frequency (TRF) receiver [ edit ] Main article: Tuned radio frequency receiver Block diagram of a tuned radio frequency receiver. To achieve enough selectivity to reject stations on adjacent frequencies, multiple cascaded bandpass filter stages had to be used. The dotted line indicates that the bandpass filters must be tuned together.

In the simplest type of radio receiver, called a tuned radio frequency (TRF) receiver , the three functions above are performed consecutively: [ 4 ] (1) the mix of radio signals from the antenna is filtered to extract the signal of the desired transmitter; (2) this oscillating voltage is sent through a radio frequency (RF) amplifier to increase its strength to a level sufficient to drive the demodulator; (3) the demodulator recovers the modulation signal (which in broadcast receivers is an audio signal , a voltage oscillating at an audio frequency rate representing the sound waves) from the modulated radio carrier wave ; (4) the modulation signal is amplified further in an audio amplifier , then is applied to a loudspeaker or earphone to convert it to sound waves.

Although the TRF receiver is used in a few applications, it has practical disadvantages which make it inferior to the superheterodyne receiver below, which is used in most applications.

[ 4 ] The drawbacks stem from the fact that in the TRF the filtering, amplification, and demodulation are done at the high frequency of the incoming radio signal. The bandwidth of a filter increases with its center frequency, so as the TRF receiver is tuned to different frequencies its bandwidth varies. Most important, the increasing congestion of the radio spectrum requires that radio channels be spaced very close together in frequency. It is extremely difficult to build filters operating at radio frequencies that have a narrow enough bandwidth to separate closely spaced radio stations. TRF receivers typically must have many cascaded tuning stages to achieve adequate selectivity.

The superheterodyne design [ edit ] Main article: Superheterodyne receiver Block diagram of a superheterodyne receiver. The dotted line indicates that the RF filter and local oscillator must be tuned in tandem.

The superheterodyne receiver, invented in 1918 by Edwin Armstrong [ 6 ] is the design used in almost all modern receivers [ 7 ] [ 4 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] except a few specialized applications.

In the superheterodyne, the radio frequency signal from the antenna is shifted down to a lower " intermediate frequency " (IF), before it is processed.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The incoming radio frequency signal from the antenna is mixed with an unmodulated signal generated by a local oscillator (LO) in the receiver. The mixing is done in a nonlinear circuit called the " mixer ". The result at the output of the mixer is a heterodyne or beat frequency at the difference between these two frequencies. The process is similar to the way two musical notes at different frequencies played together produce a beat note . This lower frequency is called the intermediate frequency (IF). The IF signal also has the modulation sidebands that carry the information that was present in the original RF signal. The IF signal passes through filter and amplifier stages, [ 8 ] then is demodulated in a detector, recovering the original modulation.

The receiver is easy to tune; to receive a different frequency it is only necessary to change the local oscillator frequency. The stages of the receiver after the mixer operates at the fixed intermediate frequency (IF) so the IF bandpass filter does not have to be adjusted to different frequencies. The fixed frequency allows modern receivers to use sophisticated quartz crystal , ceramic resonator , or surface acoustic wave (SAW) IF filters that have very high Q factors , to improve selectivity.

The RF filter on the front end of the receiver is needed to prevent interference from any radio signals at the image frequency . Without an input filter the receiver can receive incoming RF signals at two different frequencies,.

[ 14 ] [ 9 ] [ 13 ] [ 15 ] The receiver can be designed to receive on either of these two frequencies; if the receiver is designed to receive on one, any other radio station or radio noise on the other frequency may pass through and interfere with the desired signal. A single tunable RF filter stage rejects the image frequency; since these are relatively far from the desired frequency, a simple filter provides adequate rejection. Rejection of interfering signals much closer in frequency to the desired signal is handled by the multiple sharply-tuned stages of the intermediate frequency amplifiers, which do not need to change their tuning.

[ 9 ] This filter does not need great selectivity, but as the receiver is tuned to different frequencies it must "track" in tandem with the local oscillator. The RF filter also serves to limit the bandwidth applied to the RF amplifier, preventing it from being overloaded by strong out-of-band signals.

Block diagram of a dual-conversion superheterodyne receiver To achieve both good image rejection and selectivity, many modern superhet receivers use two intermediate frequencies; this is called a dual-conversion or double-conversion superheterodyne.

[ 4 ] The incoming RF signal is first mixed with one local oscillator signal in the first mixer to convert it to a high IF frequency, to allow efficient filtering out of the image frequency, then this first IF is mixed with a second local oscillator signal in a second mixer to convert it to a low IF frequency for good bandpass filtering. Some receivers even use triple-conversion .

At the cost of the extra stages, the superheterodyne receiver provides the advantage of greater selectivity than can be achieved with a TRF design. Where very high frequencies are in use, only the initial stage of the receiver needs to operate at the highest frequencies; the remaining stages can provide much of the receiver gain at lower frequencies which may be easier to manage. Tuning is simplified compared to a multi-stage TRF design, and only two stages need to track over the tuning range. The total amplification of the receiver is divided between three amplifiers at different frequencies; the RF, IF, and audio amplifier. This reduces problems with feedback and parasitic oscillations that are encountered in receivers where most of the amplifier stages operate at the same frequency, as in the TRF receiver.

[ 10 ] The most important advantage is that better selectivity can be achieved by doing the filtering at the lower intermediate frequency.

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] [ 10 ] One of the most important parameters of a receiver is its bandwidth , the band of frequencies it accepts. In order to reject nearby interfering stations or noise, a narrow bandwidth is required. In all known filtering techniques, the bandwidth of the filter increases in proportion with the frequency, so by performing the filtering at the lower f IF {\displaystyle f_{\text{IF}}} , rather than the frequency of the original radio signal f RF {\displaystyle f_{\text{RF}}} , a narrower bandwidth can be achieved. Modern FM and television broadcasting, cellphones and other communications services, with their narrow channel widths, would be impossible without the superheterodyne.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from History of radio receivers .

[ edit ] Radio waves were first identified in German physicist Heinrich Hertz 's 1887 series of experiments to prove James Clerk Maxwell 's electromagnetic theory . Hertz used spark-excited dipole antennas to generate the waves and micrometer spark gaps attached to dipole and loop antennas to detect them.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] These precursor radio receivers were primitive devices, more accurately described as radio wave "sensors" or "detectors", as they could only receive radio waves within about 100 feet of the transmitter, and were not used for communication but instead as laboratory instruments in scientific experiments and engineering demonstrations.

Television receive-only See also [ edit ] Radio portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to radio receivers .

Batteryless radio Dielectric wireless receiver Digital Audio Broadcast (DAB) Direct conversion receiver Distortion List of radios – List of specific models of radios Minimum detectable signal Radio transmitter design Radio receiver design Radiogram (furniture) Receiver (information theory) Telecommunication Tuner (radio) References [ edit ] ^ Radio-Electronics, Radio Receiver Technology ^ Ganguly, Partha Kumar (2015).

Principles of Electronics . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. pp.

286– 289.

ISBN 978-8120351240 .

^ a b c d Drentea, Cornell (2010).

Modern Communications Receiver Design and Technology . Artech House. pp.

325– 330.

ISBN 978-1596933101 .

^ a b c d e f g h Rudersdorfer, Ralf (2013).

Radio Receiver Technology: Principles, Architectures and Applications . John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 978-1118647844 .

Chapter 1 ^ a b c Hagen, Jon B. (1996).

Radio-Frequency Electronics: Circuits and Applications . Cambridge Univ. Press. p. 60.

ISBN 978-0521553568 .

^ Armstrong, Edwin H. (February 1921).

"A new system of radio frequency amplification" .

Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers .

9 (1): 3– 11 . Retrieved December 23, 2015 .

^ Lee, Thomas H. (2004) The Design of CMOS Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits, 2nd Ed.

, p. 14-15 ^ a b c d Dixon, Robert (1998).

Radio Receiver Design . CRC Press. pp.

57– 61.

ISBN 978-0824701611 .

^ a b c Williams, Lyle Russell (2006) The New Radio Receiver Building Handbook , p. 28-30 ^ a b c Army Technical Manual TM 11-665: C-W and A-M Radio Transmitters and Receivers, 1952, p. 195-197 ^ McNicol, Donald (1946) Radio's Conquest of Space , p. 272-278 ^ Terman, Frederick E. (1943) Radio Engineers' Handbook , p. 636-638 ^ a b Carr, Joseph J. (2001).

The Technician's Radio Receiver Handbook: Wireless and Telecommunication Technology . Newnes. pp.

8– 11.

ISBN 978-0750673198 .

^ Rembovsky, Anatoly; Ashikhmin, Alexander; Kozmin, Vladimir; et al. (2009).

Radio Monitoring: Problems, Methods and Equipment . Springer Science and Business Media. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0387981000 .

^ Terman, Frederick E. (1943) Radio Engineers' Handbook , p. 645 ^ Lee, Thomas H. (2004).

The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits, 2nd Ed . UK: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 8.

ISBN 978-0521835398 .

^ Appleyard, Rollo (October 1927).

"Pioneers of Electrical Communication part 5 - Heinrich Rudolph Hertz" (PDF) .

Electrical Communication .

6 (2): 67 . Retrieved December 19, 2015 .

^ Phillips, Vivian J. (1980).

Early Radio Wave Detectors . London: Inst. of Electrical Engineers. pp.

4–12 .

ISBN 978-0906048245 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Radio receivers .

Communications Receivers, Third Edition, Ulrich L. Rohde, Jerry Whitaker, McGraw Hill, New York, 2001, ISBN 0-07-136121-9 Buga, N.; Falko A.; Chistyakov N.I. (1990). Chistyakov N.I. (ed.).

Radio Receiver Theory . Translated from the Russian by Boris V. Kuznetsov.

Moscow : Mir Publishers .

ISBN 978-5-03-001321-3 First published in Russian as «Радиоприёмные устройства» {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) v t e Electronics Branches Analogue electronics Digital electronics Electronic engineering Instrumentation Microelectronics Optoelectronics Power electronics Printed electronics Semiconductor Schematic capture Thermal management Advanced topics 2020s in computing Atomtronics Bioelectronics List of emerging electronics Failure of electronic components Flexible electronics Low-power electronics Molecular electronics Nanoelectronics Organic electronics Photonics Piezotronics Quantum electronics Spintronics Electronic equipment Air conditioner Central heating Clothes dryer Computer / Notebook Camera Dishwasher Freezer Home robot Home cinema Home theater PC Information technology Cooker Microwave oven Mobile phone Networking hardware Portable media player Radio Refrigerator Robotic vacuum cleaner Tablet Telephone Television Water heater Video game console Washing machine Applications Audio equipment Automotive electronics Avionics Control system Data acquisition e-book e-health Electromagnetic warfare Electronics industry Embedded system Home appliance Home automation Integrated circuit Home appliance Consumer electronics Major appliance Small appliance Marine electronics Microwave technology Military electronics Multimedia Nuclear electronics Open-source hardware Radar and Radio navigation Radio electronics Terahertz technology Wired and Wireless Communications v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons Authority control databases : National Germany 2 Czech Republic Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐kgfhn
Cached time: 20250817034000
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.773 seconds
Real time usage: 1.005 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2711/1000000
Revision size: 42028/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 87593/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1904/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.513/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23324855/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  774.456      1 -total
 22.11%  171.200      1 Template:Reflist
 18.47%  143.061     10 Template:Cite_book
 14.18%  109.828      1 Template:Annotated_link
 12.38%   95.874      2 Template:Navbox
 11.88%   92.010      2 Template:Excerpt
 10.13%   78.476      1 Template:Electronic_systems
  9.05%   70.069      1 Template:Short_description
  8.94%   69.219      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.74%   67.658      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:491851:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817034000 and revision id 1302000099. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radio_receiver&oldid=1302000099 " Category : Receiver (radio) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Commons category link is locally defined Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 maint: postscript This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 21:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radio receiver 69 languages Add topic

