Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 The site 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Helorus 13 languages Boarisch Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Latina Latviešu Sicilianu Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°50′32″N 15°06′34″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84222°N 15.10944°E ﻿ / 36.84222; 15.10944 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek city of Sicily Helorus The archaeological site of Helorus Shown within Italy Location Noto , Province of Syracuse , Sicily , Italy Coordinates 36°50′32″N 15°06′34″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84222°N 15.10944°E ﻿ / 36.84222; 15.10944 Satellite of Syracuse Helorus , Heloros , Helorum , or Elorus ( Greek : Ἔλωρος or Ἕλωρος , Ptol.

, Steph. B.

or Ἕλωρον , Scyl.

; Italian : Eloro ), was an ancient Greek city of Magna Graecia in Sicily , situated near the east coast, about 40 km south of Syracuse and on the banks of the river of the same name.

[ 1 ] It is currently an archaeological site in the modern comune of Noto .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] We have no account of its origin, but it was probably a colony of Syracuse, of which it appears to have continued always a dependency. The name is first found in Scylax ; [ 3 ] for, though Thucydides repeatedly mentions the road leading to Helorus from Syracuse, [ 4 ] which was that followed by the Athenians in their disastrous retreat, he never speaks of the town itself. It was one of the cities which remained the under the government of Hieron II by the treaty concluded with him by the Romans , in 263 BC: [ 5 ] and, having during the Second Punic War declared in favour of the Carthaginians , was recovered by Marcus Claudius Marcellus in 214 BC.

[ 6 ] Under the Romans it appears to have been dependent on Syracuse, and had perhaps no separate municipal existence, though in a passage of Cicero [ 7 ] it appears to be noticed as a civitas.

Its name is again mentioned by the orator ( Id.

v. 34) as a maritime town where the squadron fitted out by Verres was attacked by pirates: but it does not occur in Pliny 's list of the towns of Sicily; though he elsewhere [ 8 ] mentions it as a castellum on the river of the same name: and Ptolemy [ 9 ] speaks of a city of Helorus.

The site [ edit ] Aerial view of Heloros: 1. theatre 3. Sanctuary of Demeter and Kore 4. Agora 5. Asklepieion 6. north gate 7. south gate 8. Necropoli A 9. Necropoli D 10. Necropoli C 11. Necropoli B 12. Latomie 13. colomn Pizzuta Its ruins were still visible in the days of Fazello ; a little to the north of the river Helorus , and about a mile from the sea-coast. The most conspicuous of them were the remains of a theatre, called by the country people Colisseo : but great part of the walls and other buildings could be traced. The extent of them was, however, inconsiderable.

Today the impressive walls, with square bastions, of large ashlars without mortar are visible in some places. 
The theatre and agora and several other buildings can be seen.

The sanctuary of Demeter and Kore dating from the second half of the 4th c. BC has been excavated on the shore north of the city, just outside city walls. The sanctuary flourished from the archaic to the Hellenistic period as shown by the rich votive offerings.

See also [ edit ] List of ancient Greek cities Heloris References [ edit ] ^ Steph. B.

s. v.

; Vib. Seq. p. 11.

^ Wilson, R., DARMC, R. Talbert, S. Gillies, T. Elliott, J. Becker (8 August 2020).

"Places: 462234 (Helorus)" . Pleiades . Retrieved March 22, 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ § 13. p. 168; ^ τὴν Ἑλωρίνην ὁδόν , vi. 66, 70, vii. 80.

^ Diodorus xxiii. Exc. H. p. 50, where the name is corruptly written Αἰλώρων .

^ ( Livy xxiv. 35.

^ In Verrem iii. 48.

^ xxxii. 2.

^ iii. 4. § 15.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eloro .

Official website (in Italian) v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Archaeological sites in Sicily Province of Agrigento Heraclea Minoa Akragas Valle dei Templi - Temple of Concordia - Temple of Heracles - Temple of Juno - Temple of Olympian Zeus Province of Caltanissetta Gela Bosco Littorio Greek baths of Gela Gibil Gabib Monte Bubbonia Polizzello archaeological site Sabucina Vassallaggi Province of Catania Aetna (city) Katáne Amphitheatre of Catania Roman Theatre of Catania Palike Sant'Ippolito (Caltagirone) Province of Enna Centuripe Morgantina Villa Romana del Casale Villa of Geraci Province of Messina Abacaenum Halaesa Naxos Ancient theatre of Taormina Tindari Villa Romana di Patti Villa Romana Bagnoli Province of Palermo Entella Grotta dell'Addaura Hippana Ietas Himera Pirama Soluntum Province of Ragusa Akrillai Hybla Heraea Kamarina Kaukana Province of Syracuse Akrai Santoni Casmenae Cava del Rivettazzo Colonne di San Basilio Helorus Netum Megara Hyblaea Syrakousai Roman amphitheatre of Syracuse Altar of Hieron Ear of Dionysius Galermi Aqueduct Greek Theatre of Syracuse Grotta del Ninfeo Temple of Athena Temple of Apollo Necropolis of Cassibile Necropolis of Pantalica Thapsos Villa Romana del Tellaro Province of Trapani Eryx / Erice Drepanum Halyciae Grotta del Genovese Monte Polizzo Motya Segesta Selinunte Temple C Temple E Temple F Cave di Cusa Roman furnaces in Alcamo Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Helorus&oldid=1253526532 " Categories : Syracusian colonies Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Italy Archaeological sites in Sicily Former populated places in Italy Noto Buildings and structures in the Province of Syracuse Ancient cities in Sicily Colonies of Magna Graecia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG with no article parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRG Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 26 October 2024, at 13:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Helorus 13 languages Add topic

