Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roman Republic and Empire 2 Modern use Toggle Modern use subsection 2.1 Classic liberal view 2.2 Marxist theory 2.3 Proletarian culture 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Proletariat 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Proletarian ) Class of wage-earners For other uses, see Proletariat (disambiguation) .

"Proletarian" redirects here. For the British communist magazine, see Proletarian (magazine) .

The Fourth Estate (1901) by Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo Part of a series on Organized labor Labor movement Conflict theories Decent work Exploitation of labor Timeline New unionism Proletariat Sectoral collective bargaining Social movement unionism Social democracy Democratic socialism Socialism Communism Syndicalism Union busting Anarcho-syndicalism National-syndicalism Workplace democracy Labor rights Annual leave Child labor Collective bargaining Diversity, equity, and inclusion Economic globalization Eight-hour day Employment discrimination Employment protection Equal pay Four-day week Freedom of association Low-cost country sourcing Legal working age Minimum wage Neurodiversity and labor rights Occupational safety and health Overwork Paid time off Professional abuse Race to the bottom Exploitation of labor Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Sabbatical Sick leave Six-hour day Toxic workplace Unfree labor Workers' right to access the toilet Trade unions Trade unions by country Trade union federations International comparisons ITUC WFTU Strike action Chronological list of strikes Hartal General strike Bandh newspapers Green bans Lockouts Overtime bans Pen-down strikes Sitdown strikes Solidarity action Walkouts Whipsaw strikes Wildcat strikes Work-to-rule Labor parties Australia Barbados Brazil Fiji Georgia Hong Kong Ireland Israel Malta New Caledonia New Zealand Netherlands Norway Portugal Singapore South Korea United Kingdom Sweden Academic disciplines Critique of work Industrial relations Labor economics Labor history Labor law Post-work society Refusal of work v t e The proletariat ( / ˌ p r oʊ l ɪ ˈ t ɛər i ə t / ; from Latin proletarius ' producing offspring ' ) is the social class of wage-earners , those members of a society whose possession of significant economic value is their labour power (their capacity to work).

[ 1 ] A member of such a class is a proletarian or a proletaire .

Marxist philosophy regards the proletariat under conditions of capitalism as an exploited class [ 2 ] ⁠ forced to accept meager wages in return for operating the means of production , which belong to the class of business owners , the bourgeoisie .

Karl Marx argued that this capitalist oppression gives the proletariat common economic and political interests that transcend national boundaries, [ 3 ] impelling them to unite and to take over power from the capitalist class , and eventually to create a socialist society free from class distinctions.

[ 4 ] Roman Republic and Empire [ edit ] Further information: Constitution of the Roman Republic Secessio plebis , a form of protest in ancient Rome where the plebeians would leave the city, causing the economy to collapse The proletarii constituted a social class of Roman citizens who owned little or no property. The name presumably originated with the census, which Roman authorities conducted every five years to produce a register of citizens and their property, which determined their military duties and voting privileges. Those who owned 11,000 assēs (coins) or fewer fell below the lowest category for military service, and their children— prōlēs (offspring)—were listed instead of property; hence the name proletarius (producer of offspring). Roman citizen-soldiers paid for their own horses and arms, and fought without payment for the commonwealth , but the only military contribution of a proletarius was his children, the future Roman citizens who could colonize conquered territories. Officially, propertyless citizens were called capite censi because they were "persons registered not as to their property...but simply as to their existence as living individuals, primarily as heads ( caput ) of a family." [ 5 ] [ note 1 ] Although explicitly included by name in the Comitia Centuriata ( Centuriate Assembly ), proletarii were the lowest class, largely deprived of voting rights.

[ 6 ] Not only did proletarii have less voting "weight" in the various elections, but since voting ran hierarchically starting with the highest social ranks, a majority could be reached early and their votes never even taken. Late Roman historians such as Livy vaguely described the Comitia Centuriata as a popular assembly of early Rome composed of centuriae , voting units representing classes of citizens according to wealth. This assembly, which usually met on the Campus Martius to discuss public policy, designated the military duties of Roman citizens.

[ 7 ] One of the reconstructions of the Comitia Centuriata features 18 centuriae of cavalry, and 170 centuriae of infantry divided into five classes by wealth, plus 5 centuriae of support personnel called adsidui , one of which represented the proletarii . In battle, the cavalry brought their horses and arms, the top infantry class full arms and armour, the next two classes less, the fourth class only spears, the fifth slings, while the assisting adsidui held no weapons. If unanimous, the cavalry and top infantry class were enough to decide an issue.

[ 8 ] A deeper reconstruction incorporating social backgrounds found that the senators, the knights, and the first class held 88 out of 193 centuriae , the two lowest propertied classes held only 30 centuriae , but the proletarii held only 1. Musicians, by way of comparison, had more voting power despite far fewer citizens, with 2 centuriae . "[F]or the voting to reach the proletarii a very profound split in the elite and the higher classes was required." [ 9 ] Modern use [ edit ] Classic liberal view [ edit ] Jean-François Millet –  The man with the hoe In the early 19th century, many Western European liberal scholars—who dealt with social sciences and economics—pointed out the socio-economic similarities of the modern rapidly growing industrial worker class and the classic proletarians. One of the earliest analogies can be found in the 1807 paper of French philosopher and political scientist Hugues Felicité Robert de Lamennais . Later it was translated to English with the title "Modern Slavery".

[ 10 ] Swiss liberal economist and historian Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi was the first to apply the proletariat term to the working class created under capitalism, and whose writings were frequently cited by Karl Marx . Marx most likely encountered the term while studying the works of Sismondi.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Marxist theory [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Adolph Menzel – Iron rolling mill (1872–1875) Marx, who studied Roman law at the Friedrich Wilhelm University of Berlin , [ 15 ] used the term proletariat in his socio-political theory ( Marxism ) to describe a progressive working class untainted by private property and capable of revolutionary action to topple capitalism and abolish social classes , leading society to ever higher levels of prosperity and justice.

Marx defined the proletariat as the social class having no significant ownership of the means of production (factories, machines, land, mines, buildings, vehicles) and whose only means of subsistence is to sell their labour power for a wage or salary .

[ 16 ] Marxist theory only vaguely defines the borders between the proletariat and adjacent social classes. In the socially superior, less progressive direction are the lower petty bourgeoisie , such as small shopkeepers, who rely primarily on self-employment at an income comparable to an ordinary wage. Intermediate positions are possible, where wage-labor for an employer combines with self-employment. In another direction, the lumpenproletariat or "rag-proletariat", which Marx considers a retrograde class, live in the informal economy outside of legal employment: the poorest outcasts of society such as beggars, tricksters, entertainers, buskers, criminals and prostitutes.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Socialist parties have often argued over whether they should organize and represent all the lower classes, or only the wage-earning proletariat.

A 1911 Industrial Worker publication advocating industrial unionism based on a critique of capitalism. The proletariat "work for all" and "feed all".

According to Marxism, capitalism is based on the exploitation of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie: the workers, who own no means of production, must use the property of others to produce goods and services and to earn their living. Workers cannot rent the means of production (e.g. a factory or department store) to produce on their own account; rather, capitalists hire workers, and the goods or services produced become the property of the capitalist, who sells them at the market.

Part of the net selling price pays the workers' wages (variable costs); a second part renews the means of production (constant costs, capital investment); while the third part is consumed by the capitalist class, split between the capitalist's personal profit and fees to other owners (rents, taxes, interest on loans, etc.). The struggle over the first part (wage rates) puts the proletariat and bourgeoisie into irreconcilable conflict, as market competition pushes wages inexorably to the minimum necessary for the workers to survive and continue working. The second part, called capitalized surplus value, is used to renew or increase the means of production ( capital ), either in quantity or quality.

[ 19 ] The second and third parts are known as surplus value , the difference between the wealth the proletariat produce and the wealth they consume.

[ 20 ] Marxists argue that new wealth is created through labor applied to natural resources .

[ 21 ] The commodities that proletarians produce and capitalists sell are valued not for their usefulness, but for the amount of labour embodied in them: for example, air is essential but requires no labor to produce, and is therefore free; while a diamond is much less useful, but requires hundreds of hours of mining and cutting, and is therefore expensive. The same goes for the workers' labor power: it is valued not for the amount of wealth it produces, but for the amount of labor necessary to keep the workers fed, housed, sufficiently trained, and able to raise children as new workers. On the other hand, capitalists earn their wealth not as a function of their personal labor, which may even be null, but by the juridical relation of their property to the means of production (e.g. owning a factory or farmland).

Marx argues that history is made by man and not destiny. The instruments of production and the working class that use the tools in order to produce are referred to as the moving forces of society. Over time, this developed into the levels of social class where the owners of resources joined to squeeze productivity out of the individuals who depended on their labor power. Marx argues that these relations between the exploiters and exploited results in different modes of production and the successive stages in history. These modes of production in which mankind gains power over nature is distinguished into five different systems: the Primitive Community, Slave State, Feudal State, Capitalist System, and finally the Socialist Society. The transition between these systems were all due to an increase in civil unrest among those who felt oppressed by a higher social class.

[ 22 ] The contention with feudalism began once the merchants and guild artisans grew in numbers and power. Once they organized themselves, they began opposing the fees imposed on them by the nobles and clergy. This development led to new ideas and eventually established the Bourgeoisie class which Marx opposes. Commerce began to change the form of production and markets began to shift in order to support larger production and profits. This change led to a series of revolutions by the bourgeois which resulted in capitalism. Marx argues that this same model can and should be applied to the fight for the proletariat. Forming unions similar to how the merchants and artisans did will establish enough power to enact change. Ultimately, Marx's theory of the proletarian's struggle would eventually lead to the fall of capitalism and the emergence of a new mode of production, socialism.

[ 22 ] Marx argued that the proletariat would inevitably displace the capitalist system with the dictatorship of the proletariat , abolishing the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into a communist society in which "the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all".

[ 23 ] During the Chinese Communist Revolution , the concept of the proletariat emphasized having a proletarian class consciousness , rather than having proletarian social attributes (such as being an industrial worker).

[ 24 ] : 363 In this way of defining the proletariat, a proletarian class consciousness could be developed through a subjective standpoint with political education supplied by the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 24 ] : 363 This conception of the proletariat allowed for a Marxist theoretical framing under which the revolution could address the relative weakness of industrial working classes in China.

[ 24 ] : 363 Exactly what constituted a proper proletarian class consciousness was subject to intellectual and political debate.

[ 24 ] : 97 Proletarian culture [ edit ] Marx argued that each social class had its characteristic culture and politics. The socialist states stemming from the Russian Revolution championed and created the official version of proletarian culture .

Some [ who?

] have argued that this assessment has become outdated with the advent of mass education, mass communication and globalization. According to this argument, the working-class culture of capitalist countries tend to experience "prole drift" (proletarian drift), in which everything inexorably becomes commonplace and commodified. Examples include best-seller lists, films, music made to appeal to the masses, and shopping malls.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Working class – Social class composed of those employed in lower-tier jobs Blue-collar worker – Working-class person who performs manual labour Consumtariat – global lower class in the framework of netocracy Laborer – Unskilled or skilled worker Peasant – Agricultural laborer or farmer with limited land ownership Precariat – Class of wage-earners in a tenuous job situation close to unemployment Proles (Nineteen Eighty-Four) – analogue to the proletariat in George Orwell's "Nineteen Eighty-Four" Prolefeed – Fictional language in the novel "Nineteen Eighty-Four" Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Proletarianization – Social process of becoming a wage laborer Proletarian internationalism – Marxist social class concept Proletarian literature – Literature mainly written for or by the working class Wage slavery – Dependence on wages or salary Notes [ edit ] ^ Arnold J. Toynbee , especially in his A Study of History , uses the word "proletariat" in this general sense of people without property or a stake in society. Toynbee focuses particularly on the generative spiritual life of the "internal proletariat" (those living within a given civil society). He also describes the "heroic" folk legends of the "external proletariat" (poorer groups living outside the borders of a civilization). Compare Toynbee, A Study of History (Oxford University 1934–1961), 12 volumes, in Volume V Disintegration of Civilizations, part one (1939) at 58–194 (internal proletariat), and at 194–337 (external proletariat).

References [ edit ] ^ "proletariat" . Retrieved 2013-06-06 – via The Free Dictionary .

^ Screpanti, Ernesto (2019). "Measures of Exploitation".

Labour and Value: Rethinking Marx's Theory of Exploitation . Cambridge: Open Book Publishers. p. 75.

doi : 10.11647/OBP.0182 .

ISBN 9781783747825 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

Marx's value theory is a complex doctrine in which three different kinds of speculation coalesce: a philosophy aimed at proving that value is created by a labour substance; an explanation of the social relations of production in capitalism; and a method for measuring exploitation.

^ Marx, Karl ; Engels, Friedrich (2009) [1848]. "Proletarians and Communists".

The Communist Manifesto . The Floating Press. pp.

28– 29.

ISBN 9781775412434 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties [...]: [...] In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality.

^ Aron, Raymond (2017) [1955]. "The Myth of the Revolution".

The Opium of the Intellectuals (reprint ed.). London: Routledge. p. 56.

ISBN 9781351478120 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

[...] Marx offered the classless society as the solution to the enigma of history.

^ Adolf Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society 1953) at 380; 657.

^ Berger, Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law (1953) at 351; 657 (quote).

^ Titus Livius ( c.

59 BC – AD 17), Ab urbe condita , 1, 43; the first five books translated by Aubrey de Sélincourt as Livy, The Early History of Rome (Penguin 1960, 1971) at 81–82.

^ Andrew Lintott , The Constitution of the Roman Republic (Oxford University 1999) at 55–61, re the Comitia Centuriata .

^ Henrik Mouritsen, Plebs and Politics in the Late Roman Republic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), pp. 94–95.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ de Lamennais, Félicité Robert (1840).

Modern Slavery . J. Watson. p. 9.

^ Ekins, Paul; Max-Neef, Manfred (2006).

Real Life Economics . Routledge. pp.

91– 93.

^ Ekelund, Robert B. Jr.; Hébert, Robert F. (2006).

A History of Economic Theory and Method (5th ed.). Waveland Press. p. 226.

^ Lutz, Mark A. (2002).

Economics for the Common Good: Two Centuries of Economic Thought in the Humanist Tradition . Routledge. pp.

55– 57.

^ Stedman Jones, Gareth (2006). "Saint-Simon and the Liberal origins of the Socialist critique of Political Economy". In Aprile, Sylvie; Bensimon, Fabrice (eds.).

La France et l'Angleterre au XIXe siècle. Échanges, représentations, comparisons . Créaphis. pp.

21– 47.

^ Cf., Sidney Hook , Marx and the Marxists (Princeton: Van Nostrand 1955) at 13.

^ Marx, Karl (1887).

"Chapter Six: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power" . In Frederick Engels (ed.).

Das Kapital, Kritik der politischen Ökonomie [ Capital: Critique of Political Economy ]. Moscow: Progress Publishers . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ "Lumpenproletariat | Marxism" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Marx, Karl (1848).

"Bourgeois and Proletarians" .

Manifesto of the Communist Party . Progress Publishers . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Luxemburg, Rosa.

The Accumulation of Capital . Chapter 6, Enlarged Reproduction, http://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1913/accumulation-capital/ch06.htm ^ Marx, Karl. The Capital, volume 1, chapter 6.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1867-c1/ch06.htm ^ Marx, Karl.

Critique of the Gotha Programme , I.

http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/ch01.htm ^ a b M., Rius (1994).

Marx for beginners . Icon Books.

ISBN 1-874166-14-5 .

OCLC 442879412 .

^ Marx, Karl.

The Communist Manifesto , part II, Proletarians and Communists http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ch02.htm ^ a b c d Cai, Xiang; 蔡翔 (2016).

Revolution and its narratives: China's socialist literary and cultural imaginaries (1949–1966) . Rebecca E. Karl, Xueping Zhong, 钟雪萍. Durham: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8223-7461-9 .

OCLC 932368688 .

^ Fussell, Paul (1992).

Class, A Guide Through the American Status System . New York: Ballantine.

ISBN 978-0-345-31816-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Blackledge, Paul (2011).

"Why workers can change the world" .

Socialist Review . London. Archived from the original on 2011-12-10 . Retrieved 2011-12-03 .

364 Hal Draper , Karl Marx's Theory of Revolution, Vol. 2; The Politics of Social Classes . (New York: Monthly Review Press 1978).

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Proletariat .

Look up proletariat in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proletariat&oldid=1294706115 " Categories : Proletariat Working class Communism Socialism Marxism Marxist theory Measurements and definitions of poverty Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 09:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proletariat 82 languages Add topic

