Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development of the theory 2 Evolution 3 Conveyor belt 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Norwegian cyclone model 3 languages Français 한국어 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The older of the models of extratropical cyclone development is known as the Norwegian cyclone model , developed during and shortly after World War I within the Bergen School of Meteorology .  In this theory, cyclones develop as they move up and along a frontal boundary, eventually occluding and reaching a barotropically cold environment.

[ 1 ] It was developed completely from surface-based weather observations , including descriptions of clouds found near frontal boundaries .  Developed from this model was the concept of the warm conveyor belt, which transports warm and moist air just ahead of the cold front above the surface warm front .

Development of the theory [ edit ] Polar front theory is attributed to Jacob Bjerknes , derived from a coastal network of observation sites in Norway during World War I .  This theory proposed that the main inflow into a cyclone was concentrated along two lines of convergence , one ahead of the low and another trailing behind the low.  The convergence line ahead of the low became known as either the steering line or the warm front.  The trailing convergence zone was referred to as the squall line or cold front.  Areas of clouds and rainfall appeared to be focused along these convergence zones.  The concept of frontal zones led to the concept of air masses .  The nature of the three-dimensional structure of the cyclone would wait for the development of the upper air network during the 1940s.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Evolution [ edit ] See also: Extratropical cyclone Stages of development Initial stage Wave forms on front Wave intensifies A mature low pressure system Dissipating stage of cyclone A wave along a frontal boundary, in the form of a broad area of low pressure , develops as an upper level disturbance moves towards that portion of the boundary.

Precipitation will begin to form ahead of the surface low, within the cold sector of the cyclone poleward of the warm front .  As the low deepens, both the cold and warm fronts around the low become better defined.  As the low matures, it couples with the upper level disturbance moving into the cyclone's cold sector. The cold front catches up to the westward portion of the warm front, forming an occluded front .  Eventually, the cyclone stacks with the upper level disturbance, becoming isolated within the cold sector, and begins to weaken as it becomes far removed from the original temperature discontinuity along the cold and warm fronts.  At this point, it becomes a cold-core low .  The frontal boundary becomes weaker and surrounds the equatorward portion of the cyclone, waiting for the next upper level disturbance to form a new low pressure area.

[ 5 ] Conveyor belt [ edit ] A depiction of warm conveyor belt precipitation during a wintertime extratropical cyclone A conveyor belt, also referred to as the warm conveyor belt, describes the flow of a stream of warm moist air originating within the warm sector of an extratropical cyclone ahead of the cold front which slopes up above and north of the surface warm front.  The idea of the conveyor belt originated in 1969.

[ 6 ] The left edge of the conveyor belt is sharp due to the higher density air moving in from the west forcing a sharp slope to the cold front.  An area of stratiform precipitation develops north of the warm front along the conveyor belt.  Active precipitation north of the warm front implies potential for greater development of the cyclone.  A portion of this conveyor belt turns to the right (left in the Southern Hemisphere), aligning with the upper level westerly flow .  However, the western portion of this belt wraps around the northwest (southwest in the Southern Hemisphere) side of the cyclone, which can contain moderate to heavy precipitation.  If the air mass is cold enough, the precipitation falls in the form of heavy snow .

[ 2 ] Theory from the 1980s talked about the presence of a cold conveyor belt which originates north of the warm front and flows along a clockwise path (in the northern hemisphere) into the main belt of the westerlies aloft, but there has been conflicting evidence as to whether or not it actually exists.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Surface weather analysis References [ edit ] ^ Shaye Johnson.

The Norwegian Cyclone Model.

Archived September 1, 2006, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2006-10-11.

^ a b University of Oklahoma.

The Norwegian Cyclone Model.

Archived September 1, 2006, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2007-05-17.

^ "Norwegian Cyclone Model" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on 11 May 2009 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ JetStream.

Norwegian cyclone model.

Archived 2016-01-04 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2007-05-17.

^ a b University of Oklahoma.

Reexamining the Cold Conveyor Belt.

Retrieved on 2007-05-17.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norwegian_cyclone_model&oldid=1176976638 " Categories : Synoptic meteorology and weather Extratropical cyclones Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Use dmy dates from September 2023 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 25 September 2023, at 04:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Norwegian cyclone model 3 languages Add topic

