Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Proposed examples Toggle Proposed examples subsection 2.1 Markets 2.2 Anarchism 2.3 Sobornost 2.4 Other examples 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Spontaneous order 19 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Монгол Occitan Português Română Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spontaneous emergence of order out of seeming chaos This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article or section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spontaneous order" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Spontaneous order , also named self-organization in the hard sciences , is the spontaneous emergence of order out of seeming chaos. The term "self-organization" is more often used for physical changes and biological processes , while "spontaneous order" is typically used to describe the emergence of various kinds of social orders in human social networks from the behavior of a combination of self-interested individuals who are not intentionally trying to create order through planning . Proposed examples of systems which evolved through spontaneous order or self-organization include the evolution of life on Earth , language , crystal structure , the Internet , Wikipedia , and free market economy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In economics and the social sciences, spontaneous order has been defined by Hayek as "the result of human actions, not of human design".

[ 3 ] In economics , spontaneous order has been defined as an equilibrium behavior among self-interested individuals, which is most likely to evolve and survive, obeying the natural selection process "survival of the likeliest".

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] According to Murray Rothbard , the philosopher Zhuangzi ( c.

369–286 BC) was the first to propose the idea of spontaneous order. Zhuangzi rejected the authoritarianism of Confucianism , writing that there "has been such a thing as letting mankind alone; there has never been such a thing as governing mankind [with success]." He articulated an early form of spontaneous order, asserting that "good order results spontaneously when things are let alone", a concept later "developed particularly by Proudhon in the nineteenth [century]".

[ 5 ] In 1767, the sociologist and historian Adam Ferguson within the context of Scottish Enlightenment described society as the "result of human action, but not the execution of any human design".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Jacobs has suggested that the term "spontaneous order" was effectively coined by Michael Polanyi in his essay, "The Growth of Thought in Society," Economica 8 (November 1941): 428–56.

[ 8 ] The Austrian School of Economics , led by Carl Menger , Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek made it a centerpiece in its social and economic thought. Hayek's theory of spontaneous order is the product of two related but distinct influences that do  not always tend in the same direction. As an economic theorist, his explanations can be given a rational explanation. But as a legal and social theorist, he leans, by contrast, very heavily on a conservative and traditionalist approach which instructs us  to submit blindly to a flow of events over which we can have little control.

[ 9 ] Proposed examples [ edit ] Markets [ edit ] Many classical-liberal theorists, [ 10 ] such as Hayek, have argued that market economies are a spontaneous order, and that they represent "a more efficient allocation of societal resources than any design could achieve." [ 11 ] They claim this spontaneous order (referred to as the extended order in Hayek's The Fatal Conceit ) is superior to any order a human mind can design due to the specifics of the information required.

[ 12 ] Centralized statistical data, they suppose, cannot convey this information because the statistics are created by abstracting away from the particulars of the situation.

[ 13 ] According to Norman P. Barry , this is illustrated in the concept of the invisible hand proposed by Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations .

[ 1 ] Lawrence Reed , president of the Foundation for Economic Education , a libertarian think tank in the United States, argues that spontaneous order "is what happens when you leave people alone—when entrepreneurs... see the desires of people... and then provide for them." He further claims that "[entrepreneurs] respond to market signals, to prices. Prices tell them what's needed and how urgently and where. And it's infinitely better and more productive than relying on a handful of elites in some distant bureaucracy." [ 14 ] Anarchism [ edit ] See also: Self-organization § Principles , and Anarchist symbolism § Circle-A Anarchists argue that the state is in fact an artificial creation of the ruling elite, and that true spontaneous order would arise if it were eliminated. This is construed by some but not all as the ushering in of organization by anarchist law . In the anarchist view, such spontaneous order would involve the voluntary cooperation of individuals. According to the Oxford Dictionary of Sociology , "the work of many symbolic interactionists is largely compatible with the anarchist vision, since it harbours a view of society as spontaneous order." [ 15 ] Sobornost [ edit ] The concept of spontaneous order can also be seen in the works of the Russian Slavophile movements and specifically in the works of Fyodor Dostoyevsky . The concept of an organic social manifestation as a concept in Russia expressed under the idea of sobornost . Sobornost was also used by Leo Tolstoy as an underpinning to the ideology of Christian anarchism . The concept was used to describe the uniting force behind the peasant or serf Obshchina in pre-Soviet Russia.

[ 16 ] Other examples [ edit ] Perhaps the most prominent exponent [ 17 ] of spontaneous order is Friedrich Hayek . In addition to arguing the economy is a spontaneous order, which he termed a catallaxy , he argued that common law [ 18 ] and the brain [ 19 ] are also types of spontaneous orders. In The Republic of Science, [ 20 ] Michael Polanyi also argued that science is a spontaneous order, a theory further developed by Bill Butos and Thomas McQuade in a variety of papers. Gus DiZerega has argued that democracy is the spontaneous order form of government, [ 21 ] David Emmanuel Andersson has argued that religion in places like the United States is a spontaneous order, [ 22 ] and Troy Camplin argues that artistic and literary production are spontaneous orders.

[ 23 ] Paul Krugman has also contributed to spontaneous order theory in his book The Self-Organizing Economy , [ 24 ] in which he claims that cities are self-organizing systems.

Credibility thesis suggests that the credibility of social institutions is the driving factor behind the endogenous self-organization of institutions and their persistence.

[ 25 ] Different rules of game would cause different types of spontaneous order. If an economic society obeys the equal-opportunity rules, the resulting spontaneous order is reflected as an exponential income distribution; that is, for an equal-opportunity economic society, the exponential income distribution is most likely to evolve and survive.

[ 4 ] By analyzing datasets of household income from 66 countries and Hong Kong SAR, ranging from Europe to Latin America, North America and Asia, Tao et al. found that, for all of these countries, the income structure for the great majority of populations (low and middle income classes) follows an exponential income distribution.

[ 26 ] Criticism [ edit ] Roland Kley writes about Hayek's theory of spontaneous order that "the foundations of Hayek's liberalism are so incoherent" because the "idea of spontaneous order lacks distinctness and internal structure." [ 27 ] The three components of Hayek's theory are lack of intentionality, the "primacy of tacit or practical knowledge", and the "natural selection of competitive traditions." While the first feature, that social institutions may arise in some unintended fashion, is indeed an essential element of spontaneous order, the second two are only implications, not essential elements.

[ 28 ] Hayek's theory has also been criticized for not offering a moral argument, and his overall outlook contains "incompatible strands that he never seeks to reconcile in a systematic manner." [ 29 ] Abby Innes has criticised many of the economic ideas as a fatal confrontation between economic libertarianism and reality, arguing that it represents a form of materialist utopia that has much in common with Soviet Russia [ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Anonymous Deregulation Emergence Élan vital Free price system " I, Pencil " by Leonard Read Mutual aid Natural law Natural order Revolutionary spontaneity Stigmergy Tragedy of the commons Wu wei (Effortless Action) References [ edit ] ^ a b Barry, Norman (1982). "The Tradition of Spontaneous Order".

Literature of Liberty .

5 (2).

^ "Wikipedia's Model Follows Hayek" .

The Wall Street Journal . April 15, 2009.

^ Hayek, Friedrich A. (1969).

Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics . Touchstone. p. 97.

ISBN 978-0671202460 .

^ a b Tao, Yong (2016-07-01).

"Spontaneous economic order" .

Journal of Evolutionary Economics .

26 (3): 467– 500.

arXiv : 1210.0898 .

doi : 10.1007/s00191-015-0432-6 .

ISSN 1432-1386 .

^ Rothbard, Murray.

"Concepts of the Role of Intellectuals in Social Change Toward Laissez Faire" , The Journal of Libertarian Studies , Vol. IX No. 2 (Fall 1990) ^ Adam Ferguson Archived 2007-05-09 at the Wayback Machine on The History of Economic Thought Website ^ Ferguson, Adam (1767).

An Essay on the History of Civil Society . The Online Library of Liberty: T. Cadell, London. p. 205. Archived from the original on 2013-06-01 . Retrieved 2009-08-02 .

^ Straun Jacobs, "Michael Polanyi's Theory of Spontaneous Orders," Review of Austrian Economics 11, nos. 1–2 (1999): 111–127 ^ Barry, Norman (University of Buckingham) Literature of Liberty ; Vol. v, no. 2, pp. 7–58. Arlington, VA: Institute for Humane Studies Pub. 1982 ^ MacCormick, D.N. (1989), "Spontaneous Order and the Rule of Law: Some Problems".

Ratio Juris , 2: 41–54.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9337.1989.tb00025.x ^ Hayek cited. Petsoulas, Christian. Hayek's Liberalism and Its Origins: His Idea of Spontaneous Order and the Scottish Enlightenment. Routledge. 2001. p. 2 ^ Hayek, F.A.

The Fatal Conceit: The Errors of Socialism . The University of Chicago Press. 1991. p. 6.

^ Hayek cited. Boaz, David.

The Libertarian Reader . The Free Press. 1997. p. 220 ^ Stossel, John (2011-02-10) Spontaneous Order , Reason ^ Marshall, Gordon; et al. (1998) [1994].

Oxford Dictionary of Sociology (2 ed.).

Oxford : Oxford University Press . pp.

19–20 .

ISBN 978-0192800817 .

^ Faith and Order: The Reconciliation of Law and Religion By Harold Joseph p. 388 Berman Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Religion and law ISBN 0802848524 https://books.google.com/books?id=j1208xA7F_0C&pg=PA388 ^ Hunt, Louis (20 December 2007), "The Origin and Scope of Hayek's Idea of Spontaneous Order", in Hunt, Louis; McNamara, Peter (eds.), Liberalism, Conservatism, and Hayek's Idea of Spontaneous Order , New York City : Palgrave Macmillan , p. 44, doi : 10.1057/9780230609228_3 , ISBN 978-1-4039-8425-8 ^ The Constitution of Liberty; Law, Legislation and Liberty ^ The Sensory Order ^ Polanyi, Michael.

"Republic of Science: Its Political and Economic Theory" (PDF) .

fiesta.bren.ucsb.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 14 January 2022 .

^ Persuasion, Power, and Polity ^ Dizerega, Gus (2001).

Persuasion, Power and Polity: A Theory of Democratic Self-Organization (Advances in Systems Theory, Complexity, and the Human Sciences): Gus Dizerega, Alfonso Montuori: Books . Hampton Press.

ISBN 978-1572732575 .

^ "pp. 195–211: Troy Earl Camplin" . Studies in Emergent Order. 2010-08-20 . Retrieved 2018-09-17 .

^ The Self-Organizing Economy ^ Grabel, Ilene (2000). "The political economy of 'policy credibility': the new-classical macroeconomics and the remaking of emerging economies".

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

24 (1): 1– 19.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.366.5380 .

doi : 10.1093/cje/24.1.1 .

^ Yong Tao, et al.

"Exponential structure of income inequality: evidence from 67 countries" .

Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination (2017) ^ Kley, Roland (1994), Hayek's Social and Political Thought . pp. 194–211 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Gray, John (1997). "Twentieth Century: The Limits of Liberal Political Philosophy", in An Uncertain Legacy, Essays on the Pursuit of Liberty.

pp. 193–94. (Edward B. McLean, ed.) [ ISBN missing ] ^ Shearmur, Jeremy (1996).

Hayek and After: Hayekian Liberalism as Research Programme , p. 177.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Abby Innes 'Late Soviet Britain' Cambridge University Press 2023 v t e Friedrich Hayek Concepts and career Austrian business cycle theory Austrian School Catallactics Cultural group selection Dispersed knowledge Extended order Free banking Sraffa–Hayek debate Spontaneous order Socialist calculation debate Works The Road to Serfdom (1944) " The Use of Knowledge in Society " (1945) Individualism and Economic Order (1948) The Counter-Revolution of Science (1952) The Constitution of Liberty (1960) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973; 1976; 1979) The Fatal Conceit (1988) Family August von Hayek (father) Bibliography Friedrich Hayek bibliography v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spontaneous_order&oldid=1305102953 " Categories : Systems theory Self-organization Austrian School Libertarian theory Pattern formation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from June 2024 Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spontaneous order 19 languages Add topic

