Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Materials 2 Solving corrosion 3 Other problems 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Corrosion in space Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Corrosion of materials occurring in outer space Corrosion in space is the corrosion of materials occurring in outer space . Instead of moisture and oxygen acting as the primary corrosion causes, the materials exposed to outer space are subjected to vacuum , bombardment by ultraviolet and X-rays , solar energetic particles (mostly electrons and protons from solar wind ), and electromagnetic radiation.

[ 1 ] In the upper layers of the atmosphere (between 90–800 km), the atmospheric atoms, ions, and free radicals , most notably atomic oxygen , play a major role. The concentration of atomic oxygen depends on altitude and solar activity , as the bursts of ultraviolet radiation cause photodissociation of molecular oxygen.

[ 2 ] Between 160 and 560 km, the atmosphere consists of about 90% atomic oxygen.

[ 3 ] Materials [ edit ] Corrosion in space has the highest impact on spacecraft with moving parts. Early satellites tended to develop problems with seizing bearings. Now the bearings are coated with a thin layer of gold .

Different materials resist corrosion in space differently. Electrolytes in batteries or cooling loops can cause galvanic corrosion, general corrosion, and stress corrosion.

[ 1 ] Aluminium is slowly eroded by atomic oxygen, while gold and platinum are highly corrosion-resistant. Gold-coated foils and thin layers of gold on exposed surfaces are therefore used to protect the spacecraft from the harsh environment. Thin layers of silicon dioxide deposited on the surfaces can also protect metals from the effects of atomic oxygen; e.g., the Starshine 3 satellite aluminium front mirrors were protected that way. However, the protective layers are subject to erosion by micrometeorites .

Silver builds up a layer of silver oxide, which tends to flake off and has no protective function; such gradual erosion of silver interconnects of solar cells was found to be the cause of some observed in-orbit failures.

[ 4 ] Many plastics are considerably sensitive to atomic oxygen and ionizing radiation. Coatings resistant to atomic oxygen are a common protection method, especially for plastics.

Silicone -based paints and coatings are frequently employed, due to their excellent resistance to radiation and atomic oxygen.

[ 5 ] However, the silicone durability is somewhat limited, as the surface exposed to atomic oxygen is converted to silica which is brittle and tends to crack.

Solving corrosion [ edit ] The process of space corrosion is being actively investigated. One of the efforts aims to design a sensor based on zinc oxide , able to measure the amount of atomic oxygen in the vicinity of the spacecraft; the sensor relies on drop of electrical conductivity of zinc oxide as it absorbs further oxygen.

[ citation needed ] Other problems [ edit ] The outgassing of volatile silicones on low Earth orbit devices leads to presence of a cloud of contaminants around the spacecraft. Together with atomic oxygen bombardment, this may lead to gradual deposition of thin layers of carbon-containing silicon dioxide. Their poor transparency is a concern in case of optical systems and solar panels . Deposits of up to several micrometers were observed after 10 years of service on the solar panels of the Mir space station.

[ 6 ] Other sources of problems for structures subjected to outer space are erosion and redeposition of the materials by sputtering caused by fast atoms and micrometeoroids . Another major concern, though of non-corrosive kind, is material fatigue caused by cyclical heating and cooling and associated thermal expansion mechanical stresses.

See also [ edit ] Space weathering References [ edit ] ^ a b Blockley, Richard; Shyy, Wei, eds. (2010-12-15).

Encyclopedia of Aerospace Engineering (1 ed.). Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/9780470686652.eae242 .

ISBN 978-0-470-75440-5 .

^ Martines, S.

"Analysis of LEO Radiation Environment and itsEffects on Spacecraft's Critical Electronic Dev ices" .

Mendeley . Embry Riddle Aeronautical University . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .

^ "The Use of Silicone Adhesives in Space Applications" .

Archived from the original on 2006-03-24 . Retrieved 2006-06-07 .

^ Myer Kutz - Handbook of Environmental Degradation of Materials (2005, 0815515006) ^ "Optimizing Atomic Oxygen Resistance on Coated Substrates Using TechOptimizer" . Archived from the original on 2006-06-24 . Retrieved 2006-06-07 .

^ Banks, Bruce A.; De Groh, Kim K.; Rutledge, Sharon K.; Haytas, Christy A. (1999). "Consequences of atomic oxygen interaction with silicone and silicone contamination on surfaces in low earth orbit".

Proc. SPIE .

3784 : 62.

Bibcode : 1999SPIE.3784...62B .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.870.5957 .

doi : 10.1117/12.366725 .

hdl : 2060/19990047772 .

S2CID 136474988 .

External links [ edit ] The Cosmos on a Shoestring: Small Spacecraft for Space and Earth Science, Appendix B: Failure in Spacecraft Systems PDF New Scientist premium article: Space is corrosive NASA Long Duration Exposition Facility: surface contamination in space v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corrosion_in_space&oldid=1268589444 " Categories : Corrosion Spaceflight Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009 Use British English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 10 January 2025, at 14:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Corrosion in space Add languages Add topic

