Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and family history 2 Early career and marriage Toggle Early career and marriage subsection 2.1 Education and law practice 2.2 Marriage and family 3 Local political office (1898−1915) Toggle Local political office (1898−1915) subsection 3.1 City offices 3.2 Massachusetts state legislator and mayor 4 Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916−1921) Toggle Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916−1921) subsection 4.1 1918 election 4.2 Boston police strike 4.3 1919 election 4.4 Legislation and vetoes as governor 5 Vice presidency (1921–1923) Toggle Vice presidency (1921–1923) subsection 5.1 1920 election 5.2 "Silent Cal" 6 Presidency (1923–1929) Toggle Presidency (1923–1929) subsection 6.1 1924 election 6.2 Industry and trade 6.3 Taxation and government spending 6.4 Opposition to farm subsidies 6.5 Flood control 6.6 Civil rights 6.7 Foreign policy 6.8 Cabinet 6.9 Judicial appointments 6.10 1928 election 7 Post-presidency (1929–1933) 8 Death 9 Legacy 10 Radio, film, and commemorations 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Works cited Toggle Works cited subsection 14.1 About Coolidge and his era 14.2 By Coolidge 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Primary sources 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Calvin Coolidge 130 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1923 to 1929 For his grandfather, the Vermont state representative, see Calvin Galusha Coolidge .

"John Calvin Coolidge" redirects here. For his father, see John Calvin Coolidge Sr.

Calvin Coolidge Coolidge in 1924 30th President of the United States In office August 2, 1923 – March 4, 1929 Vice President None (1923–1925) [ a ] Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Preceded by Warren G. Harding Succeeded by Herbert Hoover 29th Vice President of the United States In office March 4, 1921 – August 2, 1923 President Warren G. Harding Preceded by Thomas R. Marshall Succeeded by Charles G. Dawes 48th Governor of Massachusetts In office January 2, 1919 – January 6, 1921 Lieutenant Channing H. Cox Preceded by Samuel W. McCall Succeeded by Channing H. Cox 46th Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts In office January 6, 1916 – January 2, 1919 Governor Samuel W. McCall Preceded by Grafton D. Cushing Succeeded by Channing H. Cox President of the Massachusetts Senate In office January 7, 1914 – January 6, 1915 Preceded by Levi H. Greenwood Succeeded by Henry Gordon Wells Member of the Massachusetts Senate In office January 3, 1912 – January 6, 1915 Preceded by Allen T. Treadway Succeeded by John B. Hull Constituency Berkshire, Hampden, and Hampshire counties 16th Mayor of Northampton In office January 3, 1910 – January 1, 1912 Preceded by James W. O'Brien Succeeded by William Feiker Member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives from the 1st Hampshire district In office January 2, 1907 – January 6, 1909 Preceded by Moses M. Bassett Succeeded by Charles A. Montgomery Personal details Born John Calvin Coolidge Jr.

( 1872-07-04 ) July 4, 1872 Plymouth Notch, Vermont , U.S.

Died January 5, 1933 (1933-01-05) (aged 60) Northampton, Massachusetts , U.S.

Resting place Plymouth Notch Cemetery Political party Republican Spouse Grace Goodhue ​ ( m.

1905 ) ​ Children 2, including John Parents John Calvin Coolidge Sr.

Victoria Josephine Moor Relatives Calvin Galusha Coolidge (grandfather) Park Pollard (cousin) Education Amherst College ( AB ) Occupation Politician lawyer Signature Calvin Coolidge's voice Coolidge speaking on government spending Recorded August 11, 1924 This article is part of a series about Calvin Coolidge Early life Autobiography Eponyms 48th Governor of Massachusetts Governorship 30th President of the United States Presidency timeline First inauguration Executive actions Foreign policy Cabinet appointments Judicial appointments Indian Citizenship Act Immigration Act Washington Naval Treaty Second inauguration Flood Control Act Great Mississippi Flood Helium Act Kellogg–Briand Pact Radio Act of 1927 Federal Radio Commission Vice Presidential and Presidential campaigns 1920 convention election 1924 convention election 1928 convention " I do not choose to run " Post-presidency Presidential library v t e Calvin Coolidge (born John Calvin Coolidge Jr.

; [ 1 ] / ˈ k uː l ɪ dʒ / KOOL -ij ; July 4, 1872 – January 5, 1933) was the 30th president of the United States , serving from 1923 to 1929. A Republican lawyer from Massachusetts , he previously served as the 29th vice president from 1921 to 1923 under President Warren G. Harding , and as the 48th governor of Massachusetts from 1919 to 1921. Coolidge gained a reputation as a small-government conservative with a taciturn personality and dry sense of humor that earned him the nickname " Silent Cal ".

Coolidge began his career as a member of the Massachusetts State House . He rose up the ranks of Massachusetts politics and was elected governor in 1918 . As governor, Coolidge ran on the record of fiscal conservatism , strong support for women's suffrage , and vague opposition to Prohibition .

[ 2 ] His prompt and effective response to the Boston police strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight as a man of decisive action. The following year, the Republican Party nominated Coolidge as the running mate to Senator Warren G. Harding in the 1920 presidential election , which they won in a landslide . Coolidge served as vice president until Harding's death in 1923, after which he assumed the presidency.

During his presidency, Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the Harding administration 's many scandals . He signed into law the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 , which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans, and oversaw a period of rapid and expansive economic growth known as the " Roaring Twenties ", leaving office with considerable popularity.

[ 3 ] Coolidge was known for his hands-off governing approach and pro-business stance; biographer Claude Fuess wrote: "He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class, could interpret their longings and express their opinions. That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength." [ 4 ] Coolidge chose not to run again in 1928 , remarking that ten years as president would be "longer than any other man has had it—too long!" [ b ] Coolidge is widely admired for his stalwart support of racial equality during a period of heightened racial tension, [ 5 ] and is highly regarded by advocates of smaller government and laissez-faire economics; supporters of an active central government generally view him far less favorably. His critics argue that he failed to use the country's economic boom to help struggling farmers and workers in other flailing industries, [ 6 ] and there is still much debate among historians about the extent to which Coolidge's economic policies contributed to the onset of the Great Depression , which began shortly after he left office.

[ 7 ] Scholars have ranked Coolidge in the lower half of U.S. presidents.

Early life and family history John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born on July 4, 1872, in Plymouth Notch , Vermont —the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day . He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr.

(1845–1926) and Victoria Josephine Moor (1846–1885). Although named for his father, from early childhood Coolidge was addressed by his middle name. The name Calvin was used in multiple generations of the Coolidge family, apparently selected in honor of John Calvin , the Protestant Reformer .

[ 8 ] Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations and developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper, and public servant. He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in both houses of the Vermont General Assembly .

[ 9 ] When Coolidge was 12 years old, his chronically ill mother died at the age of 39, perhaps from tuberculosis . His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge (1875–1890), died at the age of 15, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was 18. Coolidge's father married a Plymouth schoolteacher in 1891, and lived to the age of 80.

[ 10 ] Coolidge's earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge, emigrated from Cottenham , Cambridgeshire , England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts .

[ 11 ] Coolidge also descended from Samuel Appleton , who settled in Ipswich and led the Massachusetts Bay Colony during King Philip's War .

[ 12 ] Coolidge's great-great-grandfather, another John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth.

[ 13 ] His grandfather Calvin Galusha Coolidge served in the Vermont House of Representatives.

[ 14 ] His cousin Park Pollard was a businessman in Cavendish, Vermont , and the longtime chair of the Vermont Democratic Party.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Coolidge's mother was the daughter of Hiram Dunlap Moor, a Plymouth Notch farmer, and Abigail Franklin.

[ 17 ] The Coolidge Homestead in Plymouth Notch, Vermont Coolidge as an Amherst College undergraduate Early career and marriage Education and law practice Coolidge attended the Black River Academy and then St. Johnsbury Academy before enrolling at Amherst College , where he distinguished himself in the debating class. As a senior, he joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity and graduated cum laude . While at Amherst, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman , a Congregational mystic who had a neo-Hegelian philosophy. Coolidge explained Garman's ethics forty years later: [T]here is a standard of righteousness that might does not make right, that the end does not justify the means, and that expediency as a working principle is bound to fail. The only hope of perfecting human relationships is in accordance with the law of service under which men are not so solicitous about what they shall get as they are about what they shall give. Yet people are entitled to the rewards of their industry. What they earn is theirs, no matter how small or how great. But the possession of property carries the obligation to use it in a larger service...

[ 18 ] At his father's urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts , to become a lawyer. Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond & Field, and reading law with them.

John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field, both Amherst graduates, introduced Coolidge to practicing law in the county seat of Hampshire County, Massachusetts . In 1897, Coolidge was admitted to the Massachusetts bar , becoming a country lawyer .

[ 19 ] With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898. He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court. As his reputation as a hard-working and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services.

[ 20 ] Marriage and family Coolidge with his family, c.

1915 In 1903, Coolidge met Grace Goodhue , a graduate of the University of Vermont and a teacher at Northampton's Clarke School for the Deaf . They married on October 4, 1905, at 2:30 p.m. in a small ceremony which took place in the parlor of Grace's family's house, having overcome her mother's objections to the marriage.

[ 21 ] The newlyweds went on a honeymoon trip to Montreal , originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidge's request. After 25 years he wrote of Grace, "for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces".

[ 22 ] The Coolidges had two sons: John (1906–2000) and Calvin Jr. (1908–1924). On June 30, 1924, Calvin Jr. played tennis with his brother on the White House tennis courts without putting on socks and developed a blister on one of his toes. The blister subsequently degenerated into sepsis . He died a little over a week later at the age of 16.

[ 23 ] Coolidge never forgave himself for Calvin Jr's death.

[ 24 ] His elder son John said it "hurt [Coolidge] terribly", and psychiatric biographer Robert E. Gilbert, author of The Tormented President: Calvin Coolidge, Death, and Clinical Depression , said that Coolidge "ceased to function as President after the death of his sixteen-year-old son". Gilbert writes that after Calvin Jr.'s death Coolidge displayed all ten of the symptoms the American Psychiatric Association lists as evidence of major depressive disorder .

[ 25 ] John later became a railroad executive, helped start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site .

[ 26 ] Coolidge was frugal, and when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting. He and his wife attended Northampton's Edwards Congregational Church before and after his presidency.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Local political office (1898−1915) City offices The Republican Party was dominant in New England at the time, and Coolidge followed the example of Hammond and Field by becoming active in local politics.

[ 29 ] In 1896, Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley , and was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee the next year.

[ 30 ] In 1898, he won election to the City Council of Northampton, placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected.

[ 29 ] The position offered no salary but provided Coolidge with valuable political experience.

[ 31 ] In 1899, the city council made Coolidge city solicitor. He was elected to a one-year term in 1900 and reelected in 1901.

[ 32 ] This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of $600 (equivalent to $22,678 in 2024).

[ 32 ] In 1902, the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor, and Coolidge returned to private practice. Soon thereafter, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him. The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only a year.

[ 33 ] In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board . When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern, the recently married Coolidge replied, "Might give me time!" [ 33 ] Massachusetts state legislator and mayor See also: 134th Massachusetts General Court (1913) , 135th Massachusetts General Court (1914) , and 136th Massachusetts General Court (1915) Coolidge as a state representative, 1908 In 1906, the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the Massachusetts House of Representatives . He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court .

[ 34 ] In his freshman term, Coolidge served on minor committees and, although he usually voted with the party, was known as a Progressive Republican , voting in favor of such measures as women's suffrage and the direct election of Senators .

[ 35 ] While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane , who controlled the Massachusetts Republican Party's western faction; Crane's party rival in eastern Massachusetts was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge .

[ 36 ] Coolidge forged another key strategic alliance with Guy Currier , who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm, and broad circle of friends Coolidge lacked, and which had a lasting impact on his political career.

[ 37 ] In 1907, Coolidge was reelected. In the 1908 session he was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position.

[ 38 ] Instead of vying for another term in the State House , Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired. He was well liked in the town, and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1,597 to 1,409.

[ 39 ] During his first term from 1910 to 1911, he increased teachers' salaries and retired some of the city's debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease.

[ 40 ] In 1911, he was renominated and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin.

[ 41 ] In 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session. Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin.

[ 42 ] At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the " Bread and Roses " strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts .

[ c ] After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers' demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee.

[ 43 ] A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans in 1912 was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt , and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft . Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party.

[ 44 ] When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district, Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin.

[ 44 ] "Do the day's work. If it be to protect the rights of the weak, whoever objects, do it. If it be to help a powerful corporation better to serve the people, whatever the opposition, do that. Expect to be called a stand-patter, but don't be a stand-patter. Expect to be called a demagogue, but don't be a demagogue. Don't hesitate to be as revolutionary as science. Don't hesitate to be as reactionary as the multiplication table. Don't expect to build up the weak by pulling down the strong. Don't hurry to legislate. Give administration a chance to catch up with legislation." "Have Faith in Massachusetts" as delivered by Calvin Coolidge to the Massachusetts State Senate, 1914 [ 45 ] In the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act, which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in Western Massachusetts .

[ 46 ] Coolidge intended to retire after his second term, as was customary, but when the president of the state senate , Levi H. Greenwood , considered running for lieutenant governor, Coolidge decided to run for the Senate again in hopes of being elected its presiding officer.

[ 47 ] Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate, and was defeated primarily due to his opposition to women's suffrage.

[ 48 ] Coolidge was in favor of the women's vote, and was reelected. With Crane's help, Coolidge assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate.

[ 48 ] After his election in January 1914, Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech, Have Faith in Massachusetts , which summarized his philosophy of government.

[ 45 ] Coolidge's speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account.

[ 49 ] Towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing Coolidge's name for nomination to lieutenant governor. After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections, Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate.

[ 50 ] Coolidge's supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns , encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor.

[ 51 ] Stearns, an executive with the Boston department store R. H. Stearns, became another key ally, and began a publicity campaign on Coolidge's behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session.

[ 52 ] Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916−1921) Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall . Coolidge was the leading vote-getter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall's eastern base of support.

[ 53 ] McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one-year terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes.

[ 54 ] In Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states; nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as an administrative inspector and was a member of the governor's council. He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee.

[ 55 ] As a full-time elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton.

[ 56 ] McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and in 1917. When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor.

[ 57 ] 1918 election Coolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918 . He and his running mate, Channing Cox , a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives , ran on the previous administration's record: fiscal conservatism , a vague opposition to Prohibition , support for women's suffrage, and support for American involvement in World War I .

[ 2 ] The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish and German Americans .

[ 58 ] Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16,773 votes over his opponent, Richard H. Long , in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns.

[ 59 ] Boston police strike Main article: Boston police strike Coolidge inspects militia during the 1919 Boston police strike In 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union , Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated. In August of that year, the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union.

[ 60 ] Curtis declared the union's leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty, but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4.

[ 61 ] The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters , convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8.

[ 62 ] The following day, about three-quarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike.

[ 63 ] [ d ] Tacitly but fully in support of Curtis's position, Coolidge closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities. He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle: that a policeman does not strike. That night and the next, there was sporadic violence and rioting in the city.

[ 64 ] Concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, Peters called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority and relieved Curtis of duty.

[ 65 ] Coolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then in need of his intervention, conferred with Crane's operative, William Butler, and then acted.

[ 66 ] He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force.

[ 67 ] Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited.

[ 68 ] That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers . "Whatever disorder has occurred", Gompers wrote, "is due to Curtis's order in which the right of the policemen has been denied".

[ 69 ] Coolidge publicly answered Gompers's telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strike—and his response launched him into the national consciousness.

[ 69 ] Newspapers nationwide picked up on Coolidge's statement and he became the strike's opponents' newest hero. Amid the First Red Scare , many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolutions like those in Russia , Hungary , and Germany . Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, but conservatives saw a rising star.

[ 70 ] Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave Coolidge a national reputation as a decisive leader and strict enforcer of law and order.

"Your assertion that the Commissioner was wrong cannot justify the wrong of leaving the city unguarded. That furnished the opportunity; the criminal element furnished the action. There is no right to strike against the public safety by anyone, anywhere, any time. ... I am equally determined to defend the sovereignty of Massachusetts and to maintain the authority and jurisdiction over her public officers where it has been placed by the Constitution and laws of her people." "Telegram from Governor Calvin Coolidge to Samuel Gompers", September 14, 1919 [ 71 ] 1919 election Main article: 1919 Massachusetts gubernatorial election In 1919, Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919. By this time Coolidge's supporters, especially Stearns, had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation, and some of Coolidge's speeches were published in book form.

[ 45 ] He faced the same opponent as in 1918, Richard Long, but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125,101 votes, more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier.

[ e ] His actions in the police strike, combined with the massive electoral victory, led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920.

[ 73 ] Legislation and vetoes as governor By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $100 bonus (equivalent to $1,814 in 2024) to Massachusetts veterans. He signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from 54 hours to 48, saying, "We must humanize the industry, or the system will break down." [ 74 ] He passed a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming $4 million from expenditures, allowing the state to retire some of its debt.

[ 75 ] Coolidge wielded the veto pen as governor. His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators' pay by 50%.

[ 76 ] Although he was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75% alcohol or less , in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . "Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution," he said in his veto message. "Against it, they are void." [ 77 ] Vice presidency (1921–1923) 1920 election Main article: 1920 United States presidential election At the 1920 Republican National Convention , most of the delegates were selected by state party caucuses, not primaries. As such, the field was divided among many local favorites.

[ 78 ] Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the party's U.S. Senators, never considered him seriously.

[ 79 ] After ten ballots, the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president.

[ 80 ] When the time came to select a vice-presidential nominee, the bosses also announced their choice, Senator Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin, and then departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision. A delegate from Oregon , Wallace McCamant , had read Have Faith in Massachusetts and proposed Coolidge for vice president instead. The suggestion caught on quickly, with the masses craving an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated.

[ 81 ] The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox , for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt , for vice president. The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign, as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism .

[ 82 ] Harding ran a " front-porch" campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio , but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South , New York, and New England – his audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches.

[ 83 ] On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South.

[ 82 ] They won in Tennessee , the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction .

[ 82 ] "Silent Cal" President Harding and Vice President Coolidge with their wives The vice presidency did not carry many official duties, but Harding invited Coolidge to attend cabinet meetings, making him the first vice president to do so.

[ 84 ] He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country.

[ 85 ] As vice president, Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties, where the legend of "Silent Cal" was born. It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate, such as Coolidge being "silent in five languages".

[ 86 ] Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker, in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as "Silent Cal".

An apocryphal story has it that a person seated next to Coolidge at a dinner told him, "I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you", to which Coolidge replied, "You lose".

[ 87 ] On April 22, 1924, Coolidge said that the "You lose" incident never occurred. The story was related by Frank B. Noyes, President of the Associated Press , to its membership at its annual luncheon at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, when toasting and introducing Coolidge, the invited speaker. After the introduction and before his prepared remarks, Coolidge told the membership, "Your President [Noyes] has given you a perfect example of one of those rumors now current in Washington which is without any foundation." [ 88 ] Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society. When asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, "Got to eat somewhere." [ 89 ] Alice Roosevelt Longworth , a leading Republican wit, underscored Coolidge's silence and his dour personality: "When he wished he were elsewhere, he pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said nothing. He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle." [ 90 ] Coolidge and his wife, Grace, who was a great baseball fan, once attended a Washington Senators game and sat through all nine innings without saying a word, except once when he asked her the time.

[ 91 ] As president, Coolidge's reputation as a quiet man continued. "The words of a President have an enormous weight," he later wrote, "and ought not to be used indiscriminately." [ 92 ] Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation, and cultivated it. "I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President," he once told Ethel Barrymore , "and I think I will go along with them." [ 93 ] Some historians suggest that Coolidge's image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic.

[ 94 ] Others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior was natural, deepening after the death of his son in 1924.

[ 95 ] Dorothy Parker , upon learning that Coolidge had died, reportedly remarked, "How can they tell?" [ 96 ] Presidency (1923–1929) Main article: Presidency of Calvin Coolidge For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Calvin Coolidge presidency .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e On August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly from a heart attack in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States. Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home , which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding's death.

[ 97 ] Coolidge dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled.

[ 97 ] His father, a notary public and justice of the peace , administered the oath of office in the family's parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47 a.m. on August 3, 1923, whereupon the new President of the United States returned to bed.

Coolidge returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr.

of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia , to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath.

[ 98 ] This second oath-taking remained a secret until it was revealed by Harry M. Daugherty in 1932, and confirmed by Hoehling.

[ 99 ] When Hoehling confirmed Daugherty's story, he indicated that Daugherty, then serving as United States Attorney General , asked him to administer the oath without fanfare at the Willard Hotel .

[ 99 ] According to Hoehling, he did not question Daugherty's reason for requesting a second oath-taking but assumed it was to resolve any doubt about whether the first swearing-in was valid.

[ 99 ] President Coolidge signing appropriation bills for the Veterans Bureau, June 1924 The nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge, who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration. Many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924.

[ 100 ] Coolidge believed that those of Harding's men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence, taking a methodical approach to the scandals, principally the Teapot Dome scandal , while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty.

[ 101 ] Coolidge thought the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice. The resulting resignations of those involved affirmed this. He personally intervened in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after Daugherty refused to cooperate with the investigations. He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing.

Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him, and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors.

[ 102 ] On December 6, 1923, Coolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened, giving a speech that supported many of Harding's policies, including Harding's formal budgeting process, the enforcement of immigration restrictions , and the arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania .

[ 103 ] The address to Congress was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio.

[ 104 ] The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed one month into Coolidge's term, and was generally well received nationally.

[ 105 ] In May 1924, Congress passed the World War I veterans' World War Adjusted Compensation Act ("Bonus Bill"), overriding Coolidge's veto.

[ 106 ] Later that year, Coolidge signed the Immigration Act , which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration, but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bill's specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants.

[ 107 ] Just before the Republican Convention began, Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924 , which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58% to 46%, cut personal income tax rates across the board, increased the estate tax , and bolstered it with a new gift tax .

[ 108 ] On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States. By that time, two-thirds of them were already citizens, having gained it through marriage, military service (veterans of World War I were granted citizenship in 1919), or land allotments.

[ 109 ] 1924 election Main article: 1924 United States presidential election 1924 electoral vote results The Republican Convention was held from June 10 to 12, 1924, in Cleveland, Ohio. Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot.

[ 110 ] The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot, but he declined. Former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted.

[ 110 ] The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City. The convention soon deadlocked, and after 103 ballots, the delegates agreed upon a compromise candidate, John W. Davis , with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president. The Democrats' hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette , a Republican senator from Wisconsin , split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party . Many believed that the split in the Republican Party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency.

[ 111 ] After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn. He later said that "when he [the son] died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him." [ 112 ] Even as he mourned, Coolidge ran his standard campaign, not mentioning his opponents by name or maligning them, and delivering speeches on his theory of government, including several that were broadcast over the radio.

[ 113 ] It was the most subdued campaign since 1896 , partly because of Coolidge's grief, but also because of his naturally non-confrontational style.

[ 114 ] The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920. Coolidge won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follette's home state. He won the election with 382 electoral votes and the popular vote by 2.5 million votes.

[ 115 ] Industry and trade See also: Lochner era "[I]t is probable that a press which maintains an intimate touch with the business currents of the nation is likely to be more reliable than it would be if it were a stranger to these influences. After all, the chief business of the American people is business . They are profoundly concerned with buying, selling, investing and prospering in the world." "President Calvin Coolidge's address to the American Society of Newspaper Editors", Washington D.C., January 25, 1925 [ 116 ] During Coolidge's presidency, the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the " Roaring Twenties ". He left the administration's industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover , who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio.

[ 117 ] Coolidge disdained regulation and appointed men to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission , who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction.

[ 118 ] The regulatory state under Coolidge was, as one biographer called it, "thin to the point of invisibility".

[ 119 ] Historian Robert Sobel offers some context for Coolidge's laissez-faire ideology, based on the prevailing understanding of federalism during his presidency: "As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards. Did he support these measures while president? No, because in the 1920s, such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments." [ 120 ] [ 121 ] Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927 , which established the Federal Radio Commission and the equal-time rule for radio broadcasters and restricted radio broadcasting licenses to stations that demonstrated they served "the public interest, convenience, or necessity".

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Taxation and government spending Coolidge adopted the taxation policies of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon , who advocated "scientific taxation"—the notion that lowering taxes will increase, rather than decrease, government receipts.

[ 124 ] Congress agreed, and tax rates were reduced in Coolidge's term.

[ 124 ] In addition to federal tax cuts, Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring the federal debt .

[ 125 ] His ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress, and in 1924, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924 , which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for two million people.

[ 125 ] It reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928 , while keeping spending down to reduce the overall federal debt.

[ 126 ] By 1927, only the wealthiest 2% of taxpayers paid federal income tax.

[ 126 ] Federal spending remained flat during Coolidge's administration, allowing one-fourth of the federal debt to be retired.

State and local governments saw considerable growth, surpassing the federal budget in 1927.

[ 127 ] In 1929, after Coolidge's series of tax rate reductions had cut the tax rate to 24% on those making over $100,000, the federal government collected more than $1 billion in income taxes, of which 65% was from those making over $100,000. In 1921, when the tax rate on those making over $100,000 a year was 73%, the federal government collected a little over $700 million in income taxes, of which 30% was from those making over $100,000.

[ 128 ] Opposition to farm subsidies Coolidge with his vice president, Charles G. Dawes Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge's presidency was relief for farmers. Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices.

[ 129 ] Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the 1924 elections.

[ 130 ] In 1926, with farm prices falling once more, Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen —both Republicans—proposed the McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill . The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in high-yield years, and hold it, when feasible, for later sale or sell it abroad.

[ 131 ] Coolidge opposed McNary-Haugen, saying that agriculture must stand "on an independent business basis" and that "government control cannot be divorced from political control".

[ 131 ] Instead of manipulating prices, he favored Herbert Hoover 's proposal to increase profitability by modernizing agriculture. Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing McNary-Haugen as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated.

[ 132 ] After McNary-Haugen's defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the Curtis-Crisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm cooperatives in times of surplus. The bill did not pass.

[ 132 ] In February 1927, Congress took up McNary-Haugen again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it.

[ 133 ] In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy.

[ 134 ] Congress did not override the veto. In May 1928, Congress passed the bill again by an increased majority, and Coolidge vetoed it again.

[ 133 ] "Farmers never have made much money" he said. "I do not believe we can do much about it." [ 135 ] Flood control Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 , the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

[ 136 ] Although he eventually named Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that, overall, Coolidge showed lack of interest in federal flood control.

[ 136 ] Coolidge believed that visiting the region after the floods would accomplish nothing and be seen as political grandstanding. He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require. He believed that property owners should bear much of the cost.

[ 137 ] Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation.

[ 138 ] When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15.

[ 139 ] Civil rights Osage men with Coolidge after he signed the bill granting Native Americans U.S. citizenship According to one biographer, Coolidge was "devoid of racial prejudice", but he rarely took the lead on civil rights. Coolidge disliked the Ku Klux Klan and no Klansman is known to have received an appointment from him. In the 1924 presidential election, his opponents, Robert La Follette and John Davis, and his running mate, Charles Dawes, often attacked the Klan, but Coolidge avoided the subject.

[ 140 ] Due to Coolidge's failure to condemn the Klan, some African-American leaders such as former assistant attorney general William Henry Lewis endorsed Davis.

[ 141 ] Davis got little of the black vote outside Indiana, where Klan control of the Indiana Republican Party caused many blacks to vote Democratic.

[ 142 ] It is estimated that over 90% of non-Indiana blacks voted for Coolidge.

[ 143 ] Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover was accused of running forced labor camps for African Americans during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 , which led more African Americans to vote Democratic when Hoover was the Republican presidential nominee in 1928 and 1932.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] During Coolidge's administration, lynchings of African-Americans decreased and millions of people left the Ku Klux Klan.

[ 146 ] Coolidge spoke in favor of African Americans' civil rights, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were "just as sacred as those of any other citizen" under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a "public and a private duty to protect those rights".

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to make lynching a federal crime . It was already a state crime, though not always enforced. Congress refused to pass any such legislation. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act , which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans living on reservations. Those off reservations had long been citizens.

[ 149 ] On June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at historically black, non-segregated Howard University , in which he thanked and commended African Americans for their rapid advances in education and contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in the World War, all while faced with discrimination and prejudice at home.

[ 150 ] In an October 1924 speech, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they had "contributed much to making our country what it is". He said that although the diversity of peoples was a source of conflict and tension in Europe, it was a peculiarly "harmonious" benefit for the U.S. Coolidge added that the U.S. should assist and help immigrants and urged immigrants to reject "race hatreds" and "prejudices".

[ 151 ] Foreign policy At the Smithsonian Institution , February 1927. Left to right: Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon ; Secretary of State, Frank B. Kellogg ; President Calvin Coolidge; former president and Chief Justice William Howard Taft , Secretary of the Smithsonian, Charles D. Walcott among others.

Coolidge was neither well versed nor very interested in world affairs.

[ 152 ] His focus was mainly on U.S. business, especially pertaining to trade, and "Maintaining the Status Quo". Although not an isolationist, he was reluctant to enter into European involvements.

[ 153 ] Coolidge believed strongly in a non-interventionist foreign policy and supported American exceptionalism .

[ 154 ] He considered the 1920 Republican victory a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the U.S. should join the League of Nations .

[ 155 ] Coolidge did not believe the League served U.S. interests.

[ 155 ] But he spoke in favor of joining the Permanent Court of International Justice (World Court), provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions.

[ 156 ] In 1926, the Senate approved joining the Court, with reservations .

[ 157 ] The League of Nations accepted the reservations, but suggested some modifications of its own.

[ 158 ] The Senate failed to act, and so the U.S. did not join the World Court.

[ 158 ] In 1924, the Coolidge administration nominated Charles Dawes to head the multinational committee that produced the Dawes Plan . It set fixed annual amounts for Germany's World War I reparations payments and authorized a large loan, mostly from U.S. banks, to help stabilize and stimulate the German economy.

[ 159 ] Coolidge attempted to pursue further curbs on naval strength after the successes of Harding's Washington Naval Conference , by sponsoring the Geneva Naval Conference in 1927, which failed owing to a French and Italian boycott and the failure of Great Britain and the U.S. to agree on cruiser tonnages. As a result, the conference was a failure and Congress eventually authorized for increased American naval spending in 1928.

[ 160 ] The Kellogg–Briand Pact of 1928, named for U.S. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg and French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand , was a key peacekeeping initiative. Ratified in 1929, the treaty committed signatories—the U.S., the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Germany, and Japan—to "renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another".

[ 161 ] The treaty did not achieve its intended result—to outlaw war—but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II .

[ 162 ] Coolidge continued the Harding administration's policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union .

[ 163 ] Efforts were made to normalize ties with post- Revolution Mexico. Coolidge recognized Mexico's new governments under Álvaro Obregón and Plutarco Elías Calles , and continued U.S. support for the elected Mexican government against the National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty during the Cristero War , lifting the arms embargo on Mexico. He appointed Dwight Morrow as Ambassador to Mexico with the successful objective to avoid further conflict with Mexico.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] Coolidge's administration saw continuity in the occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti . In 1924, Coolidge ended the US occupation of the Dominican Republic as a result of withdrawal agreements finalized during Harding's administration.

[ 167 ] In 1925, Coolidge ordered the withdrawal of Marines stationed in Nicaragua following perceived stability after the 1924 Nicaraguan general election . In January 1927, he redeployed them there, after failed attempts to peacefully resolve the rapid deterioration of political stability and avert the ensuing Constitutionalist War . He later sent Henry L. Stimson to mediate a peace deal that ended the civil war and extended U.S. military presence in Nicaragua beyond Coolidge's presidency.

[ 164 ] In January 1928, to extend an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over U.S.

interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean , [ 168 ] Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States in Havana , Cuba, the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency.

[ 169 ] He was the last sitting U.S. president to visit Cuba until Barack Obama in 2016.

[ 170 ] For Canada, Coolidge authorized the St. Lawrence Seaway , a system of locks and canals that provided large vessels passage between the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes .

[ 171 ] [ 164 ] Cabinet Coolidge's cabinet in 1924, outside the White House .

Front row, left to right: Harry Stewart New , John W. Weeks , Charles Evans Hughes , Coolidge, Andrew Mellon , Harlan F. Stone , Curtis D. Wilbur .

Back row, left to right: James J. Davis , Henry C. Wallace , Herbert Hoover , Hubert Work .

Although some of Harding's cabinet appointees were scandal-tarred, Coolidge initially retained all of them out of conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president, he was obligated to retain Harding's counselors and policies until the next election. He kept Harding's speechwriter Judson T. Welliver . Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925.

[ 172 ] Coolidge appointed C. Bascom Slemp , a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician, to work jointly with Edward T. Clark, a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vice-presidential staff, as Secretaries to the President , a position equivalent to the modern White House Chief of Staff .

[ 105 ] Perhaps the most powerful person in Coolidge's cabinet was Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon , who controlled the administration's financial policies and was regarded by many, including House Minority Leader John Nance Garner , as more powerful than Coolidge himself.

[ 173 ] Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover also held a prominent place in the cabinet, in part because Coolidge found value in Hoover's ability to win positive publicity with his pro-business proposals.

[ 174 ] Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes directed Coolidge's foreign policy until he resigned in 1925 following Coolidge's reelection. He was replaced by Frank B. Kellogg , who had previously served as a senator and ambassador to Great Britain. Coolidge made two other appointments after his reelection: William M. Jardine as Secretary of Agriculture and John G. Sargent as Attorney General.

[ 175 ] Coolidge had no vice president during his first term.

Charles Dawes became vice president during Coolidge's second term, and Dawes and Coolidge clashed over farm policy and other issues.

[ 176 ] OFFICE NAME TERM President Calvin Coolidge 1923–1929 Vice President None 1923–1925 Charles G. Dawes 1925–1929 Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes 1923–1925 Frank B. Kellogg 1925–1929 Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon 1923–1929 Secretary of War John W. Weeks 1923–1925 Dwight F. Davis 1925–1929 Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty 1923–1924 Harlan F. Stone 1924–1925 John G. Sargent 1925–1929 Postmaster General Harry S. New 1923–1929 Secretary of the Navy Edwin C. Denby 1923–1924 Curtis D. Wilbur 1924–1929 Secretary of the Interior Hubert Work 1923–1928 Roy O. West 1928–1929 Secretary of Agriculture Henry C. Wallace 1923–1924 Howard M. Gore 1924–1925 William M. Jardine 1925–1929 Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover 1923–1928 William F. Whiting 1928–1929 Secretary of Labor James J. Davis 1923–1929 Judicial appointments Main article: List of federal judges appointed by Calvin Coolidge See also: Harlan F. Stone Supreme Court nomination Coolidge appointed Harlan F. Stone first as attorney general and then as a Supreme Court justice.

In 1925, Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States , Harlan F. Stone . Stone was Coolidge's fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican. In 1924, Stone was serving as the dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding's attorney general, Harry M. Daugherty .

[ 177 ] It does not appear that Coolidge considered appointing anyone other than Stone, although Stone urged him to appoint Benjamin N. Cardozo .

[ 178 ] Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the court's three liberal justices who often voted to uphold New Deal legislation.

[ 179 ] President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone chief justice.

Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 61 to the United States district courts . He appointed judges to various specialty courts, including Genevieve R. Cline , who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928.

[ 180 ] Coolidge signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload.

1928 election Main article: 1928 United States presidential election In the summer of 1927, Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota . While on vacation, he issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president: " I do not choose to run for President in 1928." [ 181 ] After allowing the reporters to take that in, Coolidge elaborated. "If I take another term, I will be in the White House till 1933 … Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had it—too long!" [ 182 ] In his memoirs, Coolidge explained his decision not to run: "The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them. While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish." [ 183 ] After leaving office, he and Grace returned to Northampton, where he wrote his memoirs. The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 when Herbert Hoover was elected in a landslide. Coolidge was reluctant to endorse Hoover. On one occasion he remarked, "for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice—all of it bad." [ 184 ] But Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing Hoover's nomination.

[ 185 ] Post-presidency (1929–1933) Coolidge receiving grapefruit at the Florida Orange Festival, 1930 After his presidency, Coolidge retired to a spacious home in Northampton, "The Beeches".

[ 186 ] He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River, and local boating enthusiasts often observed him on the water. During this time, he chaired the Non-Partisan Railroad Commission, an entity several banks and corporations created to survey the country's long-term transportation needs and make recommendations for improvements. He was an honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind , a director of New York Life Insurance Company , president of the American Antiquarian Society , and a trustee of Amherst College.

[ 187 ] Coolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, "Calvin Coolidge Says", from 1930 to 1931.

[ 188 ] Faced with looming defeat in 1932, some Republicans spoke of rejecting Herbert Hoover as their party's nominee, and instead drafting Coolidge to run, but the former President made it clear that he was not interested in running again, and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him, should it come about.

[ 189 ] Hoover was renominated, and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him. Hoover lost the general election to Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide.

[ 190 ] Death Coolidge died suddenly of coronary thrombosis at The Beeches on January 5, 1933, at 12:45 p.m., aged 60.

[ 191 ] Shortly before his death, he told an old friend, "I feel I no longer fit in with these times." [ 192 ] Coolidge is buried in Plymouth Notch Cemetery in Plymouth Notch, Vermont . The nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site. In July 1972, the State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors' center nearby to mark Coolidge's 100th birthday.

Legacy President Ronald Reagan in the White House Cabinet Room with a portrait of Coolidge in the background.

Despite being one of the most popular U.S. presidents while in office, Coolidge is generally rated below average by modern historians.

David Greenberg , a scholar from Rutgers University , said, "although the public liked and admired Calvin Coolidge during his tenure, the Great Depression that began in 1929 seriously eroded his reputation and changed public opinion about his policies".

[ 193 ] Historians have criticized Coolidge for his lack of assertiveness and have called him a "do nothing president" who enjoyed high public approval only because he was in office when things were going well around the world.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] Some historians have scrutinized Coolidge for signing laws that broadened federal regulatory authority and say it paved the way for corruption in future presidential administrations.

[ 196 ] In a 1982 Chicago Tribune survey of 49 historians, Coolidge was ranked the eighth-worst U.S. president.

[ 197 ] In 2006, British journalist William Shawcross said he believed Coolidge was the worst president of the 20th century.

[ 198 ] In a 2021 C-SPAN survey, historians ranked Coolidge 24th out of 44 presidents. They gave him high ratings for "moral authority" and "administrative skills" but poor ratings for "setting an agenda" and "pursuing equal justice".

[ 199 ] Although historians generally view Coolidge unfavorably, his hands-off government approach continues to resonate with modern conservatives and Republican politicians.

[ 200 ] In 1981, President Ronald Reagan publicly praised Coolidge's laissez-faire policy.

[ 193 ] Later, Reagan had a portrait of Thomas Jefferson in the White House Cabinet Room replaced by one of Coolidge.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] [ 203 ] [ 204 ] Radio, film, and commemorations Despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician, Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president. He made himself available to reporters, giving 520 press conferences, meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since.

[ 205 ] Coolidge's second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio. On December 6, 1923, his speech to Congress was broadcast on radio, [ 206 ] the first presidential radio address.

[ 207 ] Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927 , which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission . On August 11, 1924, Theodore W. Case , using the Phonofilm sound-on-film process he developed for Lee de Forest , filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn, making him the first president to appear in a sound film, President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds .

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. Navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans-Atlantic flight, Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and presented him with the Medal of Honor , [ 210 ] and the event was filmed.

[ 211 ] Official presidential portrait of Coolidge, 1932 The Sesquicentennial of American Independence Half Dollar , minted in 1926 Coolidge on a 1938 postage stamp Coolidge with reporters and cameramen, 1924 Collection of video clips of President Coolidge See also Coolidge, Arizona Coolidge Dam List of things named after Calvin Coolidge Presidency of Calvin Coolidge SS President Coolidge General: List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Notes ^ Coolidge was vice president under Warren G. Harding and became president upon Harding's death on August 2, 1923. As this was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1967, a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next ensuing election and inauguration.

^ Eleven years later, Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected to his third term and ultimately served over 12 years as president before he died in office.

^ See also the main article, Lawrence textile strike , for a full description.

^ The exact total was 1,117 out of 1,544 [ 63 ] ^ The tally was Coolidge 317,774, Long 192,673.

[ 72 ] References ^ "John Coolidge, Guardian of President's Legacy. Dies at 93" .

The New York Times . June 4, 2000 . Retrieved May 11, 2019 .

[He] had originally been John Calvin Coolidge, but dropped his first name to avoid confusion and later legally changed it.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , p. 111; McCoy 1967 , pp. 75–76.

^ McCoy 1967 , pp. 420–421; Greenberg 2006 , pp. 49–53.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 500.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 12–13; Greenberg 2006 , pp. 1–7.

^ Fieldstadt, Elisha (April 22, 2021).

"Presidents ranked from worst to best" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2021 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ "Significant Papers – Coolidge Prosperity Gave America the Reserve to Weather the Great Depression" .

Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation . Retrieved September 27, 2021 .

^ "The Pilgrim's Faith: Coolidge and Religion" .

www.coolidgefoundation.org . Retrieved December 15, 2019 .

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 22.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 17; McCoy 1967 , p. 5; White 1938 , p. 11.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 12.

^ Roberts 1995 , p. 199.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 7.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 24.

^ "Bold Park Pollard" .

Boston Herald . August 17, 1923 . Retrieved September 9, 2022 – via Brattleboro Reformer .

^ Kingsbury, Barbara B. (1994).

Chubb Hill Farm and Cavendish, Vermont: A Family and Town History, 1876–1960 . Cavendish, VT: Cavendish Historical Society. p. 101 – via Google Books .

^ Coolidge 1929 , p. 12.

^ White 1938 , pp. 43–44.

^ Shlaes 2013 , pp. 66–68.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 74–81; McCoy 1967 , pp. 22–26.

^ Bryson 2013 , p. 187.

^ White 1938 , p. 61.

^ Shapell, Benjamin; Willen, Sara (July 6, 2017).

"The Death of Calvin Coolidge Jr" . Shapell Manuscript Foundation . Retrieved April 8, 2019 .

^ Remini, Robert V.; Golway, Terry, eds. (2008).

Fellow Citizens: The Penguin Book of U.S. Presidential Inaugural Addresses . Penguin Books. p. 307.

ISBN 978-1440631573 .

^ "President Coolidge's Burden" .

The Atlantic . 2003 . Retrieved December 12, 2021 .

^ Martin 2000 .

^ Shlaes 2013 , p. 91.

^ Grinder, Darrin; Shaw, Steve (2016).

The Presidents & Their Faith: From George Washington to Barack Obama . Elevate Publishing.

ISBN 978-1943425778 .

^ a b Sobel 1998a , pp. 49–51.

^ White 1938 , pp. 51–53.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 83.

^ a b Fuess 1940 , pp. 84–85.

^ a b McCoy 1967 , p. 29.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 61.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 62; Fuess 1940 , p. 99.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 63–66.

^ White 1938 , pp. 99–102.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 68–69.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 72.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 106–107; Sobel 1998a , p. 74.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 108.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 76.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 110–111; McCoy 1967 , pp. 45–46.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , pp. 79–80; Fuess 1940 , p. 111.

^ a b c Coolidge 1919 , pp. 2–9.

^ White 1938 , p. 105.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 114–115.

^ a b White 1938 , p. 111.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 90–92.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 90; Fuess 1940 , p. 124.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 92–98; Fuess 1940 , pp. 133–136.

^ White 1938 , p. 117.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 139–142.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 145.

^ White 1938 , p. 125.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 151–152.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 107–110.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 112.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 115; McCoy 1967 , p. 76.

^ Russell 1975 , pp. 77–79; Sobel 1998a , p. 129.

^ Russell 1975 , pp. 86–87.

^ Russell 1975 , pp. 111–113; Sobel 1998a , pp. 133–136.

^ a b Russell 1975 , p. 113.

^ White 1938 , pp. 162–164.

^ Russell 1975 , p. 120.

^ White 1938 , pp. 164–165.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 142.

^ Russell 1975 , pp. 182–183.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , p. 143.

^ Shlaes 2013 , pp. 174–179.

^ Coolidge 1919 , pp. 222–224.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 238.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 239–243; McCoy 1967 , pp. 102–113.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 117; Fuess 1940 , p. 195.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 186.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 187; McCoy 1967 , p. 81.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 187–188.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 152–153.

^ White 1938 , pp. 198–199.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 259–260.

^ White 1938 , pp. 211–213.

^ a b c Sobel 1998a , pp. 204–212.

^ White 1938 , pp. 217–219.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 210–211.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 219; McCoy 1967 , p. 136.

^ Appleby, Joyce; Brinkley, Alan; Broussard, Albert S.; McPherson, James M.; Ritchie, Donald A. (2010).

The American Vision: Modern Times . Appleby, Joyce, 1929–2016, National Geographic Society (U.S.) (Teacher wraparound ed.). Columbus, Ohio: Glencoe/McGraw-Hill. p. 364.

ISBN 978-0078775154 .

OCLC 227926730 .

^ Hannaford , p. 169.

^ "Sees Hope in Dawes Plan" .

The New York Times . April 23, 1924. p. 2 . Retrieved June 10, 2019 .

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 217.

^ Cordery 2008 , p. 302.

^ Bryson 2013 , p. 194.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 243.

^ Greenberg 2006 , p. 60.

^ Buckley 2003 , pp. 615–618.

^ Gilbert 2005 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Greenberg 2006 , p. 9.

^ a b Fuess 1940 , pp. 308–309.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 310–315.

^ a b c "Confirms Daugherty's Story of Coolidge's Second Oath" .

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 226–228; Fuess 1940 , pp. 303–205; Ferrell 1998 , pp. 43–51.

^ White 1938 , p. 265.

^ White 1938 , pp. 272–277.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 328–329; Sobel 1998a , pp. 248–249.

^ Shlaes 2013 , p. 271.

^ a b Fuess 1940 , pp. 320–322.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 341.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 342; Sobel 1998a , p. 269.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 278–279.

^ Madsen 2015 , p. 168; Kappler 1929 ; Landry 2016 .

^ a b Fuess 1940 , pp. 345–346.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 300.

^ Coolidge 1929 , p. 190.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 300–301.

^ Sobel 1998a , pp. 302–303.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 354.

^ Shlaes 2013 , p. 324.

^ Ferrell 1998 , pp. 64–65.

^ Ferrell 1998 , pp. 66–72; Sobel 1998a , p. 318.

^ Ferrell 1998 , p. 72.

^ Sobel 1998b .

^ Greenberg 2006 , p. 47; Ferrell 1998 , p. 62.

^ Greenberg 2006 , pp. 131–132.

^ Radio Act of 1927 (Public Law 69-632), February 23, 1927, pp. 186–200.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , pp. 310–311; Greenberg 2006 , pp. 127–129.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , pp. 310–311; Fuess 1940 , pp. 382–383.

^ a b Ferrell 1998 , p. 170.

^ Ferrell 1998 , p. 174.

^ Rader, Benjamin (1971).

Federal Taxation in the 1920s: A Re-examination . Historian. pp.

432– 433.

^ Ferrell 1998 , p. 84; McCoy 1967 , pp. 234–235.

^ McCoy 1967 , p. 235.

^ a b Fuess 1940 , pp. 383–384.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , p. 327.

^ a b Fuess 1940 , p. 388; Ferrell 1998 , p. 93.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 331.

^ Ferrell 1998 , p. 86.

^ a b Sobel 1998a , p. 315; Barry 1997 , pp. 286–287; Greenberg 2006 , pp. 132–135.

^ McCoy 1967 , pp. 330–331.

^ Barry 1997 , pp. 372–274.

^ Greenberg 2006 , p. 135.

^ Roberts 2014 , p. 209.

^ "1924 Election Conflicting Minority Endorsements" .

^ Giffin, William W. (June 1983).

"The Political Realignment of Black Voters in Indianapolis, 1924" .

Indiana Magazine of History .

^ "1924 Election Conflicting Minority Endorsements" .

^ "The Mississippi River Great Flood of 1927 •" . September 18, 2017.

^ "US Forced Labor Camps: An Overlooked Chapter in American History – OpEd" .

Eurasia Review . June 28, 2023.

^ Shlaes 2013 , p. 6.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 250; McCoy 1967 , pp. 328–329.

^ s:Calvin Coolidge's First State of the Union Address ^ Deloria 1992 , p. 91.

^ Coolidge 1926 , pp. 31–36.

^ Coolidge 1926 , pp. 159–165.

^ "Calvin Coolidge: Foreign Affairs | Miller Center" .

Miller Center . October 4, 2016 . Retrieved October 28, 2018 .

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 342.

^ Joel Webster.

"Coolidge against the world: Peace, prosperity, and foreign policy in the 1920s" .

James Madison University . Retrieved February 1, 2020 .

^ a b McCoy 1967 , pp. 184–185.

^ McCoy 1967 , p. 360.

^ McCoy 1967 , p. 363.

^ a b Greenberg 2006 , pp. 114–116.

^ "Dawes Plan | World War I reparations" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved October 28, 2018 .

^ Marriott, Leo. (2005).

Treaty cruisers : the world's first international warship building competition . Barnsley: Pen & Sword Maritime. p. 12.

ISBN 1844151883 .

OCLC 60668374 .

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 421–423.

^ McCoy 1967 , pp. 380–381; Greenberg 2006 , pp. 123–124.

^ McCoy 1967 , p. 181.

^ a b c "Foreign Policy" .

coolidgefoundation.org . Retrieved October 28, 2018 .

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 349.

^ McCoy 1967 , pp. 178–179.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 414–417; Ferrell 1998 , pp. 122–123.

^ Miller Center 2016 .

^ Historian 2018 .

^ Kim 2014 .

^ "The Great Lakes–St. Lawrence Seaway System" .

Saint Lawrence Seaway . March 20, 2014 . Retrieved October 28, 2018 .

^ Greenberg 2006 , pp. 48–49.

^ Rusnak 1983 , pp. 270–271.

^ Polsky & Tkacheva 2002 , pp. 224–227.

^ Greenberg 2006 , pp. 111–112.

^ Senate Historian 2014 .

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 364.

^ Handler 1995 , pp. 113–122.

^ Galston , passim .

^ Freeman 2002 , p. 216.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 370.

^ White 1938 , p. 361.

^ Coolidge 1929 , p. 239.

^ Ferrell 1998 , p. 195.

^ Clemens & Daggett 1945 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 407.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 450–455.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 403; Ferrell 1998 , pp. 201–202.

^ Fuess 1940 , pp. 457–459; Greenberg 2006 , p. 153.

^ Fuess 1940 , p. 460.

^ Greenberg 2006 , pp. 154–155.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 410.

^ a b Greenberg, David.

Calvin Coolidge: Impact and Legacy .

Miller Center of Public Affairs . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Alsop, Joseph (July 28, 1966).

Assaying the Presidents .

The Calgary Albertan . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Schmid, Randolph (August 6, 2000).

Rating the presidents .

The Calgary Albertan . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Gerhardt, Michael J. (April 2013).

Calvin Coolidge, 1923–1929 .

University of Oxford . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Presidents rated: Truman, Ike near the top .

Chicago Tribune .

The World . February 4, 1982. Retrieved September 29, 2024.

^ Shawcross, William (November 11, 2006).

Calvin Coolidge .

The Independent . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Historians Survey Results: Calvin Coolidge .

C-SPAN . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Gold, Michael (December 6, 2023).

With One Vote for Calvin Coolidge, G.O.P. Hopefuls Name Their Favorite Presidents .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ 'Cool Cal' Coolidge back in White House .

The Miami News . February 4, 1981. Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Johnson, Haynes (June 14, 1981).

Dusting Off Calvin Coolidge .

The Tampa Tribune . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ White House pedlar of an ageless dream .

The Observer . January 29, 1984. Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Smith, Joseph B. (November 29, 1986).

Is Coolidge's Picture Coming Down?

.

The New York Times . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Greenberg 2006 , p. 7.

^ Sobel 1998a , p. 252.

^ Williams, Emrys (1967). "The Presidential address".

Radio and Electronic Engineer .

33 (1): 1.

doi : 10.1049/ree.1967.0001 .

ISSN 0033-7722 .

^ de Forest 1924 .

^ Mashon, Mike (November 3, 2016).

"Silent Cal, Not So Silent | Now See Hear!" .

blogs.loc.gov . Retrieved February 9, 2019 .

^ "Medal of Honor will be awarded to Lindbergh" .

UPI . May 23, 1927 . Retrieved February 9, 2019 .

^ Unknown (1927).

"Lindbergh honored by President Calvin Coolidge" .

Periscope Film .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2021 . Retrieved February 9, 2019 .

Works cited About Coolidge and his era "Confirms Daugherty's Story of Coolidge's Second Oath" .

St. Louis Post-Dispatch . St. Louis, Missouri. Associated Press. February 2, 1932. p. 1C . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

Barry, John M.

(1997).

Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How It Changed America .

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-0684840024 .

Buckley, Kerry W. (December 2003). "A President for the 'Great Silent Majority': Bruce Barton's Construction of Calvin Coolidge".

The New England Quarterly .

76 (4): 593– 626.

doi : 10.2307/1559844 .

ISSN 0028-4866 .

JSTOR 1559844 .

Bryson, Bill (2013), One Summer: America, 1927 , New York: Doubleday, ISBN 978-0767919401 Clemens, Cyril; Daggett, Athern P. (1945), "Coolidge's "I Do Not Choose to Run": Granite or Putty?", The New England Quarterly , 18 (2): 147– 163, doi : 10.2307/361282 , JSTOR 361282 Cordery, Stacy A. (2008).

Alice: Alice Roosevelt Longworth, from White House Princess to Washington Power Broker . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0143114277 .

Deloria, Vincent (1992).

American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century . University of Oklahoma Press.

ISBN 978-0806124247 .

Ferrell, Robert H.

(1998).

The Presidency of Calvin Coolidge .

University Press of Kansas .

ISBN 978-0700608928 .

Freeman, Jo (2002).

A Room at a Time: How Women Entered Party Politics . Rowman and Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0847698059 .

de Forest, Lee (1924).

"President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground (1924)" . Retrieved February 4, 2007 .

Fuess, Claude Moore (1940).

Calvin Coolidge: The Man from Vermont . Little, Brown.

OCLC 467020 .

Galston, Miriam (November 1995). "Activism and Restraint: The Evolution of Harlan Fiske Stone's Judicial Philosophy".

Tulane Law Revue .

70 : 137.

Gilbert, Robert E. (2005).

"Calvin Coolidge's Tragic Presidency: the Political Effects of Bereavement and Depression" .

Journal of American Studies .

39 (1): 87– 109.

doi : 10.1017/S0021875805009266 .

JSTOR 27557598 .

Greenberg, David (2006).

Calvin Coolidge . The American Presidents Series.

Times Books .

ISBN 978-0805069570 .

Handler, Milton C. (December 1995). "Clerking for Justice Harlan Fiske Stone".

Journal of Supreme Court History .

20 (1): 113– 122.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5818.1995.tb00098.x .

ISSN 1059-4329 .

S2CID 145379304 .

Historian (2018).

"Travels of President Calvin Coolidge" . U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian.

Kappler, Charles (1929).

"Indian affairs: laws and treaties Vol. IV, Treaties" . Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008 . Retrieved October 14, 2008 .

Kim, Susanna (December 18, 2014).

"Here's What Happened the Last Time a US President Visited Cuba" .

ABC News . Archived from the original on January 6, 2017 . Retrieved March 1, 2016 .

Landry, Alysa (July 26, 2016).

"First Sitting Prez Adopted by Tribe Starts Desecration of Mount Rushmore" .

IndianCountryToday.com . Archived from the original on August 4, 2019 . Retrieved June 11, 2018 .

Madsen, Deborah L., ed. (2015).

The Routledge Companion to Native American Literature . Routledge. p. 168.

ISBN 978-1317693192 .

Martin, Douglas (June 4, 2000).

"John Coolidge, Guardian of President's Legacy. Dies at 93" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

McCoy, Donald R. (1967).

Calvin Coolidge: The Quiet President . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1468017779 .

Miller Center (2016).

"Calvin Coolidge: Foreign Affairs" .

millercenter.org . Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016 . Retrieved February 24, 2016 .

Polsky, Andrew J.; Tkacheva, Olesya (Winter 2002).

"Legacies versus Politics: Herbert Hoover, Partisan Conflict, and the Symbolic Appeal of Associationalism in the 1920s" (PDF) .

International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society .

16 (2): 207– 235.

doi : 10.1023/A:1020525029722 .

hdl : 2027.42/43975 .

JSTOR 20020160 .

S2CID 142508983 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 20, 2017.

Roberts, Gary Boyd (1995). "Ancestors of American Presidents".

The Bimonthly Newsletter of the New England Historic Genealogical Society .

15 : 199.

Roberts, Jason (2014). "The Biographical Legacy of Calvin Coolidge and the 1924 Presidential Election". In Katherine A. S. Sibley (ed.).

A Companion to Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover . Wiley Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1118834473 .

Rusnak, Robert J. (Spring 1983). "Andrew W. Mellon: Reluctant Kingmaker".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

13 (2): 269– 278.

JSTOR 27547924 .

Russell, Francis (1975).

A City in Terror: Calvin Coolidge and the 1919 Boston Police Strike .

Beacon Press .

ISBN 978-0807050330 .

Senate Historian (2014).

"Charles G. Dawes, 30th Vice President (1925–1929)" .

US Senate . Archived from the original on November 6, 2014 . Retrieved February 2, 2017 .

Shlaes, Amity (2013).

Coolidge . New York: HarperCollins .

ISBN 978-0061967559 .

Sobel, Robert (1998a).

Coolidge: An American Enigma .

Regnery Publishing .

ISBN 978-0895264107 .

Sobel, Robert (1998b).

"Coolidge and American Business" . John F. Kennedy Library and Museum. Archived from the original on March 8, 2006.

White, William Allen (1938).

A Puritan in Babylon: The Story of Calvin Coolidge . Macmillan.

By Coolidge Coolidge, Calvin (1919).

Have Faith in Massachusetts: A Collection of Speeches and Messages (2nd ed.).

Houghton Mifflin .

Coolidge, Calvin (2004) [1926].

Foundations of the Republic: Speeches and Addresses . University Press of the Pacific.

ISBN 978-1410215987 .

Coolidge, Calvin (1929).

The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge . Cosmopolitan Book Corp.

OCLC 1228046023 .

Coolidge, Calvin (2001). Peter Hannaford (ed.).

The Quotable Calvin Coolidge: Sensible Words for a New Century . Images From The Past, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-1884592331 .

Further reading Library resources about Calvin Coolidge Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Calvin Coolidge Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Ferrell, Robert H.

(2008).

Grace Coolidge: The People's Lady in Silent Cal's White House . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0700615636 .

LCCN 2007045737 .

Felzenberg, Alvin S. (Fall 1998).

"Calvin Coolidge and Race: His Record in Dealing with the Racial Tensions of the 1920s" .

New England Journal of History .

55 (1): 83– 96.

Fuess, Claude M. (1953), "Calvin Coolidge – Twenty Years After" (PDF) , Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society , 63 (2): 351– 369 Hatfield, Mark O. (1997).

"Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923)" .

Vice Presidents of the United States, 1789–1993 . U.S. Government Printing Office. pp.

347– 354.

Postell, Joseph W. "Roaring Against Progressivism: The Principled Conservatism of Calvin Coolidge," in Joseph W. Postell and Johnathan O'Neill, eds.

Toward an American Conservatism: Constitutional Conservatism during the Progressive Era (2013) pp. 181–208.

Russell, Francis. "Coolidge and the Boston Police Strike." Antioch Review 16#4 (1956), pp. 403–15.

online Tacoma, Thomas J.

The Political Thought of Calvin Coolidge: Burkean Americanist (Lexington Books, 2020).

Tacoma, Thomas. "Calvin Coolidge and the Great Depression: A New Assessment." Independent Review 24.3 (2019): 361–380.

online Zibel, Howard J. "The Role of Calvin Coolidge in the Boston Police Strike of 1919," Industrial and Labor Relations Forum 6, no. 3 (November 1969): 299–318 Primary sources Coolidge, Calvin (1964). Howard H. Quint and Robert H. Ferrell (ed.).

The Talkative President: The Off–the–Record Press Conferences of Calvin Coolidge .

University of Massachusetts Press . Archived from the original on June 23, 2011 . Retrieved August 25, 2017 .

Coolidge, Grace (1992). Wikander, Lawrence E.; Ferrell, Robert H.

(eds.).

Grace Coolidge: An Autobiography . High Plains Pub. Co.

ISBN 978-1881019015 .

LCCN 92072825 .

External links Calvin Coolidge at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource External videos Q&A interview with Amity Shlaes on Coolidge , February 10, 2013 , C-SPAN Booknotes interview with Robert Sobel on Coolidge: An American Enigma , August 30, 1998 , C-SPAN Biographical information White House biography United States Congress.

"Calvin Coolidge (id: C000738)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Digital collections Works by Calvin Coolidge in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Calvin Coolidge at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Calvin Coolidge at the Internet Archive Text of a number of Coolidge speeches , Miller Center of Public Affairs Works by Calvin Coolidge at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Physical collections Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library & Museum Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation Calvin Coolidge: A Resource Guide , Library of Congress Calvin Coolidge Personal Manuscripts Other Calvin Coolidge collected news and commentary at The New York Times President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground , the first presidential film with sound recording "Life Portrait of Calvin Coolidge" , from C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits , September 27, 1999 Appearances on C-SPAN Calvin Coolidge at IMDb Newspaper clippings about Calvin Coolidge in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Calvin Coolidge 30th President of the United States (1923–1929) 29th Vice President of the United States (1921–1923) 48th Governor of Massachusetts (1919–1921) Life Early life and family history Boyhood home and first inauguration site gravesite Calvin Coolidge House Early career and marriage Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts Boston police strike (1919) Vice Presidency Retirement and death Presidential Library and Museum Presidency ( timeline ) First inauguration Second inauguration Industry and trade Taxation ( Revenue Act of 1924 , Revenue Act of 1926 , Revenue Act of 1928 ) Allegheny National Forest Civil rights ( Indian Citizenship Act of 1924 ) Immigration Act of 1924 Clarke–McNary Act Oil Pollution Act of 1924 World War Adjusted Compensation Act (1924) Opposition to farm subsidies ( McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill ) Judiciary Act of 1925 Federal Corrupt Practices Act Amendments of 1925 Railway Labor Act Passport Act of 1926 Flood control ( Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 , Flood Control Act of 1928 ) State of the Union Addresses (1926 1927) " I do not choose to run " (1927) Radio Act of 1927 Federal Radio Commission Equal-time rule McFadden Act (1927) Brave Little State of Vermont speech (1928) McSweeney-McNary Act of 1928 Migratory Bird Conservation Act Reed–Jenkins Act Foreign policy ( Banana Wars , United States occupation of Nicaragua (1912–1933), United States occupation of Haiti (1915–1934), United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–1924), Washington Naval Treaty (1922), Kellogg–Briand Pact (1928) Presidential transition of Herbert Hoover Cabinet Judicial appointments Harlan F. Stone Supreme Court nomination Elections 1918 Massachusetts gubernatorial election 1919 Massachusetts gubernatorial election 1920 Republican National Convention 1920 United States presidential election transition 1924 Republican National Convention 1924 United States presidential election Books The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge (1929) Public image Things named after Coolidge Sesquicentennial half dollar U.S. postage stamps Coolidge effect SS President Coolidge Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Family Grace Coolidge (wife) John Coolidge (son) John Calvin Coolidge Sr.

(father) Calvin Galusha Coolidge (grandfather) Arthur Brown , Olympia Brown , Charles A. Coolidge (cousins) Marcus A. Coolidge , Arthur W. Coolidge , Martha Coolidge , Carlos Coolidge (distant relations) Edmund Rice (ancestor) Rob Roy (family dog) Rebecca (pet raccoon) ← Warren G. Harding Herbert Hoover → ← Thomas R. Marshall Charles G. Dawes → Category Offices and distinctions Massachusetts House of Representatives Preceded by Moses M. Bassett Member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives 1907–1909 Succeeded by Charles A. Montgomery Massachusetts Senate Preceded by Allen T. Treadway Member of the Massachusetts Senate 1912–1915 Succeeded by John B. Hull Political offices Preceded by James W. O'Brien Mayor of Northampton, Massachusetts 1910–1912 Succeeded by William Feiker Preceded by Levi H. Greenwood President of the Massachusetts Senate 1914–1915 Succeeded by Henry Gordon Wells Preceded by Grafton D. Cushing Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts 1916–1919 Succeeded by Channing H. Cox Preceded by Samuel W. McCall Governor of Massachusetts 1919–1921 Preceded by Thomas R. Marshall Vice President of the United States 1921–1923 Succeeded by Charles G. Dawes Preceded by Warren G. Harding President of the United States 1923–1929 Succeeded by Herbert Hoover Party political offices Preceded by Grafton D. Cushing Republican nominee for Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts 1915, 1916, 1917 Succeeded by Channing H. Cox Preceded by Samuel W. McCall Republican nominee for Governor of Massachusetts 1918 , 1919 Succeeded by Channing H. Cox Preceded by Charles W. Fairbanks Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1920 Succeeded by Frank Orren Lowden Withdrew Preceded by Warren G. Harding Republican nominee for President of the United States 1924 Succeeded by Herbert Hoover Articles related to Calvin Coolidge v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Cabinet of President Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929) Vice President None (1923–1925) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1923–1925) Frank B. Kellogg (1925–1929) Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon (1923–1929) Secretary of War John W. Weeks (1923–1925) Dwight F. Davis (1925–1929) Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty (1923–1924) Harlan F. Stone (1924–1925) John G. Sargent (1925–1929) Postmaster General Harry S. New (1923–1929) Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby (1923–1924) Curtis D. Wilbur (1924–1929) Secretary of the Interior Hubert Work (1923–1928) Roy Owen West (1928–1929) Secretary of Agriculture Henry Cantwell Wallace (1923–1924) Howard Mason Gore (1924–1925) William Marion Jardine (1925–1929) Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover (1923–1928) William F. Whiting (1928–1929) Secretary of Labor James J. Davis (1923–1929) v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams ( 1789–1797 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1797–1801 ) Aaron Burr ( 1801–1805 ) George Clinton ( 1805–1812 ) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Joe Biden ( 2009–2017 ) Mike Pence ( 2017–2021 ) Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) JD Vance ( 2025–present ) Category List v t e Cabinet of President Warren G. Harding (1921–1923) Vice President Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes (1921–1923) Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon (1921–1923) Secretary of War John W. Weeks (1921–1923) Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty (1921–1923) Postmaster General Will H. Hays (1921–1922) Hubert Work (1922–1923) Harry S. New (1923) Secretary of the Navy Edwin Denby (1921–1923) Secretary of the Interior Albert B. Fall (1921–1923) Hubert Work (1923) Secretary of Agriculture Henry Cantwell Wallace (1921–1923) Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover (1921–1923) Secretary of Labor James J. Davis (1921–1923) v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Governors of Massachusetts Colony (1629–1686) Endecott Winthrop T. Dudley Haynes Vane Winthrop T. Dudley Bellingham Winthrop Endecott T. Dudley Winthrop Endecott T. Dudley Endecott Bellingham Endecott Bellingham Leverett Bradstreet Dominion (1686–1689) J. Dudley Andros Bradstreet Province (1692–1776) W. Phips Stoughton Bellomont Stoughton Governor's Council J. Dudley Governor's Council J. Dudley Tailer Shute Dummer Burnet Dummer Tailer Belcher Shirley S. Phips Shirley S. Phips Governor's Council Pownall Hutchinson Bernard Hutchinson Gage Commonwealth (since 1776) Hancock Cushing Bowdoin Hancock Adams Sumner Gill Governor's Council Strong Sullivan Lincoln Sr.

Gore Gerry Strong Brooks Eustis Morton Lincoln Jr.

Davis Armstrong Everett Morton Davis Morton Briggs Boutwell Clifford E. Washburn Gardner Banks Andrew Bullock Claflin W. Washburn Talbot Gaston Rice Talbot Long Butler Robinson Ames Brackett Russell Greenhalge Wolcott Crane Bates Douglas Guild Draper Foss Walsh McCall Coolidge Cox Fuller Allen Ely Curley Hurley Saltonstall Tobin Bradford Dever Herter Furcolo Volpe Peabody Volpe Sargent Dukakis King Dukakis Weld Cellucci Swift Romney Patrick Baker Healey Italics indicate acting officeholders v t e Lieutenant governors of Massachusetts Colony (1629–1686) Goffe Humphrey T. Dudley Ludlow Bellingham Winthrop T. Dudley Bellingham Endecott Winthrop T. Dudley Endecott T. Dudley Endecott Bellingham Willoughby Leverett Symonds Bradstreet Danforth Dominion (1686–1689) Stoughton Nicholson Province (1692–1776) Stoughton Povey Tailer Dummer Tailer S. Phips Hutchinson A. Oliver T. Oliver Commonwealth (since 1776) T. Cushing B. Lincoln Adams Gill S. Phillips Robbins L. Lincoln Cobb Gray W. Phillips L. Lincoln Jr.

Morton Winthrop Armstrong Hull Childs Reed Cushman Huntington Plunkett Brown Benchley Trask Goodrich Nesmith Hayden Claflin Tucker Talbot Knight Long Weston Ames Brackett Haile Wolcott Crane Bates Guild Draper Frothingham Luce Walsh Barry G. Cushing C. Coolidge Cox Fuller Allen Youngman Bacon Hurley Kelly Cahill Bradford A. Coolidge Sullivan Whittier R. Murphy McLaughin Bellotti Richardson Sargent Dwight O'Neill Kerry E. Murphy Cellucci Swift Healey Murray Polito Driscoll v t e Presidents of the Massachusetts Senate Cushing Powell Adams S. Phillips Adams Cobb Otis J. Bacon S. Dana Otis S. Dana J. Phillips Silsbee Mills S. Leland Lathrop Fowler Saltonstall Thorndike Pickman Bliss Mann M. Lawrence King Quincy P. Leland Robinson Quincy Lincoln Calhoun Scudder Bell Wilder Wilson Warren Cook Benchley Baker Upham Phelps Claflin Clifford Field Pond Brastow Pitman Brastow H. Coolidge Loring Cogswell Bishop Crocker Bruce Pillsbury Boardman Hartwell Sprague Pinkerton Butler G. Lawrence Smith Soule Jones W. Dana Chapple Treadway Greenwood C. Coolidge H. Wells McKnight Allen W. Wells G. Bacon Fish Moran Wragg Cotton Goodwin Hunt A. Coolidge Nicholson Richardson Dolan Richardson Furbush Holmes Powers Donahue Harrington Bulger Birmingham Travaglini Murray Rosenberg Chandler Spilka v t e ( ← 1916 ) 1920 United States presidential election ( → 1924 ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Warren G. Harding Vice President: Calvin Coolidge Other candidates Leonard Wood Frank Orren Lowden Hiram Johnson William Cameron Sproul Nicholas Murray Butler Calvin Coolidge Robert M. La Follette Jeter C. Pritchard Miles Poindexter Howard Sutherland Herbert Hoover Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: James M. Cox Vice President: Franklin D. Roosevelt Other candidates William Gibbs McAdoo A. Mitchell Palmer Al Smith John W. Davis Edward I. Edwards Woodrow Wilson (incumbent) Robert L. Owen Third party and independent candidates Socialist Party Nominee: Eugene V. Debs VP nominee: Seymour Stedman Farmer–Labor Party Nominee: Parley P. Christensen VP nominee: Max S. Hayes Prohibition Party Nominee: Aaron S. Watkins VP nominee: D. Leigh Colvin American Party Nominee: James E. Ferguson VP nominee: William J. Hough Socialist Labor Party Nominee: William Wesley Cox VP nominee: August Gillhaus Single Tax Nominee: Robert Colvin Macauley VP nominee: Richard C. Barnum Other 1920 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1920 ) 1924 United States presidential election ( → 1928 ) Republican Party ( Convention · Primaries ) Nominees President: Calvin Coolidge (incumbent) Vice President: Charles G. Dawes Other candidates Hiram Johnson Robert M. La Follette Democratic Party ( Convention · Primaries ) Nominees President: John W. Davis Vice President: Charles W. Bryan Other candidates William Gibbs McAdoo Al Smith campaign Oscar Underwood Progressive Party Nominees President: Robert M. La Follette Vice President: Burton K. Wheeler Other Third-party and independent candidates Communist Party Nominee: William Z. Foster VP nominee: Benjamin Gitlow Prohibition Party Nominee: Herman P. Faris VP nominee: Marie C. Brehm American Party Nominee: Gilbert Nations VP nominee: Charles Hiram Randall Other 1924 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1928 ) 1932 United States presidential election ( → 1936 ) Democratic Party ( Primaries · Convention ) Nominees President: Franklin D. Roosevelt Vice President: John Nance Garner Other candidates John Nance Garner William H. Murray James A. Reed Albert Ritchie Al Smith ( campaign ) Republican Party ( Primaries · Convention ) Nominees President: Herbert Hoover (incumbent) Vice President: Charles Curtis (incumbent) Other candidates John J. Blaine Calvin Coolidge Joseph I. France James W. Wadsworth Third party and independent candidates Communist Party Nominee: William Z. Foster VP nominee: James W. Ford Prohibition Party Nominee: William David Upshaw Socialist Party Nominee: Norman Thomas VP nominee: James H. Maurer Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Verne L. Reynolds VP nominee: John W. Aiken Independents James Renshaw Cox William Hope Harvey Other 1932 elections : House Senate v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal Portals : Biography Conservatism Law Politics Radio United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Chile Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Calvin_Coolidge&oldid=1306491136 " Categories : Calvin Coolidge 1872 births 1933 deaths 19th-century Congregationalists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century Congregationalists 20th-century members of the Massachusetts General Court 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century vice presidents of the United States 1920 United States vice-presidential candidates Activists for Native American rights American Indigenous rights activists American anti-lynching activists American Antiquarian Society members American autobiographers American Congregationalists American lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law American people of English descent Amherst College alumni Appleton family Candidates in the 1920 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1924 United States presidential election College Republicans Coolidge family Deaths from coronary thrombosis Governors of Massachusetts Harding administration cabinet members Lieutenant governors of Massachusetts Massachusetts city council members Massachusetts lawyers Massachusetts Republicans Massachusetts state senators Mayors of places in Massachusetts Members of the Massachusetts House of Representatives Members of the Sons of the American Revolution People from Plymouth, Vermont Politicians from Northampton, Massachusetts Presidents of the United States Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees Republican Party (United States) vice presidential nominees Republican Party governors of Massachusetts Republican Party presidents of the United States Republican Party vice presidents of the United States St. Johnsbury Academy alumni Vice presidents of the United States Writers from Northampton, Massachusetts Writers from Vermont Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from April 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Calvin Coolidge 130 languages Add topic

