Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Considerations for safe bookmark usage 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bookmark 30 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Malti 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marking Tool For other uses, see Bookmark (disambiguation) .

A book with a bound bookmark.

Book with florentine paper bookmark.

Fabric bookmark with Bedouin embroidery, Lakiya , Israel A metal bookmark with a fabric tassel and decorative beads A bookmark is a thin marking tool, commonly made of card , leather , or fabric , used to keep track of a reader's progress in a book and allow the reader to easily return to where the previous reading session ended.  Alternate materials for bookmarks are paper , metals like silver and brass, silk , wood , cord (sewing) , and plastic . Some books may have one or more bookmarks made of woven ribbon sewn into the binding. Furthermore, other bookmarks incorporate a page-flap that enables them to be clipped on a page.

History [ edit ] According to new results of the research done on the history of bookmarks, there are indications that bookmarks have accompanied codices since their first emergence in the 1st century AD.

[ 1 ] The earliest existing bookmark dates from the 6th century AD and it is made of ornamented leather lined with vellum on the back and was attached with a leather strap to the cover of a Coptic codex (Codex A, MS 813 Chester Beatty Library, Dublin).

[ 2 ] It was found near Sakkara, Egypt, under the ruins of the monastery Apa Jeremiah. Further earliest bookmarks and remnants of them have been found in Coptic codices dating from the 1st to the 11th century and in Carolingian codices from the 8th to the 12th century. Bookmarks were used throughout the medieval period, [ 3 ] consisting usually of a small parchment strip attached to the edge of folio (or a piece of cord attached to headband).

Modern bookmarks are available in a huge variety of materials in a multitude of designs and styles. Many are made of cardboard or heavy paper, but they are also constructed of paper, ribbon, fabric, felt, steel, wire, tin, beads, wood, plastic, vinyl, silver, gold, and other precious metals, some decorated with gemstones.

The first detached, and therefore collectible, bookmarkers began to appear in the 1850s. One of the first references to these is found in Mary Russell Mitford's Recollections of a Literary Life (1852): "I had no marker and the richly bound volume closed as if instinctively." Note the abbreviation of 'bookmarker' to 'marker'. The modern abbreviation is usually 'bookmark'. Historical bookmarks can be very valuable, and are sometimes collected along with other paper ephemera .

By the 1860s, attractive machine-woven markers were being manufactured, mainly in Coventry , England , the centre of the silk-ribbon industry. One of the earliest was produced by J.&J. Cash to mark the death of Albert, Prince Consort , in 1861. Thomas Stevens of Coventry soon became pre-eminent in the field and claimed to have nine hundred different designs.

Woven pictorial bookmarks produced by Thomas Steven , a 19th-century English silk weaver, starting around 1862, are called Stevengraphs .

[ 4 ] Woven silk bookmarks were very appreciated gifts in the Victorian Era and Stevens seemed to make one for every occasion and celebration. One Stevengraph read: All of the gifts which heaven bestows, there is one above all measure, and that's a friend midst all our woes, a friend is a found treasure to thee I give that sacred name, for thou art such to me, and ever proudly will I claim to be a friend to thee.

Most 19th-century bookmarks were intended for use in Bibles and prayer books and were made of ribbon, woven silk, or leather. By the 1880s the production of woven silk markers was declining and printed markers made of stiff paper or cardboard began to appear in significant numbers. This development paralleled the wider availability of books themselves, and the range of available bookmarkers soon expanded dramatically.

Considerations for safe bookmark usage [ edit ] Bookmarks that do not damage the books that they are used in should be acid-free, thin, so they will not indent the pages they rest between, and include no dyes or decorative materials that might bleed into the book's paper, with flat, thin, gentle edges.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Bookmark (World Wide Web) Dog ears Rotating bookmark References [ edit ] ^ Szirmai, J.A. (1999).

The Archeology of Medieval Bookbinding . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-085-967-904-6 .

^ Lamacraft, C.T. (1939).

Early Book-Bindings from a Coptic Monastery . The Library, Fourth Series, Vol. 20 (1940). pp.

214– 233.

^ For a 9th-century Carolingian bookmark see: Szirmai, J. A. (1999).

The archaeology of medieval bookbinding . Aldershot: Ashgate. p. 123.

ISBN 0-85967-904-7 .

For a 15th-century bookmark, see Medeltidshandskrift 34, Lund University Library.

^ Gordon Campbell (2006).

The Grove Encyclopedia of Decorative Arts . Vol. 2.

Oxford University Press . p. 395.

ISBN 978-0-19-518948-3 .

^ "Collecting Bookmarks | Book Collecting Guide" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bookmarks .

Earliest History of Bookmarks by Asim Maner World of Bookmarks ,  Reference site featuring history of bookmarks History of Bookmarks by Lois R. Densky-Wolff ( Archived 21 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine ) International Friends of Bookmarks (IFOB) , community website with much information about bookmarks v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases National United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bookmark&oldid=1294591889 " Category : Book terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 16:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bookmark 30 languages Add topic

