Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Examples 3 Consequences 4 Research and questions 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cultural literacy 7 languages العربية Español فارسی 한국어 Igbo 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ability to understand a culture This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cultural literacy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cultural literacy is a term coined by American educator and literary critic E. D. Hirsch , referring to the ability to understand and participate fluently in a given culture. Cultural literacy is an analogy to literacy proper (the ability to read and write letters). A literate reader knows the object-language's alphabet, grammar, and a sufficient set of vocabulary; a culturally literate person knows a given culture's signs and symbols , including its language, particular dialectic , stories, [ 1 ] entertainment, idioms , idiosyncrasies, and so on.  The culturally literate person is able to talk to and understand others of that culture with fluency.

Causes [ edit ] Children of a given culture typically become culturally literate there via the process of enculturation . Enculturation seems to occur naturally, being intertwined with education, play, family relationships, friendships, etc. The cause of cultural literacy is a more difficult question when considering acculturation of immigrants, outsiders, cultural minorities, strangers, guests, etc.

Literacy of a given culture seems to arise over time with consistent exposure to and participation in that culture, especially certain key cultural strongholds, like business, story, arts, education, history, religion, and family. One could become literate in an oral culture (with no written language or recorded media) only by extended conversation. Alternatively, one could become literate for a written culture through conversation as well as reading culturally relevant books or exposure to culturally relevant films, plays, monuments, television shows, etc.

Western culture in general and Anglo-American culture in particular is a bibliocentric culture.  It often trades in allusions to the Christian Bible, [ 2 ] the influential works of Early Modern English such as works of William Shakespeare , the Thomas Cranmer Book of Common Prayer , Geoffrey Chaucer 's poetry, and many others. Knowledge of these books (among others) contributes largely to cultural literacy in the west. However, also essential are exposure to the art, history, and the lived experience of members of that culture.

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] For example, in 1908 British author G. K. Chesterton wrote, "Complete self-confidence is a weakness... the man who has [self-confidence] has ' Hanwell ' written on his face as plain as it is written on that omnibus".

[ 3 ] This statement, especially the latter half, might be opaque to a reader from outside the United Kingdom, who does not know that "omnibus" is a less common British word for "bus" and "Hanwell" was the name of a (now defunct) insane asylum .

Consequences [ edit ] The benefits and detriments of cultural literacy are debated.

[ by whom?

] For example, social mobility increases when one is able to comfortably participate in conversation with gatekeepers like employers and teachers. Non-native members of a culture, such as missionaries to a foreign land or refugees from a native land, may experience negative consequences due to cultural illiteracy. However, the achievement of cultural literacy may seem to come at a cost to one's own native culture.

[ citation needed ] Research and questions [ edit ] Discussions of cultural literacy have given rise to several controversial questions: [ 4 ] The Literature Question: How important are books to cultural literacy in the west? And which books?

The Content Question: What kinds of knowledge are important for cultural literacy? Knowing such and such facts, names, dates or more ethereal experiences like having heard such and such a song?

The Minority Question: Is cultural literacy part of the hegemony of the dominant culture ?

The Multicultural Question: Which culture are we talking about when we say "cultural" literacy? Should we be talking about one or several—and which one(s)?

[ 5 ] The Education Question: Should advancing cultural literacy be one of the goals of education? If so, what is the best means of doing so?

The Assessment Question: How do we evaluate cultural literacy? Is there a best way to test someone's cultural literacy?

See also [ edit ] Bildung Cultural competence Cultural sensitivity Educational essentialism Great books Intercultural communication Scientific literacy References [ edit ] ^ Watson, Rita (Oct 1987). "Learning Words from Linguistic Expressions: Definition and Narrative".

Research in the Teaching of English .

21 (3): 298– 317.

JSTOR 40171117 .

^ Mangalwadi, Vishal Mangalwadi (2012).

The Book that Made Your World . Thomas Nelson. p. 464.

ISBN 978-1595555458 .

^ Chesterton, G. K. (1908).

Orthodoxy . Chapter II, "The Maniac".

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Applebee, Arthur N.[A.N.A] (Oct 1987). "Musings...: Cultural Literacy".

Research in the Teaching of English .

21 (3): 229– 231.

JSTOR 40171113 .

^ Wiener, Harvey S. (Sep 1985). "Multicultural Literacy for Faculty: Accommodating Non-Native Speakers of English in Content Courses".

Rhetoric Review .

4 (1): 100– 107.

doi : 10.1080/07350198509359111 .

JSTOR 465770 .

Further reading [ edit ] E. D. Hirsch Jr.

(1987).

Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 0-395-43095-X .

Hirsch, Eric Donald; Kett, Joseph F.; Trefil, James S. (2002).

The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy (3rd ed.). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 0-618-22647-8 .

Christenbury, Leila "Cultural Literacy: A Terrible Idea Whose Time Has Come" The English Journal 78 .1 (January 1989), pp. 14–17.

Broudy, Harry S.

(Spring 1990). "Cultural Literacy and General Education".

Journal of Aesthetic Education .

24 (1, Special Issue: Cultural Literacy and Arts Education): 7– 16.

doi : 10.2307/3332851 .

JSTOR 3332851 .

Anson, Chris M. "Book Lists, Cultural Literacy, and the Stagnation of Discourse" The English Journal 77 .2 (February 1988), pp. 14–18.

Zurmuehlen, Marilyn "Serious Pursuit of Cultural Trivialization" Art Education 42 .6 (November 1989), pp. 46–49.

Simpson, Alan "The Uses of "Cultural Literacy": A British View" Journal of Aesthetic Education 25 .4, 25th Anniversary Issue Winter, 1991), pp. 65–73.

Reedy, Jeremiah "Cultural Literacy and the Classics" The Classical Journal 84 .1 (October 1988), pp. 41–46.

Murray, Denise E.

Diversity as Resource. Redefining Cultural Literacy (Alexandria, Virginia) 1994.

Bernard Schweizer . "Cultural Literacy: Is It Time to Revisit the Debate?" Thought & Action 25 (Fall 2009).

"Cultural Literacy Tests - Challenge Yourself With Our Free Online Cultural Literacy Tests" .

The Literacy Company . Archived from the original on 2021-07-29 . Retrieved 2014-02-26 .

v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category v t e Literacy Learning Adolescent literacy Emergent literacy Family literacy Functional illiteracy Phonics Post-literacy Whole language Locations List of countries by literacy rate Canada India Bihar New Zealand Tokelau Romania United States Institutions International Literacy Association International Literacy Day National Council of Teachers of English No Child Left Behind Act People Marie Clay Ruth Johnson Colvin Paulo Freire James Paul Gee Griffith Jones Frank Laubach Brian Street Other types AI Agricultural Braille Carbon Computational Computer Critical Cultural Data Digital Diaspora Ecological Electracy Emotional Faith Financial Geo-literacy Graph Health Mental health Occupational Safety and Health Information Information literacies Information and media Legal Media Metaliteracy Multiliteracies Musical Numeracy Object Oracy Political Power Physical Psychological Racial Religious Scientific Social Statistical Technological Transliteracy Visual Web Related Aliteracy Asemic writing Children's literature Composition studies Dick and Jane Dyslexia Literacy test Media consumption Orality Oral literature Post-literate society Reading Writing Writing system v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_literacy&oldid=1302400204 " Categories : Cultural concepts Literacy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2020 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 05:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural literacy 7 languages Add topic

