Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 Works cited 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Edward N. Zalta 9 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1952) Edward N. Zalta Zalta speaking at the Wikimania 2015 Born Edward Nouri Zalta ( 1952-03-16 ) March 16, 1952 (age 73) Education Education Rice University ( BA ) University of Massachusetts Amherst ( PhD ) Thesis An Introduction to a Theory of Abstract Objects (1981) Doctoral advisor Terence Parsons Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Mathematical platonism Neo-logicism [ 1 ] ( Stanford–Edmonton School ) [ 2 ] Mathematical structuralism ( abstract variety ) [ 3 ] Institutions University of Auckland Rice University University of Salzburg CSLI , Stanford University Main interests Metaphysics Notable ideas Abstract object theory , exemplifying and encoding a property as two modes of predication , Platonized naturalism , [ 4 ] computational metaphysics Edward Nouri Zalta [ 5 ] ( / ˈ z ɔː l t ə / ; born March 16, 1952) is an American philosopher who is a senior research scholar at the Center for the Study of Language and Information at Stanford University . He received his BA from Rice University in 1975 and his PhD from the University of Massachusetts Amherst in 1981, both in philosophy .

[ 5 ] Zalta has taught courses at Stanford University , Rice University , the University of Salzburg , and the University of Auckland . Zalta is also the Principal Editor of the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

[ 6 ] Research [ edit ] Edward N. Zalta. "The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Issues Faced by Academic Reference Works That May Be of Interest to Wikipedians", Wikimania 2015 , Mexico City.

Zalta's most notable philosophical position is descended from the positions of Alexius Meinong and Ernst Mally , [ 7 ] who suggested that there are many non-existent objects . On Zalta's account, some objects (the ordinary concrete ones around us, like tables and chairs) exemplify properties, while others ( abstract objects like numbers, and what others would call "non-existent objects", like the round square , and the mountain made entirely of gold) merely encode them.

[ 8 ] While the objects that exemplify properties are discovered through traditional empirical means, a simple set of axioms allows us to know about objects that encode properties.

[ 9 ] For every set of properties, there is exactly one object that encodes exactly that set of properties and no others.

[ 10 ] This allows for a formalized ontology .

References [ edit ] ^ Tennant, Neil (August 21, 2013) [First published August 21, 2013].

"Logicism and Neologicism" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.). Stanford University: The Metaphysics Research Lab (published November 3, 2017).

ISSN 1095-5054 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

^ st-andrews.ac.uk Archived December 24, 2006, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, "A Logically Coherent Ante Rem Structuralism " , "Ontological Dependence Workshop, University of Bristol, February 2011.

^ Linsky, B., and Zalta, E., 1995, "Naturalized Platonism vs. Platonized Naturalism", The Journal of Philosophy , 92 (10): 525–555.

^ a b Zalta, Edward N. (2009).

An Introduction to a Theory of Abstract Objects (1981) (Thesis). ScholarWorks@ UMass Amherst .

doi : 10.7275/f32y-fm90 . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ "Editorial Information" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2018 ed.). Stanford University: The Metaphysics Research Lab. March 21, 2018.

ISSN 1095-5054 . Retrieved May 31, 2018 .

Principal Editor: Edward N. Zalta, Senior Research Scholar, Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University .

^ Zalta 1983 , p. xi.

^ Zalta 1983 , p. 33.

^ Zalta 1983 , p. 36.

^ Zalta 1983 , p. 35.

Works cited [ edit ] Anderson, David J.; Zalta, Edward N. (2004). "Frege, Boolos, and Logical Objects".

Journal of Philosophical Logic .

33 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1023/B:LOGI.0000019236.64896.fd .

S2CID 6620015 .

Zalta, Edward N. (1983).

Abstract Objects: An Introduction to Axiomatic Metaphysics . Synthese Library. Vol. 160. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-90-277-1474-9 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Edward N. Zalta at Wikimedia Commons Official website v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH PhilPeople People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of an American philosopher is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edward_N._Zalta&oldid=1278629791 " Categories : 1952 births 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers American epistemologists Living people American metaphysicians Ontologists American philosophers of language American philosophers of logic American philosophers of mathematics American philosophers of mind Rationalists Rice University alumni Rice University staff Stanford University staff University of Massachusetts Amherst College of Humanities and Fine Arts alumni American philosopher stubs Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2022 Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing video clips All stub articles This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 16:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edward N. Zalta 9 languages Add topic

