Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Eduard Heine 28 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar मराठी مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1821–1881) Eduard Heine Heinrich Eduard Heine Born ( 1821-03-16 ) 16 March 1821 Berlin , Prussia Died 21 October 1881 (1881-10-21) (aged 60) Halle , Prussia Nationality German Alma mater University of Berlin Known for Uniform continuity Heine–Borel theorem Awards Gauss Medal Scientific career Fields Mathematician Institutions University of Bonn University of Halle Doctoral advisor Enno Dirksen Martin Ohm Heinrich Eduard Heine (16 March 1821 – 21 October 1881) was a German mathematician .

Heine became known for results on special functions and in real analysis . In particular, he authored an important treatise on spherical harmonics and Legendre functions ( Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen ). He also investigated basic hypergeometric series . He introduced the Mehler–Heine formula .

Biography [ edit ] Heinrich Eduard Heine was born on 16 March 1821 in Berlin, as the eighth child of banker Karl Heine and his wife Henriette Märtens. Eduard was initially home schooled , then studied at the Friedrichswerdersche Gymnasium and Köllnische Gymnasium in Berlin.

[ 1 ] In 1838, after graduating from gymnasium, he enrolled at the University of Berlin , but transferred to the University of Göttingen to attend the mathematics lectures of Carl Friedrich Gauss and Moritz Stern . In 1840 Heine returned to Berlin, where he studied mathematics under Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet , while also attending classes of Jakob Steiner and Johann Franz Encke . In 1842 he was awarded a PhD by the University of Berlin for a thesis on differential equations submitted with Enno Dirksen and Martin Ohm as advisors. Heine dedicated the doctoral thesis to his professor Gustav Dirichlet. Next he went to the University of Königsberg to participate in the mathematical seminar of Carl Gustav Jacobi , while also following mathematical physics classes of Franz Ernst Neumann . In Königsberg Heine got in contact with fellow students Gustav Kirchhoff and Philipp Ludwig von Seidel .

[ 2 ] In 1844 Heine went for a teaching position at the University of Bonn , passing his habilitation and starting as a privatdozent . He continued his research in mathematics in Bonn and, in 1848, was promoted to extraordinary professor . In 1850 he married Sophie Wolff, the daughter of a Berlin merchant; the couple had five children, four daughters and one son. In 1856 Heine moved as a full professor to the University of Halle , where he remained for the rest of his life. From 1864 to 1865, he served as a rector of the university. In 1875, the University of Göttingen offered Heine a mathematics chair but he decided to reject the offer and remain in Halle. In 1877, at the centenary of Gauss's birth, he was awarded the Gauss Medal for his research.

[ 2 ] Eduard Heine died on 21 October 1881 in Halle.

[ 2 ] Selected works [ edit ] De aequationibus nonnullis differentialibus (Berlin, 1842) Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen (G. Reimer, Berlin, 1861) Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen, Theorie und Anwendungen (Volume 1) (2nd ed., G. Reimer, Berlin, 1878) Handbuch der Kugelfunctionen, Theorie und Anwendungen (Volume 2) (2nd ed., G. Reimer, Berlin, 1881) See also [ edit ] Basic hypergeometric series Andréief–Heine identity Heine–Borel theorem Heine–Cantor theorem Heine definition of continuity Heine's Reciprocal Square Root Identity Heine–Stieltjes polynomials Formalism (philosophy of mathematics) Limit of a function List of things named after Eduard Heine References [ edit ] ^ Narins, Brigham (2001).

World of mathematics . Gale Group. p. 289.

ISBN 978-0-7876-5064-3 .

^ a b c Goebel, M.; Ka Richter; H. Schlosser.

"Heinrich Eduard Heine (1821–1881)" .

University of Halle . Retrieved 2011-12-07 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Eduard Heine" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Eduard Heine at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Argentina Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eduard_Heine&oldid=1294172483 " Categories : 1821 births 1881 deaths 19th-century German mathematicians German mathematical analysts Mathematicians from Berlin Köllnisches Gymnasium alumni University of Göttingen alumni Humboldt University of Berlin alumni University of Königsberg alumni Academic staff of the University of Bonn Academic staff of the Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg Mathematicians from the Kingdom of Prussia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eduard Heine 28 languages Add topic

