Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Roger Edwards (meteorologist) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American meteorologist Roger Edwards Born Dallas , Texas Alma mater University of Oklahoma Known for Weather forecasting , storm chasing and ethical positions thereof, Electronic Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology Spouse Elke (Ueblacker) Edwards Scientific career Fields Meteorology Institutions National Hurricane Center , Storm Prediction Center Academic advisors Charles A. Doswell III Website www .stormeyes .org /tornado / Roger Edwards is an American meteorologist and expert on severe convective storms ( thunderstorms ). He is the co-founder and editor-in-chief of the Electronic Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology ( EJSSM ).

Biography [ edit ] Edwards was born in Dallas , Texas and attended Woodrow Wilson High School . He earned a B.S. in meteorology from the University of Oklahoma (OU) in 1989 and worked as a meteorological aide at the National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL) as an undergraduate. Here he worked under the direction and mentorship of Don Burgess and participated in field research, including with the TOtable Tornado Observatory (TOTO) team.

[ 1 ] Edwards left graduate work at OU to accept a meteorologist position at the National Hurricane Center (NHC) where he worked from 1990 to 1993. He joined the National Severe Storms Forecast Center (NSSFC), now the Storm Prediction Center (SPC), in 1993, where he worked as a lead forecaster until his retirement on December 31, 2024.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Edwards is an expert and is outspoken on issues of weather forecasting , on public safety, particularly regarding tornado preparedness for large event venues, schools, and other large congregations of people, and on storm spotter training. He also has a research focus on tropical cyclone tornadoes . He has authored and co-authored as well as reviewed papers in American Meteorological Society (AMS) journals and conferences.

[ 4 ] With his expertise and emphasis on public outreach, Edwards is frequently interviewed by the media and is invited to speak at conferences across the country. He maintains the Online Tornado FAQ section at the SPC website. He is a storm chaser and is known for strong stances on storm chaser conduct and responsibility.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He was a forecaster for Project VORTEX in 1994 and deployed mobile mesonet vehicles and in-situ probes for TWISTEX in 2008. Edwards was a contributor to Storm Track magazine and maintained the storm Storm Chase FAQ at its associated website. He co-founded with David M. Schultz and serves as editor-in-chief of the open access Electronic Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology . Edwards served for fives years as the Local Steward representing SPC for the National Weather Service Employees Organization (NWSEO).

Edwards is married to Elke (Ueblacker) Edwards and they have two children. Elke is also a storm chaser and photographer, and Roger enjoys travel, field geology, hiking, softball, gardening, and fishing.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] List of tropical cyclone-spawned tornadoes References [ edit ] ^ Cohen, Ariel; Keli Pirtle (January 20, 2015).

"Roger Edwards, Lead Forecaster, Operations Branch, Storm Prediction Center" .

Staff Profiles . Storm Prediction Center . Retrieved 2015-04-30 .

^ Edwards, Roger (2013).

"Curriculum Vitae" . Retrieved 2014-07-05 .

^ Edwards, Roger; Grams, Jeremy (2024-12-31).

"Day 1 Convective Outlook" .

Storm Prediction Center . Retrieved 2024-12-31 .

^ a b Edwards, Roger.

"Roger Edwards" .

About Us . StormEyes.org . Retrieved 2014-07-05 .

^ Thompson, Richard L.; R. Edwards (2011).

"Cancer Within" . Retrieved 2014-07-05 .

^ Edwards, Roger; C. Doswell (1995).

"Irresponsible Media Storm Chase Practices" . Retrieved 2014-07-05 .

External links [ edit ] Personal website Weather or Not: Severe Outflow by Roger Edwards (blog) Storms Observed: Roger and Elke's Chase Blog Roger Edwards at IMDb What You See Really Does Matter (Roger Edwards, Storm Track ) Not Obeying Stupid Rules ( WeatherBrains interview, Dec 2, 2013) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roger_Edwards_(meteorologist)&oldid=1266448140 " Categories : American meteorologists Storm chasers University of Oklahoma alumni Living people People from Dallas National Weather Service people Woodrow Wilson High School (Dallas) alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 31 December 2024, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roger Edwards (meteorologist) Add languages Add topic

