Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gallery 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Summit 67 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kurdî Lietuvių Lombard Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Summit (topography) ) Point on a surface with a higher elevation than all immediately adjacent points This article is about a topographic term. For meetings between heads of state, see Summit (meeting) . For other uses, see Summit (disambiguation) .

A climber taking the final few steps to the 6,160 m (20,210 ft) [ 1 ] summit of Imja Tse (Island Peak) in Nepal , 2004 View from the summit of Switzerland 's highest peak, Monte Rosa A summit is a point on a surface that is higher in elevation than all points immediately adjacent to it. The topographic terms acme , apex , peak ( mountain peak ), and zenith are synonymous .

The term top ( mountain top ) is generally used only for a mountain peak that is located at some distance from the nearest point of higher elevation. For example, a big, massive rock next to the main summit of a mountain is not considered a summit. Summits near a higher peak, with some prominence or isolation , but not reaching a certain cutoff value for the quantities, are often considered subsummits (or subpeaks ) of the higher peak, and are considered part of the same mountain. A pyramidal peak is an exaggerated form produced by ice erosion of a mountain top.

For summits that are permanently covered in significant layers of ice, the height may be measured by the highest point of rock (rock height) or the highest point of permanent solid ice (snow height).

The highest summit in the world is Mount Everest with a height of 8,848.86 m (29,031.7 ft) above sea level . The first official ascent was made by Tenzing Norgay and Sir Edmund Hillary . They reached the mountain's peak in 1953.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Whether a highest point is classified as a summit, a sub peak or a separate mountain is subjective. The International Climbing and Mountaineering Federation 's definition of a 4,000 m peak is that it has a prominence of 30 metres (98 ft) or more; it is a mountain summit if it has a prominence of at least 300 metres (980 ft).

[ 4 ] Otherwise, it is a subpeak.

Siskiyou Mountain Summit sign along Interstate 5 in Oregon , marking the highest point along the highway at 4,310 ft (1,310 m) Summit may also refer to the highest point along a line, trail, or route. In many parts of the Western United States , the term summit is used for the highest point along a road, highway, or railroad, more commonly referred to as a pass . For example, the highest point along Interstate 80 in California is referred to as Donner Summit and the highest point on Interstate 5 is Siskiyou Mountain Summit . This can lead to confusion as to whether a labeled "summit" is a pass or a peak.

Gallery [ edit ] The summit of Mount Damavand , Iran Doso Doyabi , one of the highest peaks entirely within Nevada , United States Mount Elbrus and its two peaks ( Caucasus , Russia) See also [ edit ] Geoid – Ocean shape without winds and tides Hill – Landform that extends above the surrounding terrain Nadir (topography) Summit accordance Seven Summits – Set of highest mountains on each of the seven continents References [ edit ] ^ "Nepal Mountaineering Association" . 2008 . Retrieved 2 June 2011 .

^ Lyons, Kate (2017-05-21).

"Mount Everest's Hillary Step has collapsed, mountaineer confirms" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on Dec 31, 2017 . Retrieved 2017-12-10 .

^ "Everest" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 2017-12-10 .

^ UIAA – International Climbing and Mountaineering Federation (22 February 2023).

"Mountain Classification: 4000m Summits in Alps" . Retrieved 2024-01-29 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Summits .

Peak finder World Mountain Peak Map - Map of mountain peaks higher than 1000m.

Summit Climbing Gear List peakbagger.com Information and statistics about the mountain peaks and mountain ranges of the world peakbucket.com The activity tracking website for peakbaggers worldwide peakery.com Worldwide peakbagging community with over 300,000 peak summit logs and peak lists peakbook.org International peakbagging community with worldwide peak lists peakhunter.org Global summit log project with crowd sourced peak data hill-bagging.co.uk Database and logging of British and Irish hills v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons Portal : Mountains Authority control databases National Germany Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Summit&oldid=1299290399 " Categories : Summits Geodesy Cartography Physical geography Slope landforms Surveying Topography Oronyms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 14:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Summit 67 languages Add topic

