Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Gallery 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nicolas-André Monsiau 6 languages Català Français Italiano مصرى Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French artist and draughtsman (1754-1837) Nicolas-André Monsiau Self-portrait of Monsiau in 1827 Born 1754 Paris , France Died May 31, 1837 (1837-05-31) (aged 83) Paris , France Movement Neoclassicism Nicolas-André Monsiau (1754 – 31 May 1837) was a French history painter and a refined draughtsman [ 1 ] who turned to book illustration to supplement his income when the French Revolution disrupted patronage. His Poussiniste drawing style and coloring marked his conservative art in the age of Neoclassicism .

Background [ edit ] His training at the school of the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture , Paris, was under the direction of Jean-François Pierre Peyron . An early patron, the marquis de Corberon, paid for a sojourn at Rome, where he studied at the French Academy in Rome from 1776. On his return to Paris, he was unable to exhibit in the annual Paris salons, which were closed to all but those who had been received ( "agréé" ) by the Académie or were members, under the Ancien Régime .  Instead he found an outlet in the smaller Salon de la corréspondance , where in 1782 he showed a tenebrist Piquant effect of the light of a lamp.

Two years later he was received at the Académie with a historical subject, Alexander taming Bucephalus and was made a member 3 October 1787, his second attempt, on the strength of The Death of Agis .

The influence of Jacques-Louis David , an acquaintance from Monsiau's days in Rome, is most vividly represented by Monsiau's Ulysses, after returning to his palace and slaying Penelope's suitors, orders the women to remove the corpses (1791 Salon), where the action is played out in a shallow frieze-like space defined by a colonnade parallel to the picture plane.

[ 2 ] In his best-known painting, Zeuxis choosing among the most beautiful girls of Crotona , shown at the Salon of 1791, [ 3 ] Monsiau illustrates an anecdote of the painter Zeuxis , recorded in Pliny's Natural History , that exemplifies an essential aspect of the Classical approach to artistic creation, in the artist's refining an ideal Art by selecting from among the lesser beauties of Nature.

Monsiau's great public commission was a commemoration of the occasion on 26 January 1802, at which Napoleon delivered an authoritarian constitution to the Cisalpine Republic at a convocation of notables (the consulta ) at Lyon.

François Gérard had turned down the commission, preferring to continue his series of individual portraits of the Bonapartes. Monsiau received the commission in 1806; the finished painting was exhibited at the Salon of 1808 and was installed at the Tuileries the following year.

Monsiau was among the first history painters to depict scenes from modern history that were not commemorations of battles. He showed Molière reading Tartuffe at the house of Ninon de Lenclos at the Salon of 1802 . It was engraved by Jean-Louis Anselin . His painting of Louis XVI giving instructions to the sea captain-explorer La Pérouse before his attempted circumnavigation was exhibited at the Salon of 1817 and was purchased for the recently restored Louis XVIII .

His portrayal of a sensational episode in which an escaped lion from the Grand Ducal menagerie in Florence had dropped a child it had picked up, without harming it, was exhibited at the Salon of 1801 and is conserved in the Louvre .

Among his pupils was the portrait draughtsman Louis Letronne (1790–1842), whose pencil portrait of Ludwig van Beethoven is iconic.

Gallery [ edit ] Works by Monsiau La Folie conduisant l'Amour aveugle, (1796), Paris Aspasia Conversing with Socrates and Alcibiades (1801), Pushkin Museum.

The Lion of Florence (1801), Louvre .

Aspasia Conversing with the Most Illustrious Men of Athens (1806) Les Membres de la Consulta de la République Cisalpine (1808), Versailles.

Portrait of President Thomas Berthereau (1811) Louis XVI giving his instructions to La Pérouse, ship's captain for his voyage of exploration around the world, in the presence of the Marquis of Castries, Minister for the Navy, 29 June 1785 (1817), Versailles.

Alexandre et Diogène (1818), musée de Rouen .

References [ edit ] ^ Even after his reception at the Académie, he continued to show finished drawings on historical subjects. Monsiau's pencil portrait drawings are less well-known: a portrait of the sculptor Houdon is at the Minneapolis Institute of Art.

^ Conserved in the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts. ( Illustrated ).

^ Conserved in the Art Gallery of Ontario , Toronto.

Sources [ edit ] Benezit, Dictionnaire des Peintres, Sculpteurs, Dessinateurs et Graveurs .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nicolas-André Monsiau .

Nicolas-André Monsiau (French) ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nicolas-André_Monsiau&oldid=1289356507 " Categories : 18th-century French painters French male painters 19th-century French painters 1754 births 1837 deaths 19th-century painters of historical subjects French draughtsmen 19th-century French male artists 18th-century French male artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 02:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nicolas-André Monsiau 6 languages Add topic

