Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Associated weather 3 Climatic influence on economy 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents South Atlantic High 6 languages Español فارسی Français Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 25°00′S 15°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 25.000°S 15.000°W ﻿ / -25.000; -15.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Semipermanent anticyclone over the Atlantic Ocean "St. Helena High" redirects here. For the school, see St. Helena High School .

South Atlantic High on the right.

South Atlantic High is a semipermanent pressure high centered at about 25°S , 15°W , in the Atlantic Ocean . It is also called the St. Helena High , Saint Helena island being the only land in the area. It can stretch thousands of miles across the South Atlantic.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This does not mean that the position and the intensity of this anticyclone are permanent, but just that there is an anticyclone on the maps describing the average monthly pressure. This area of high pressure is part of the great subtropical belt of anticyclones called the subtropical ridge .

Formation [ edit ] Hadley cell transporting heat and humidity from the Tropics toward the mid-latitudes.

In the Horse latitudes , generally in the region between 30 and 35 degrees of north and south latitude, there are more or less permanent highs. This is the subsiding part of Hadley cells . Indeed, near the equator, where the Coriolis force is quite weak, a direct circulation of air is established. In the lower levels of the atmosphere, the difference in temperature between the equator and the northerly warmer regions gives rise to the Intertropical Convergence Zone where the warmer air rises because of convergence and relatively lower density. Subsequently, this air spreads north and south and cools at higher altitude and descends further north and south.

[ 1 ] Associated weather [ edit ] This system greatly affects sailing because the associated winds are generally not strong and sailing vessels have to go far north or south of the centre of the high pressure region depending on the direction of travel to find winds that are favourable in strength and direction.

[ 3 ] Climatic influence on economy [ edit ] The anticyclonic circulation produces a dry climate, contributing to the aridity of the Namib and Kalahari deserts, but its influence does not stop there: the South Atlantic High brings warm weather from the east coast of South America to Africa in summer as it carries tropical air to its southern flank.

[ 1 ] On its northern flank, where the winds are easterly trade winds, there is the intertropical convergence zone that controls the African monsoon and the rainy season in the Guianas .

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Leduc, Richard; Gervais, Raymond (1985).

Connaître la météorologie (in French). Montréal: Presses de l' Université du Québec . p.

72 (section 3.6 "Les grands traits de la circulation générale").

ISBN 2-7605-0365-8 . Retrieved 2009-02-16 .

circulation de Hadley.

^ "South Atlantic high" .

Glossary .

American Meteorological Society . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ "L'anticyclone de Sainte Hélène bientôt de retour" (in French). Organisation du Vendée Globe . November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-08-03 .

^ Christine Poixblanc (April 2001).

"La Zone de Convergence Intertropicale, qu'est-ce-que c'est ?" .

La ZIC, responsable des saisons en Guyane (in French). Terres de Guyane. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017 . Retrieved 2009-08-02 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal 25°00′S 15°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 25.000°S 15.000°W ﻿ / -25.000; -15.000 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=South_Atlantic_High&oldid=1270398811 " Categories : Anticyclones Atlantic Ocean Regional climate effects Climate of Argentina Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 January 2025, at 10:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents South Atlantic High 6 languages Add topic

