Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In Shakespeare's plays Toggle In Shakespeare's plays subsection 1.1 Richard III 1.2 Richard II 2 In other notable works 3 John I 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Tudor myth 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tradition in English history, historiography and literature The first page of Richard III , printed in the Second Folio of 1632 The Tudor myth is the tradition in English history , historiography and literature that presents the 15th century, including the Wars of the Roses , in England as a dark age of anarchy and bloodshed. The narrative that the Tudor myth perpetrated was curated with the political purpose of promoting the Tudor period of the 16th century as a golden age of peace, law, order, and prosperity.

[ 1 ] The hope was to elevate King Henry VII 's rulership compared to his predecessors.

[ 2 ] The Tudor myth may have also been advanced by the Tudors and their confederates due to the poor financial conditions of the populace in the 16th century as opposed to the 15th century.  In Thomas Lambert's Richard III, the Tudor Myth, and the Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism, he argues that the 16th century had "...poorer economic performance and higher taxation during the Tudor reign compared to the previous century..." [ 3 ] The Tudor myth was made to elevate King Henry VII (a Lancastrian by relation), by ruining King Richard II and King Richard III .

[ 4 ] Throughout the 16th century, Richard II would be vilified and portrayed as a terrible leader and traitor to the English monarchy. Richard III (and by extension, Yorkist loyalties) is portrayed as an irredeemable tyrant to legitimize Tudor rule.

[ 5 ] The most popular rendition gained notoriety due to Shakespeare's play, Richard III , in which King Richard III's moral character is berated.

[ 6 ] In Shakespeare's plays [ edit ] Richard III [ edit ] Shakespeare's plays were both a product of and a contributor to the Tudor myth and King Richard III's portrayal. His play was written in hindsight, since he was aware of the events that followed King Richard III's reign.

[ 7 ] With this information in mind, Shakespeare set out to disparage King Richard III's character, as exemplified in 
his portrayal of Richard Richard III of England (1452–1485; reigned, 1483–1485) as a deformed hunchback and murderer. Historian Thomas More , was one of the first to spread this characterisation of King Richard III.

William Shakespeare picked up on the rumour and continued this tradition through his history plays that covered the 15th century including Richard II , Henry IV, Part 1 , Henry IV, Part 2 , Henry V , Henry VI, Part 1 , Henry VI, Part 2 , Henry VI, Part 3 , and Richard III . Though scholars and historians, such as Horace Walpole and Sir George Buck denounced this portrayal of the king during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Shakespeare's description of King Richard III remained the most well-known depiction of him in British/Commonwealth-American historical writing up until the twentieth century.

[ 8 ] This view of King Richard III was perpetuated by the revisionist historian Paul Murray Kendall , author of Richard III (1956), in which Shakespeare's portrayal is brought to life.

[ 9 ] Kendall's film also garnered more attention to King Richard III's reputation in general, and many historians would begin to explore the validity of Shakespeare's and the Tudor's portrayal of the king.

[ 10 ] Though this portrayal of King Richard III is widely accepted, many, such as Merry England chose to provide a different perspective on his kingship. More specifically, Ricardian historians, the Richard III Society and The Society of Friends of King Richard III have striven to provide historical perspectives more favourable to Richard III and his achievements during his brief reign.

[ 11 ] Richard II [ edit ] The following passage from Act 4, Scene 1 in Shakespeare's play, Richard II , is often pointed to as an expression of the Tudor myth.  It is a speech by the character the Bishop of Carlisle, spoken just as Bolingbroke suggests that he will ascend the throne of England. Carlisle raises his voice to object, and ends with a vision of the future that seems to prophesy the civil wars that are the basis of Shakespeare's English history plays: [ 12 ] [ 13 ] My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king, Is a foul traitor to proud Hereford's king; And if you crown him, let me prophesy, The blood of English shall manure the ground And future ages groan for this foul act; Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels, And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound; Disorder, horror, fear, and mutiny, Shall here inhabit, and this land be call'd The field of Golgotha and dead men's skulls.

O! if you raise this house against this house, It will the woefullest division prove That ever fell upon this cursed earth.

Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so, Lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!

[ 14 ] In this scene, Shakespeare is expressing the conventional Tudor-era view that the chaos of the 15th century was a divine punishment for the deposition of Richard II.

[ 12 ] In other notable works [ edit ] The Anglica Historia of Polydore Vergil , Books 23–25 on Richard III.

; Entire 1555 edition (Henry VII's official historian). First in print in 1534.

Sir Thomas More 's History of King Richard III (1513) [2] . More's book is hostile to Richard in a partisan spirit. A few years after Richard died a Warwickshire historian named John Rous claimed that Richard spent two years in the womb, and was finally born with a full set of teeth, and a full head of hair.  Thomas More described Richard  as "malicious, wrathful, envious …  little of stature, ill featured of limbs, crook back." [ 15 ] More's source was John Morton , who was Archbishop of Canterbury under Henry VII , and had served as Bishop of Ely under Edward IV and Richard III. Other sources include various Tudor accounts, including those by John Rous and Polydore Vergil . More also provides direct testimony.

[ 16 ] Edward Hall 's Union of the Noble and Illustre Families of Lancaster and York (1548), portrayed King Henry IV in a favourable light.

Raphael Holinshed and his collaborators who wrote the Chronicles of England, Scotland and Wales (2nd edition, 1587), which was Shakespeare's primary source for his history plays.

William Shakespeare 's play, Richard III In The Black Adder , Richard III is presented as a kind man and good king who wins the Battle of Bosworth Field, but is succeeded by his nephew as Richard IV after he is accidentally killed. After Richard IV's death at the end of the series, Henry VII becomes king and rewrites history, presenting Richard III as an evil king, and eliminating Richard IV's reign from the history books.

John I [ edit ] Tudor propaganda also sought to rehabilitate John I of England as a dissenter from the church.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England Ricardian (Richard III) References [ edit ] ^ [1] Tillyard, E. M. W.

Shakespeare’s History Plays.

Chatto & Windus (1944) ISBN 978-0701111571 ^ Breverton, Terry (15 May 2016).

Henry VII: The Maligned Tudor King . Amberley Publishing Limited.

ISBN 978-1-4456-4606-0 .

^ Lambert, Thomas (October 2024).

"Richard III, the Tudor Myth, and the Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism" .

Monthly Review Press .

76 (5).

^ Egan, Gabriel (2007).

Shakespeare . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-2371-6 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ Cooper, John.

"The Tudor Monarchy" (PDF) .

Cengage Learning EMEA . State Papers Online . Retrieved 3 April 2023 .

^ Wilson, Jeffrey (29 November 2020).

Shakespeare and Game of Thrones . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-22868-7 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ Barker, Simon.

"The Mary Rose revisited: Tudor myth, popular history and "the tears that England owes" .

ProQuest . Journal of Popular Culture.

ProQuest 1297357115 . Retrieved 3 April 2023 .

^ Reese, M. M.

The Cease of Majesty: A Study of Shakespeare's History Plays , New York: St Martin's Press, 1961 ^ Kendall, Paul Murray.

Richard III , New York: W. W. Norton, 1956 ^ Kendall, Paul Murray.

Richard III: The Great Debate: Sir Thomas More's History of King Richard III and Horace Walpole's Historic Doubts on the Life and Reign of King Richard III , 1965 ^ Gillingham, John.

The Wars of The Roses: Peace and Conflict in Fifteenth-Century England . Louisiana State University Press, 1981 ^ a b Grene, Nicholas.

Shakespeare's Tragic Imagination . Springer (2016) ISBN 9781349249701 p. 1 ^ Brustein, Robert Sanford.

The Tainted Muse: Prejudice and Presumption in Shakespeare and His Time . Yale University Press, 2009 ISBN 9780300115765 p. 135 ^ Shakespeare, William.

Richard II . Act 4, sc. i ^ Carleton, Charles.

Royal Warriors: A Military History of the British Monarchy.

Routledge, 2014. p. 66.

ISBN 9781317873778 ^ Gross, Charles.

The Sources and Literature of English History from the Earliest Times to about 1485 . Longmans, Green & Company, 1900. p. 297.

^ Levin, Carole (1980).

"A Good Prince: King John and Early Tudor Propaganda" .

The Sixteenth Century Journal .

11 (4): 23– 32.

doi : 10.2307/2539973 .

ISSN 0361-0160 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tudor_myth&oldid=1303762370 " Categories : Historiography of the United Kingdom Propaganda in the United Kingdom 15th century in England 16th century in England Henry VII of England Richard II of England Richard III of England Historical myths Thomas More William Shakespeare Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tudor myth 2 languages Add topic

