Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Flora 3 Fauna 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Ivory Coast 3 languages العربية فارسی Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biodiversity of Ivory Coast ) African buffalo African jacana The wildlife of Ivory Coast consists of the flora and fauna of this nation in West Africa. The country has a long Atlantic coastline on the Gulf of Guinea and a range of habitat types. Once covered in tropical rainforest, much of this habitat has been cleared, the remaining terrain being gallery forests and savanna with scattered groups of trees, resulting in a decrease in biodiversity . As of 2016, 252 species of mammal had been recorded in Ivory Coast, 666 species of bird , 153 species of reptile , 80 species of amphibian , 671 species of fish and 3660 species of vascular plant .

Geography [ edit ] Topography of Ivory Coast, before the creation of Lake Buyo Ivory Coast is a country in western sub-Saharan Africa just north of the equator , bordered by Liberia and Guinea to the west, Mali and Burkina Faso to the north and Ghana to the east. To the south lies the Gulf of Guinea with a 515 km (320 mi) coastline where there is a network of lagoons . The land rises from south to north, the terrain being mostly flat to undulating plain, with mountains in the west and northwest. The highest point is Mount Richard-Molard on the border with Guinea, reaching 1,752 metres (5,748 ft). The main rivers flow from north to south. A dam on the Bandama River , the longest waterway in the country, has created the artificial Lake Kossou , while another on the Sassandra River has created the rather smaller Lake Buyo .

[ 1 ] The forests on mountains in the west of the country near the border with Guinea and Liberia, are classified as Guinean montane forests . The Guinean forest-savanna mosaic belt extends across the middle of the country from east to west, and is the transition zone between the coastal forests and the interior savannas . The forest-savanna mosaic interlaces forest, savanna and grassland habitats. Northern Ivory Coast is part of the Sudanian Savanna ecoregion of the Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands biome . It is a zone of lateritic or sandy soils, with vegetation decreasing from south to north.

[ 2 ] Temperatures average between 25 and 30 °C (77 and 86 °F). The main rainy season is between May and September, with the remaining part of the year being dry in the north of the country, as the Harmattan wind blows. In the south the rainfall is higher (2,000 mm (80 in) annually and twice as much as the north) and some rain falls in most months.

[ 3 ] Flora [ edit ] Rainforest with emergent trees in Taï National Park As of 2016, 3660 species of vascular plant had been recorded in Ivory Coast.

[ 4 ] The Ébrié Lagoon is dominated by mangroves and herbaceous vegetation including both rooted and floating aquatic plants . Further inland are extensive swamps with larger herbaceous plants and small trees.

[ 5 ] In the southwest of the country, the Taï National Park protects the largest area of forest remaining in the Upper Guinean rainforest belt of West Africa. The vegetation is predominantly dense evergreen ombrophilous forest with emergent trees up to 60 m (200 ft) tall, with massive trunks and large buttresses or stilt roots. This mature tropical forest includes some 1,300 species of higher plants and has been designated as a World Heritage Site and a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve .

[ 6 ] Another area that has been protected is the Comoé National Park , near the border with Burkina Faso . This has a variety of habitats, including gallery forests, woodland, open savannas and wetland.

[ 7 ] Fauna [ edit ] Main articles: List of mammals of Ivory Coast and List of birds of Ivory Coast As of 2016, some 252 species of mammal had been recorded in Ivory Coast, 666 species of bird , 153 species of reptile , 80 species of amphibian and 671 species of fish .

[ 4 ] In the shallow parts of the Ébrié Lagoon there are a range of invertebrates including polychaete worms, nemertean worms, oligochaetes , isopods , amphipods and prawns . Over a hundred species of fish have been recorded here, and the lagoon and surrounding swamps are home to the pygmy hippopotamus , the West African crocodile , the West African slender-snouted crocodile , the dwarf crocodile and the African manatee .

[ 5 ] Population growth and civil wars, together with deforestation, the increase area of plantations, hunting for bushmeat and other factors have led to a reduction in diversity among the animals in Ivory Coast, [ 8 ] such that many are now restricted to protected areas. Among the 135 species of mammal recorded in Comoé National Park are 11 species of primates including the olive baboon , green monkey , lesser spot-nosed monkey , Mona monkey , black and white colobus , olive colobus, white collared mangabey and western chimpanzee . A total of 17 carnivore species have been observed here, but cheetahs , African wild dogs and lions no longer seem to be present. There are also 21 species of artiodactyl present including hippopotamus , bushpig , bongo, warthog , buffalo , kob , red-flanked duiker , bushbuck , waterbuck , roan antelope and oribi .

[ 9 ] Mammals recorded in the Taï National Park include the pygmy hippopotamus and 11 species of monkey, [ 10 ] as well as African forest elephants , buffaloes, pangolins , bushbuck, leopards , chimpanzees and zebras .

[ 11 ] Reptiles include crocodiles , lizards and chameleons , as well as snakes such as horned vipers , mambas , and pythons .

Among the 670 species of bird that have been recorded in the country are 10 species of seabird and 119 species of water bird, with the remaining birds being terrestrial. There are no species endemic to the country, but it is visited by 197 species of migratory bird .

[ 12 ] Some notable birds include 6 species of vulture , raptors , owls , 8 species of stork , African jacana , Ibises , herons , plovers , parrots , 11 species of hornbill , pigeons , and many smaller passerines .

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ Philip's (1994).

Atlas of the World . Reed International. p. 100.

ISBN 0-540-05831-9 .

^ "The Republic of Côte d'Ivoire" .

West Africa: Land Use and Land Cover Dynamics . USGS.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 June 2019 .

^ Robert E. Handloff, ed. (1988).

"Ivory Coast: Climate" . Library of Congress.

Archived from the original on 30 August 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2019 .

^ a b "Countries with the most number of mammal species" .

Tropical Rainforests . Mongabey. 2016.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ a b Hughes, R.H. (1992).

A Directory of African Wetlands . IUCN. p. 350.

ISBN 978-2-88032-949-5 .

^ "Protection of a chimpanzee community in the Taï National Park through local community ecotourism" . Fondation Ensemble. 2014.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2019 .

^ "Case Study: Protecting the ecological integrity of Comoé National Park" .

West Africa: Land Use and Land Cover Dynamics . USGS.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2019 .

^ "Case Study: Marahoué National Park: a protected area on the edge of existence" .

West Africa: Land Use and Land Cover Dynamics . USGS.

Archived from the original on 30 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ McGinley, Mark.

"Comoé National Park, Côte d'Ivoire" .

Encyclopedia of Earth . United Nations Environment Programme-World Conservation.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Taï National Park" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 30 January 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Parc National de Taï" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Côte d'Ivoire" .

Data Zone . BirdLife International.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Côte d'Ivoire" .

Data Zone . BirdLife International.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

v t e Ivory Coast articles History Gyaaman Ashanti Empire French West Africa 1960–1999 1999–present 1999 coup d'état First Civil War Second Civil War ( 2010–11 Ivorian crisis ) 2017 mutinies Geography Borders Cities Climate Departments Districts Environment National parks Regions Rivers Subdivisions Wildlife Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Military Political parties President Vice-President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Companies Energy Franc (currency) Mining Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Abortion Child marriage Crime Human trafficking Prostitution Culture Demographics Education Ethnic groups Flag Health Languages LGBT rights Media Music Olympics Public holidays Religion Outline Category v t e Wildlife of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Ivory_Coast&oldid=1275848056 " Categories : Biota of Ivory Coast Wildlife by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 February 2025, at 12:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Ivory Coast 3 languages Add topic

