Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Other literary appearances 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hermocrates 21 languages Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Sicilianu Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century BC Syracusan politician and strategos This article is about the 5th-century BC Syracusan general. For the hypothetic dialogue by Plato, see Hermocrates (dialogue) . For the 2nd-century sophist, see Hermocrates of Phocaea .

Hermocrates Native name Ἑρμοκράτης Born unknown Died c. 407 BC Allegiance Syracuse Rank Strategos Navarch Battles / wars Peloponnesian War Sicilian Expedition Battle of Cyzicus Sicilian Wars Hermocrates ( / h ɜːr ˈ m ɒ k r ə ˌ t iː z / ; Ancient Greek : Ἑρμοκράτης , romanized : Hermokrátēs , c. 5th century – 407 BC) was an ancient Syracusan general from Greek Sicily during the Athenians ' Sicilian Expedition in the midst of the Peloponnesian War .  He is also remembered as a character in the Timaeus and Critias dialogues of Plato .

Life [ edit ] The first historical reference to Hermocrates comes from Thucydides , where he appears at the congress of Gela in 424 BC giving a speech demanding the Sicilian Greeks stop their quarrelling and unite against the Athenians, who had been attacking the Sicilian cities for supporting Corinth .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] When Athens sent an armada to conquer Sicily in 415, Hermocrates called for expanding the anti-Athens coalition, and sent ambassadors to Sparta , Corinth, Carthage , and Italy seeking allies.

[ 3 ] The Athenians were able to establish a base at Catana , and had defeated the Syracusans at the river Anapus. Hermocrates called for extending his cities fortifications and was able to do away with the traditional fifteen general system, instead calling for three to lead the war effort instead. He was elected as one of Syracuse's three strategoi , along with Heracleides and Sicanus.

[ 4 ] He was also able to convince the Athenian allied Camarians to remain neutral in the war. Due to his lack of success in the battlefield, he was dismissed from this position as strategoi, but he later became one of the most important advisers to the Spartan general Gylippus after he had arrived in Sicily. He now commanded a contingent of Syracusan soldiers and together with Gylippus, achieved victory over Athens during its siege of Syracuse. After the Athenian force was defeated, Hermocrates called for the prisoners of war to be treated kindly, but this was ignored.

In 412 BC, Syracuse sent ships east to assist their Spartan allies in an attack on the Athenians. Hermocrates was made an admiral and lead the Syracusan ships in several skirmishes against Athenians ships, but was utterly defeated during the Battle of Cyzicus . Sparta and their allies were routed and Hermocrates was banned in absentia by political rivals back in Syracuse, being blamed for the defeat.

[ 5 ] While he remained in exile, tensions between the Sicilian city Selinunte and their Athenian allied rival Segesta , broke out into war. Segesta, unable to call on Athens for help, instead asked Carthage for assistance and in 410 BC, Hannibal Mago launched an invasion of Sicily. Hermocrates organized an army and was able to push back the Carthaginians, but in Syracuse, riots broke out along political lines between those who supported Hermocrates, and those who denounced him, saying that his ultimate aim was tyranny. He was killed in a street fight in 407 BC.

Other literary appearances [ edit ] Hermocrates is one of the persons appearing in Plato 's dialogues Timaeus and Critias . Plato originally might have planned a third dialogue named Hermocrates , but failed to compose it.

F. M. Cornford writes: Since the dialogue that was to bear his name was never written, we can only guess why Plato chose him. It is curious to reflect that, while Critias is to recount how the prehistoric Athens of nine thousand years ago had repelled the invasion from Atlantis and saved the Mediterranean peoples from slavery, Hermocrates would be remembered by the Athenians as the man who had repulsed their own greatest effort at imperialist expansion.

[ 6 ] Hermocrates is also mentioned by Xenophon , [ 7 ] Plutarch , [ 8 ] and Polyaenus .

[ 9 ] Hermocrates appears as a character in the novel Chaereas and Callirhoe written by the ancient Greek author Chariton . In the novel he appears as the father of Callirhoe, one of the main characters in the story.

See also [ edit ] List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Notes [ edit ] ^ Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War IV 58–65.

^ Marchant, E. C. (1933).

^ Thucydides VI 32–34.

^ Thucydides VI 72–73.

^ Thucydides VIII 85.

^ Cornford, F. M. (1937), p. 2.

^ Xenophon, Hellenika , I 1,27.

^ Plutarch, Nicias 16, 28.

^ Polyaenus I 43.

Bibliography [ edit ] Cornford, F. M.

(1937).

Plato's Cosmology . London: Lund Humphries.

ISBN 0-87220-386-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Marchant, E. C. (1933). "The Speech of Hermocrates".

The Classical Review .

47 (2). Cambridge University Press: 65– 66.

doi : 10.1017/s0009840x00061540 .

JSTOR 701642 .

S2CID 162147306 .

Westlake, H. D. (1958). "Hermocrates the Syracusan".

Bulletin of the John Rylands Library .

41 : 239– 68.

doi : 10.7227/BJRL.41.1.9 .

External links [ edit ] Livius.org: Hermocrates Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany Vatican Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hermocrates&oldid=1275709281 " Categories : 407 BC deaths Ancient Greek generals 5th-century BC Syracusans People of the Peloponnesian War Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from February 2025 Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hermocrates 21 languages Add topic

