Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Difference from other approaches 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 History of the term 2.2 Precursors in indigenous groups 2.3 Development of theory 2.4 Development of practice 3 Application Toggle Application subsection 3.1 In system-wide offenses 3.2 In criminal cases 3.3 In prisons 3.4 In social work 3.5 In schools 4 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 4.1 Victim-offender dialogue 4.2 Family group conferencing 4.3 Restorative conferences 4.4 Circles of Support and Accountability 4.5 Sentencing circles 5 Other social movements Toggle Other social movements subsection 5.1 Positive criminology and positive victimology 5.2 Prison abolition 6 Research Toggle Research subsection 6.1 Stories and Case Studies 6.2 Recidivism 7 Criticism 8 In the media 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Restorative justice 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Restitution with input from victims and offenders Not to be confused with Harm reduction or Transformative justice .

Criminology and penology Theory Anomie Biosocial criminology Broken windows Collective efficacy Crime analysis Criminalization Differential association Deviance Expressive function of law Labeling theory Psychopathy Rational choice Risk and actuarial criminology Social control Social learning Strain Subculture Symbolic interactionism Victimology Secondary victimisation Victim blaming Types of crime Against Humanity Person State Class Blue-collar White-collar Cold case Perfect Corporate Hate Immigrant International Juvenile Organized Political Public-order State State-corporate Transnational Victimless War Narcotic slavery Methods Comparative Profiling Ethnography Uniform Crime Reports Crime mapping reform sentencing Crime statistics Positivist school Qualitative Quantitative BJS NIBRS Penology Crime prevention Corrections Denunciation Deterrence Incapacitation Sentence Trial Prison Prisoner Solitary confinement Punishment Rehabilitation Recidivism Zero tolerance Criminal justice Participatory Restorative Retributive Right to an effective remedy Utilitarian Transformative Prison abolition Prison reform open Prisoner abuse Prisoners' rights Victims' rights Schools Anarchist Chicago Classical Conflict Critical Environmental Feminist Integrative Italian Law and order Marxist Neo-classical Populist Positivist Postmodernist Realism Left Right Subfields American Anthropological Biosocial criminology Conflict Criminology Culture Cyber Demography Development Environmental Experimental Organizational Political Public Radical criminology Browse Index Journals Organizations People v t e Positive criminology People Italian school of positive criminology ( Enrico Ferri , Raffaele Garofalo , Cesare Lombroso ) Topics Open prison Peacemaking criminology Positive psychology Recidivism Rehabilitation (penology) Reintegrative shaming Restorative justice Right realism Social integration Therapeutic jurisprudence v t e Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e Restorative justice is an ethical framework that offers an alternative form of justice, as well as an ethos [ 1 ] [ 2 ] guiding human behaviour and how we approach relationships including resolving conflicts [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] .

Unlike traditional criminal justice , restorative justice focuses on repairing harm by looking into the future and by empowering the harmed (victims) and harming parties (offenders) to participate in a dialogue [ 7 ] . In doing so, restorative justice practitioners work to ensure that offenders take responsibility for their actions, to understand the harm they have caused, to give them an opportunity to redeem themselves, and to discourage them from causing further harm. For victims, the goal is to give them an active role in the process, [ 8 ] and to reduce feelings of anxiety, unfairness and powerlessness.

[ 9 ] Restorative justice programmes are complementary to the criminal justice system including retributive justice .

[ 10 ] It has been argued from the perspectives of some positions on what punishment is that some cases of restorative justice constitute an alternative punishment to those atoning.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Though academic assessment, restorative justice has rendered positive results for both victims and offenders, [ 9 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] . Moreover, more recent studies have shown that academic performance falters in school districts where restorative justice is practiced.

[ 15 ] Proponents argue that most studies suggest it makes offenders less likely to re-offend.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] A 2007 study also found that it had a higher rate of victim satisfaction and offender accountability than traditional methods of justice delivery.

[ 9 ] Its use has seen worldwide growth since the 1990s.

[ 19 ] Restorative justice inspired and is part of the wider study of restorative practices .

The literature summarises restorative justice practices as: victim-offender mediation, family group conferencing and circles [ 20 ] . Their main differences between these key practices lie in the number and roles of participants. Victim-offender mediation involves meetings between the victim and the offender.

[ 21 ] Family group conferencing involves meetings with the victim, the offender and direct stakeholders such as their family and professionals supporting them including youth or social workers, the police or friends. Circles include the victim, the offender and representatives of the wider community.

[ 22 ] Independently of the restorative justice practice, the overall goal is for participants to share their experience of what happened, to discuss who was harmed by the crime and how, and to create a consensus for what the offender can do to repair the harm from the offense.

[ 23 ] This may include a payment of money given from the offender to the victim, apologies and other amends, and other actions to compensate those affected and to prevent the offender from causing future harm.

[ 24 ] Founded upon the principle of equality, restorative justice practices are firmly rooted in the needs of the victim, as well as the offender, and thus their focus is on empowering both parties through power sharing leading to honest and equal dialogue towards resolution [ 25 ] .

Definition [ edit ] The Restorative Justice (Prescribed Persons) (Scotland) Order 2021 (SSI 2021-40) According to noted professor of criminology John Braithwaite , restorative justice is: [ 26 ] ...a process where all stakeholders affected by an injustice have an opportunity to discuss how they have been affected by the injustice and to decide what should be done to repair the harm. With crime, restorative justice is about the idea that because crime hurts, justice should heal. It follows that conversations with those who have been hurt and with those who have inflicted the harm must be central to the process.

Although law professionals may have secondary roles in facilitating the restorative justice process, it is the citizens who must take up the majority of the responsibility in healing the pains caused by crime.

[ 26 ] The process of restorative justice thus shifts the responsibility for addressing crime.

In 2014, Carolyn Boyes-Watson from Suffolk University defined restorative justice as: [ 27 ] ...a growing social movement to institutionalize peaceful approaches to harm, problem-solving and violations of legal and human rights. These range from international peacemaking tribunals such as the South Africa Truth and Reconciliation Commission to innovations within the criminal and juvenile justice systems, schools, social services and communities. Rather than privileging the law, professionals and the state, restorative resolutions engage those who are harmed, wrongdoers and their affected communities in search of solutions that promote repair, reconciliation and the rebuilding of relationships. Restorative justice seeks to build partnerships to reestablish mutual responsibility for constructive responses to wrongdoing within our communities.  Restorative approaches seek a balanced approach to the needs of the victim, wrongdoer and community through processes that preserve the safety and dignity of all.

Reconciliation is one potential component of restorative justice. However, restorative justice does not necessarily involve reconciliation.

[ 28 ] Difference from other approaches [ edit ] According to distinguished, American criminologist and professor Howard Zehr , restorative justice differs from traditional criminal justice in terms of the guiding questions it asks. In restorative justice, the questions are: Who has been hurt?

What are their needs?

Whose obligations are these?

What are the causes?

Who has a stake in the situation?

What is the appropriate process to involve stakeholders in an effort to address causes and put things right?

[ 29 ] In contrast, traditional criminal justice asks: What laws have been broken?

Who did it?

What do the offender(s) deserve?

[ 30 ] Others, however, have argued that there are several similarities between restorative justice and traditional criminal justice and that some cases of restorative justice constitute punishment from the perspectives of some positions on what punishment is.

[ 11 ] Restorative justice is also different from the adversarial legal process or that of civil litigation .

As Braithwaite writes, "Court-annexed ADR ( alternative dispute resolution ) and restorative justice could not be philosophically further apart." While the former seeks to address only legally relevant issues and to protect both parties' rights, restorative justice aims at "expanding the issues beyond those that are legally relevant, especially into underlying relationships." [ 31 ] History [ edit ] History of the term [ edit ] The phrase "restorative justice" has appeared in written sources since the first half of the nineteenth century.

[ 32 ] The modern usage of the term was introduced by Albert Eglash, who in 1977 described three different approaches to justice: "retributive justice", based on punishment; "distributive justice", involving therapeutic treatment of offenders; "restorative justice", based on restitution with input from victims and offenders.

[ 33 ] Nils Christie , further elaborated the term "restorative justice" in his 1977 article "Conflict as Property" [ 34 ] Christie argued that restorative justice aims to return conflict to those who have been harmed or have harmed.

[ 35 ] Precursors in indigenous groups [ edit ] According to Howard Zehr , "Two people have made very specific and profound contributions to practices in the field – the Indigenous people of Canada and the United States , and the Maori of New Zealand ... [I]n many ways, restorative justice represents a validation of values and practices that were characteristic of many indigenous groups," whose traditions were "often discounted and repressed by western colonial powers".

[ 36 ] For example, in New Zealand, prior to European contact, the Maori had a well-developed system called Utu that protected individuals, social stability, and the integrity of the group.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Restorative justice (sometimes known in these contexts as circle justice ) continues to be a feature of indigenous justice systems today.

[ 39 ] Development of theory [ edit ] Zehr's book Changing Lenses–A New Focus for Crime and Justice , first published in 1990, is credited with being "groundbreaking", [ 40 ] as well as being one of the first to articulate a theory of restorative justice.

[ 41 ] The title of this book refers to providing an alternative framework for thinking about – or new lens for viewing – crime and justice.

[ 42 ] Changing Lenses juxtaposed a "retributive justice" framework, where crime is viewed as an offense against the state, with a restorative justice framework, where crime is viewed as a violation of people and relationships.

[ 43 ] The book made reference to the positive results of efforts in the late 1970s and 1980s at victim–offender mediation, pioneered in the United States by Howard Zehr, Ron Claassen and Mark Umbreit.

[ 44 ] By the second half of the 1990s, the expression "restorative justice" had become popular, evolving to widespread usage by 2006.

[ 45 ] The restorative justice movement has attracted many segments of society, including "police officers, judges, schoolteachers, politicians, juvenile justice agencies, victim support groups, aboriginal elders, and mums and dads".

[ 46 ] "Restorative justice is a fast-growing state, national, and international social movement that seeks to bring together people to address the harm caused by crime," write Mark Umbreit and Marilyn Peterson Armour. "Restorative justice views violence, community decline, and fear-based responses as indicators of broken relationships. It offers a different response, namely the use of restorative solutions to repair the harm related to conflict, crime, and victimization." [ 47 ] Development of practice [ edit ] In North America, the growth of restorative justice has been facilitated by NGOs dedicated to this approach to justice, such as the Victim Offender Mediation Association, as well as by the establishment of academic centers, such as the Center for Justice and Peacebuilding at Eastern Mennonite University in Virginia, the University of Minnesota 's Center for Restorative Justice and Peacemaking, the Community Justice Institute at Florida Atlantic University , the Center for Peacemaking and Conflict Studies at Fresno Pacific University in California, the Center for Restorative Justice at the University of San Diego , and the Centre for Restorative Justice at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, Canada.

[ 48 ] Members of the Mennonites and the social-action arm of their church-community, Mennonite Central Committee , were among the early proponents.

[ 49 ] [ 48 ] "[T]he antinomian groups advocating and supporting restorative justice, such as the Mennonites (as well as Amish and Quaker groups), subscribe to principled pacifism and also tend to believe that restorative justice is much more humane than the punitive juvenile and criminal justice systems." [ 49 ] The development of restorative justice in continental Europe, especially the German speaking countries, Austria, Germany and Switzerland, is somewhat different from the Anglo-Saxon experience. For example, victim–offender mediation is just one model of restorative justice, but in the present European context it is the most important one.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Restorative justice is not just a theory, but a practice-oriented attitude in dealing (not only) with criminal relevant conflicts. Some have argued that restorative justice may be moving towards restorative practice.

[ 52 ] In October 2018, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe adopted a recommendation to member states which recognised "the potential benefits of using restorative justice with respect to criminal justice systems" and encouraged member states to "develop and use restorative justice".

[ 53 ] Application [ edit ] In system-wide offenses [ edit ] The South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission shows how restorative justice can be used to address system-wide offenses that affect broad swaths of a group or a society.

[ 54 ] In criminal cases [ edit ] In criminal cases, victims can testify about the crime's impact upon their lives, receive answers to questions about the incident, and participate in holding the offender accountable. Meanwhile, offenders can tell their story of why the crime occurred and how it has affected their lives. They are given an opportunity to compensate the victim directly – to the degree possible.

[ 55 ] In criminal cases, this can include money, community service in general and/or specific to the offense, education to prevent recidivism, and/or expression of remorse.

A courtroom process might employ pretrial diversion, dismissing charges after restitution. In serious cases, a sentence may precede other restitution.

[ 56 ] In the community, concerned individuals meet with all parties to assess the experience and impact of the crime. Offenders listen to victims' experiences, preferably until they are able to empathize with the experience. Then they speak to their own experience: how they decided to commit the offense. A plan is made for prevention of future occurrences, and for the offender to address the damage to the injured parties. Community members hold the offender(s) accountable for adherence to the plan.

[ 57 ] While restorative justice typically involves an encounter between the offender and the victim, some organizations, such as the Mennonite Central Committee Canada, emphasize a program's values over its participants. This can include programs that only serve victims (or offenders for that matter), but that have a restorative framework. Indigenous groups are using the restorative justice process to try to create more community support for victims and offenders, particularly the young people. For example, different programs are underway at Kahnawake , a Mohawk reserve in Canada, and at the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation of the Oglala Lakota nation, within the United States.

[ citation needed ] In prisons [ edit ] Besides serving as an alternative to civil or criminal trial, restorative justice is also thought to be applicable to offenders who are currently incarcerated.

[ 58 ] [ page needed ] The purpose of restorative justice in prisons is to assist with the prisoner's rehabilitation , and eventual reintegration into society. By repairing the harm to the relationships between offenders and victims, and offenders and the community that resulted from the crime, restorative justice seeks to understand and address the circumstances which contributed to the crime. This is thought to prevent recidivism (that is, that the offender repeats the undesirable behavior) once the offender is released.

Research of a restorative reentry planning circle process in Hawai‘i was shown to help children, whose incarcerated parents had one, address the trauma they suffered from losing a parent to prison.

[ 59 ] The potential for restorative justice to reduce recidivism is one of the strongest and most promising arguments for its use in prisons. However, there are both theoretical and practical limitations, which can make restorative justice infeasible in a prison environment. These include: difficulty engaging offenders and victims to participate in mediation; the controversial influence of family, friends, and the community; and the prevalence of mental illness among prisoners.

[ 60 ] In social work [ edit ] In social work cases, impoverished victims such as foster children are given the opportunity to describe their future hopes and make concrete plans to transition out of state custody in a group process with their supporters.

[ 61 ] In social justice cases, restorative justice is used for problem solving.

[ 62 ] In schools [ edit ] Restorative justice has been implemented in some schools.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] It uses a model similar to programs used by the criminal-justice system.

[ 65 ] Restorative practices can "also include preventive measures designed to build skills and capacity in students as well as adults".

[ 66 ] Some examples of preventive measures in restorative practices include teachers and students devising classroom expectations together or setting up community-building in the classroom.

[ 66 ] Restorative justice also focuses on justice as needs and obligations, expands justice as conversations between the offender, victim and school, and recognizes accountability as understanding the impact of actions and repairing harm.

[ 67 ] In this approach, teachers, students and the community can reach agreements to meet all stakeholders needs.

[ 67 ] Collectivity is emphasized as the group must create an action-plan to heal harm and to find a way to bring the offender back into the community.

[ 68 ] While focussing on making the victim(s) whole, restorative justice programs have the added benefit of reduction in disciplinary actions such as suspensions and expulsions resulting in lower discipline-numbers reported to the state, and more effective reformative and/or reconciliatory  actions imposed, such as writing apology-letters, performing community service or – for example, in cases of bullying – composing a research paper on the negative effects of bullying. 
This approach develops and fosters empathy, as participating parties must come to understand the needs of all stakeholders in order for the conflict to be fully rectified.  Both the offending party and the wronged/victimized party can address and begin to resolve their obstacles to achieving their education, with the aid of the restorative-justice partners.  Behavioral problems stemming from grief, for example, may be recognized and acknowledged within restorative-justice programs; as a result, a party may be referred to a counselor to receive grief counseling. In theory, this decreases the likelihood of the offender causing further harm. Some studies claim that taking punitive measures against a grieving person will cause more distress, leading to more troublesome behavior.

[ citation needed ] By approaching student discipline with restorative justice in the forefront, conflicts may be resolved within the funding restrictions of the school administration – by way of reduced student-absenteeism, rehabilitation of the offending party, and restoring justice and making whole the wronged party. Collectivity and empathy are further developed by having students participate in restorative-justice circles in administering roles such as mediators or jurors.

[ citation needed ] Methods [ edit ] Urban mediation agent in Fort-de-France (Martinique) Restorative justice recommends methods to hold perpetrators accountable while providing victims a voice, which includes a voluntary meeting between the offender and the victim.

[ 4 ] [ 69 ] A 2013 Cochrane review restorative justice conferences where the offender meet the victim face-to-face, and explained that "[t]he victim is encouraged to attend but is under no obligation, and in some instances the victim may be represented by another party." [ 70 ] However, alternatives to the practice exist, such as reading victim impact statements while holding the perpetrator accountable, reducing the risk of further harm or revictimization.

[ 71 ] In addition, the meeting may include people representing the wider community.

Suggested reasons for why it can be effective include: The offender has to learn about the harm they have caused to their victim, making it hard for them to justify their behavior.

It offers a chance to discuss moral development to offenders who may have had little of it in their life.

Offenders are more likely to view their punishment as legitimate.

The programs tend to avoid shaming and stigmatizing the offender.

[ 72 ] Many restorative justice systems, especially victim–offender mediation and family group conferencing, require participants to sign a confidentiality agreement . These agreements usually state that conference discussions will not be disclosed to nonparticipants. The rationale for confidentiality is that it promotes open and honest communication.

Victim-offender dialogue [ edit ] Victim–offender dialogue (VOD), (also called victim–offender mediation , victim–offender conferencing, victim–offender reconciliation, or restorative justice dialogue), is usually a meeting, in the presence of one or two trained facilitators, between victim and offender. This system generally involves few participants, and often is the only option available to incarcerated offenders. Victim Offender Dialogue originated in Canada as part of an alternative court sanction in a 1974 Kitchener, Ontario case involving two accused vandals who met face-to-face with their many victims.

[ 73 ] One of the first victim–offender mediation projects in the United Kingdom was run by South Yorkshire Probation Service from 1983 to 1986.

[ 74 ] On May 13, 2018 in Manhattan , video showed an 87-year old man using a Citibank ATM on Broadway . A 57-year old man walked up to him from behind and hit him on the back of the head. The victim died. The original proposal was to charge the attacker with felony murder , which had a maximum sentence of life in prison. Soon afterward, Assistant Manhattan District Attorney Dafna Yoran suggested using restorative justice to reduce the charge to manslaughter , which had a maximum sentence of 10 years, on two conditions. First, the suspect had to agree to participate in a 90 minute conversation with the family of the victim. Second, the family of the victim had to agree to the reduced charge. Both of these conditions were met, and the suspect was charged with manslaughter.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Family group conferencing [ edit ] Family group conferencing (FGC) has a wider circle of participants than VOD, adding people connected to the primary parties, such as family, friends and professionals.

[ 78 ] FGC is most commonly used for juvenile cases, due to the important role of the family in a juvenile offender's life. Examples can be found in New South Wales , Australia , under the 1997 Young Offenders Act, and in New Zealand under the 1989 Children, Young Persons, and their Families Act. The New South Wales scheme has been favorably evaluated by the New South Wales Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research.

Fiji uses this form of mediation when dealing with cases of child sexual assault. While it may be seen as beneficial to involve the victim's family in the process, there are multiple issues stemming from this. For example, the vast majority of offenders are known to the victims in these cases. In a Fijian context, the notion of family extends wider than that of the normative Western idea. Therefore, involving the family in these cases may become complicated, for the family may not necessarily side with the victim or the process itself could cause rifts within the clan. Furthermore, the process as a whole places much emphasis on the victim forgiving the offender, as opposed to the offender making amends with the victim. Overall, the current process has the potential to cause great trauma and revictimise the victim.

[ 79 ] Restorative conferences [ edit ] Restorative conferences (RC) involves a wider circle of participants than VOD and FGC. There are many different names and procedures of operation for these community-based meetings. They are also referred to as Restorative Circles , Restorative Justice Conferences , Community Restorative Boards or Community Accountability Conferences . Specific programs have their own names, such as Community Justice Committees in Canada and Referral Order Panels in England & Wales. Restorative Circles refers to restorative justice conferences in Brazil [ 80 ] [ 81 ] and Hawaii , [ 82 ] though can have a wider meaning in the field of restorative practices .

A conference will typically include the victim, the offender and members of the local community, who have typically received some training.

[ 83 ] The family and friends of the offender and victim are frequently invited. RC is explicitly victim-sensitive.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] The community members discuss the nature and impact of the offense with the offender. The discussion continues until restitution is agreed; they may also see that the agreement is fulfilled.

The largest restorative justice conference in history took place in the course of the 1990 reconciliation campaign that ended the blood feuds among ethnic Albanians in Kosovo , which was attended by between 100,000 and 500,000 participants.

[ 86 ] The reconciliation campaign was led by Anton Çetta , and over a period of three years (1990–1992) approximately one third of the entire population of Kosovo were documented to be actively involved in restorative justice conferences to end the blood feuds.

[ 86 ] Circles of Support and Accountability [ edit ] Main article: Circles of Support and Accountability Circles of Support and Accountability (CoSA) originated as a project of the "Welcome In", a Mennonite church in Hamilton, Ontario . This approach has demonstrated the capacity to enhance the safe integration of otherwise high-risk sex offenders with their community. Canada judges some sex offenders too dangerous for any form of conditional release, "detaining" them until they serve their entire sentence. A subsequent conviction often leads to designation as a "Dangerous Offender".

Prior to 1994, many such offenders were released without any support or observation beyond police surveillance. Between 1994 and 2007, CoSA assisted with the integration of well over 120 such offenders. Research indicated that surrounding a 'core member' with 5–7 trained volunteer circle members reduced recidivism by nearly 80%.

[ 87 ] Further, recidivist offences were less invasive and less brutal than without the program. CoSA projects now exist in every Canadian province and every major urban centre. CoSA projects are also operational in several U.S. states (Iowa, California, Minnesota, Oregon, Ohio, Colorado, Vermont) as well as in several United Kingdom regions (Cornwall, Devon, Hampshire, Thames Valley, Leicestershire, North Wales, North Yorkshire, and Manchester).

Sentencing circles [ edit ] Sentencing circles (sometimes called peacemaking circles) use traditional circle ritual and structure to involve all interested parties. The procedure commonly works as follows: the offender applies for the intervention, a healing circle is held for the victim, a healing circle is held for the offender, a sentencing circle is held and finally, follow-up circles to monitor progress.

Other social movements [ edit ] Positive criminology and positive victimology [ edit ] Positive criminology and positive victimology are conceptual approaches, developed by the Israeli criminologist Natti Ronel and his research team, that are well connected to restorative justice theories and practice. Positive criminology and victimology both place an emphasis on social inclusion and on unifying and integrating forces at individual, group, social and spiritual levels that are associated with the limiting of crime and recovery from victimization. In traditional approaches the study of crime, violence and related behaviors emphasizes the negative aspects in people's lives that are associated with deviance, criminality and victimization. A common understanding is that human relationships are affected more by destructive encounters than by constructive or positive ones. Positive criminology and victimology argue that a different approach is viable, based on three dimensions – social integration, emotional healing and spirituality – that constitute positive direction indicators.

Prison abolition [ edit ] Prison abolition not only calls for the eradication of cages, but also new perspectives and methodologies for conceptualizing crime, an aim that is shared by restorative justice. In an abolitionist style of restorative justice, participation is voluntary and not limited by the requirements of organizations or professionals, the process includes all relevant stakeholders and is mediated by an independent third party. The emphasis is on meeting the needs of and strengthening the community.

[ 88 ] Research [ edit ] Studies on restorative justice generally report positive outcomes. However restorative justice studies are usually self-selecting, tempering the generalizability of positive results.

[ 89 ] A 2007 meta-study of all research projects concerning restorative justice conferencing published in English between 1986 and 2005 found positive results, specifically for victims: [ 9 ] Greater ability to return to work, to resume normal daily activities, and to sleep.

No cases of offenders verbally or violently abusing victims.

Reduced fear of the offender (especially for violence victims); lower perceived likelihood of another offense; increased sense of security; reduced anger towards the offender; greater sympathy for the offender and the offender's supporters; greater feelings of trust in others; increased feelings of self-confidence; reduced anxiety.

Other findings included: The only principled basis for selectively allowing, or banning, restorative justice is harm reduction.

Limited public familiarity and misconceptions about restorative justice.

Greater availability, together with information about victims' positive views is likely to increase the proportion of victims willing to participate.

However, in a 2002 meta-review of the literature focused on victim experiences, it was concluded there was no evidence that victims were more satisfied with restorative justice when compared with traditional justice.

[ 14 ] While the principle of restorative justice makes victims central to the process research have shown that, in practice, restorative justice programs often become offender focused, minimizing the needs and experiences of victims.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] A 2002 study found that while the majority victims reported positive experiences with restorative justice, their level of satisfaction was lower than offenders.

[ 14 ] Some victims report feeling the offender's apologies are disingenuous and/or that their experience and emotions are invalidated.

[ 93 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] In other studies, a minority victims have reported feeling pressured to forgive the offender, downplay the intensity of their emotions, or move quickly through the restorative justice process.

[ 97 ] In July 2011, the International Center for Transitional Justice published a report entitled "To Live as Other Kenyans do: A Study of the Demands of Kenyan Victims of Human Rights Violations".

[ 98 ] The findings are based on individual and group interviews of victims of human rights abuses from Kenya's 2007 post-election violence. It highlights the importance of a victim-centered approach to determine the most effective mode of implementation for a comprehensive reparations program.  The main finding of the report is that victims demand tangible basic benefits lost as a product of violence, such as food and shelter.  It also acknowledges the need for symbolic reparations, such as formal apologies. The provision of reparations will in a sense create a restoration of the way life was before violence, and also signal the moving forward of a society through institutional change.

The COREPOL Project (Conflict Resolution, Mediation and Restorative Justice and the Policing of Ethnic Minorities in Germany, Austria and Hungary) has been researching the effects of restorative justice programs in Germany, Austria and Hungary. Its goal is to establish whether restorative justice can lead to better relations between the police and minority groups. Its first stage is to look at the extent and role of restorative justice programs within the countries. The second stage is to look at the position of certain minority populations within the societies, with the study focusing on Turks in Germany, Roma in Hungary and Africans in Austria. The involvement of the police in restorative justice programs for minority populations will be explored. Finally, the proposed research will give examples of when restorative justice can be used to improve communication and interaction between the police and minority groups. The study deals with countries that use the civil law legal system, in contrast to the common law legal system of English-speaking countries. COREPOL is coordinated by the German Police University and funded through the European Commission's Seventh Framework Program (FP7).

Stories and Case Studies [ edit ] Sharon Daniel created an interactive documentary, Inside the Distance, (2013) that shares experiences from Belgian victims, offenders, and mediators. This project has been exhibited at the European Forum for Restorative Justice [ 99 ] and the U.S. National Center on Restorative Justice.

[ 100 ] Recidivism [ edit ] Reduction of recidivism is also a goal of restorative justice, [ 16 ] secondary to the restoration of offenders.

[ 101 ] Proponents argue that it can prevent reoffending [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and deter other potential criminals.

[ 18 ] Critics counter that restorative justice does not significantly influence crime rates.

[ 101 ] [ 18 ] While some older studies showed mixed results, as of 2013, studies that compared recidivism rates have become more definitive and in favor of restorative justice.

[ 16 ] [ 18 ] Some studies claim modest, relative reductions, [ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] but more recent studies are finding significant and meaningful reductions in recidivism rates (see below).

A 1998 meta-analysis by Bonta et al. found that restorative justice programs caused mild reductions in reoffending rates.

[ 13 ] Latimer, Dowden and Muise carried out a meta-analysis that provided a more precise definition.

[ 13 ] conducted the second meta-analysis on the effectiveness of restorative justice. This study is important because it addresses the file-drawer problem . Also, some of the studies analyzed implemented a randomized controlled trial (a gold standard in research methods), although this does not represent the majority of studies included. This meta-analysis lends empirical support for the effectiveness of restorative justice to lower recidivism rates and increase compliance and satisfaction rates. However, the authors caution that a self-selection bias is rife through most studies of restorative justice. They reference authors from one study [ 106 ] who found no evidence that restorative justice has a treatment effect on recidivism beyond a self-selection effect.

The third meta-analysis on the effectiveness of restorative justice was conducted by Bradshaw, Roseborough, and Umbreit in 2006. The results of this meta-analysis add empirical support for the effectiveness of restorative justice in reducing juvenile recidivism rates. Since then, studies by Baffour in (2006) and Rodriguez (2007) have also concluded that restorative justice reduces recidivism rates compared to the traditional justice system. Bergseth (2007) and Bouffard (2012) supported these findings and also concluded that there may be some long-term effects of restorative justice over the traditional justice system; as well as restorative justice being more effective with serious crimes, restorative justice participants are less likely to commit serious crimes if they do re-offend and they go longer without re-offending. All of these studies found that restorative justice is equally effective regardless of race.

In 2007, Lawrence W. Sherman and Heather Strang published a review of the previous literature and they conclude that in no way can restorative justice be more harmful than the traditional justice system. It is at least equally as effective as the traditional justice system in all cases. In most cases (especially with more serious offenses and with adult offenders) it is significantly more effective than the traditional justice system at lowering recidivism rates. It also reduced crime victims' post-traumatic stress symptoms and related costs and desires for violent revenge against their offenders. It provided both victims and offenders with more satisfaction with justice than the alternative, and saved money overall.

A 2013 meta-analysis by the Cochrane Collaboration on the effect of youth justice conferencing on recidivism in young offenders found that there was no significant effect for restorative justice conferencing over normal court procedures for number re-arrested, nor monthly rate of reoffending. They also noted a lack of high quality evidence regarding the effectiveness of restorative justice conferencing for young offenders.

[ 70 ] A 2023 meta-analysis found that restorative justice programs were associated with significant and small reductions in general recidivism but not violent recidivism. In addition, restorative justice programs resulted in greater victim and client satisfaction, victims’ views of procedural justice, and client accountability compared to traditional legal system approaches. There were significant sample, study, and program moderators that influenced the effects of restorative justice in reducing recidivism outcomes.

[ 107 ] Criticism [ edit ] Restorative justice has generally not shown improvements for recidivism rates in violent crimes.

[ 70 ] [ 107 ] According to Allison Morris , the following are some of the most common criticisms of restorative justice: ...restorative justice erodes legal rights; restorative justice results in net-widening; restorative justice trivializes crime (particularly men's violence against women ); restorative justice fails to "restore" victims and offenders; restorative justice fails to effect real change and to prevent recidivism; restorative justice results in discriminatory outcomes; restorative justice extends police powers; restorative justice leaves power imbalances untouched; restorative justice leads to vigilantism ; restorative justice lacks legitimacy; and restorative justice fails to provide "justice".

[ 108 ] Another critique of restorative justice suggests that professionals are often left out of the restorative justice conversation. Albert W. Dzur and Susan M. Olson argue that this sector of justice cannot be successful without professionals. They claim that professionals can aid in avoiding problems that come up with informal justice and propose the theory of democratic professionalism, where professionals are not just agents of the state – as traditional understandings would suggest – but as mediums, promoting community involvement while still protecting individuals' rights.

[ 109 ] Additionally, some critics like Gregory Shank and Paul Takagi see restorative justice as an incomplete model in that it fails to fix the fundamental, structural inequalities that make certain people more likely to be offenders than others.

[ 110 ] They and others question the structure of society and the fairness of institutional systems at their very core, pushing for addressing the root causes of many one-on-one offenses as well as for creating a socio-economic system that will be more conducive to harmonious, healthy living in general.

[ 111 ] Some researchers agree that more research must be conducted to support the validity of restorative justice in schools, specifically in how it is implemented.

[ 68 ] More exactly, restorative justice practices that are inconsistent, insufficient, or run out of funding tend to have the worst reputations for success.

[ 112 ] While many research studies support positive findings in restorative justice, continuing studies are still needed.

[ citation needed ] Some judicial systems only recognize monetary restitution agreements. For instance, if victim and offender agree that the offender would pay $100 and mow the victim's lawn five times, the court would only recognize the $100 as restitution. Some agreements specify a larger monetary amount (e.g., $200) to be paid if the non-monetary restitution is not completed. Many jurisdictions cap the amount which a juvenile offender can be required to pay.

Labor regulations typically limit the personal service tasks that can be performed by minors . In addition, personal service usually must be approved by the juvenile's parents. According to the Victim Offender Mediation Association, victims are not allowed to profit from restitution or punitive damages ; only out-of-pocket losses ( actual damages ) can be recovered. Courts can disallow unreasonable compensation arrangements.

[ citation needed ] Both victim and offender can be hesitant to engage in victim–offender dialogue later in the criminal justice process. Once an offender starts serving a sentence, they may believe that the sentence is how they take responsibility for their actions rather than conversing with the victim. For victims, the trial and the sentencing of the offender may terminate the possibilities for discussion. For both offender and victim, victim–offender dialogue is limited in the amount of trust between the two parties.

[ 113 ] In the media [ edit ] Studies by Kelly M. Richards have shown that the general public would be open to the idea of alternative forms of justice, though only after the idea has been explicitly explained to them.

[ 114 ] According to other studies performed by Vicky De Mesmaecker, in order for restorative justice to become publicly accepted, there must be an effective public relations collaboration between the media and the criminologists.

[ 115 ] The use of forgiveness as a tool has in the restorative justice programs, run for victims and perpetrators of Rwandan genocide , the violence in Israeli–Palestinian conflict , and Northern Ireland conflict , has also been documented in film, Beyond Right and Wrong: Stories of Justice and Forgiveness (2012).

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] A tribal form of restorative justice is portrayed in the book Touching Spirit Bear by Ben Mikaelsen .

The 2004 British drama film Red Dust based on the novel by the same name tells an exemplary fictional story about the applied methodology of restorative justice used by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (South Africa) .

The 2017 Canadian documentary A Better Man follows a meeting between a woman who is recovering from domestic violence and the ex-partner.

[ 118 ] Season 2 episode 5 of the NPR podcast Mindshift [ 119 ] compares two schools that use restorative discipline practices, one that has already made the transition and one that is just beginning to use these practices.

Peace Alliance hosts a twice weekly discussion forum on restorative justice called Restorative Justice on the Rise.

[ 120 ] There is public discussion about the restorative justice movement, as well as an archive of past discussions since January 27, 2019.

In July 2020 the BBC Radio 4 series The Punch examined the case of Jacob Dunne who was convicted of manslaughter after landing one blow on his victim, James Hodgkinson, in a fight outside a pub. Hodgkinson did not recover and died nine days later. The programme told of the meeting between Dunne and Hodgkinson's parents and considered the impact on both parties.

[ 121 ] See also [ edit ] Bullying Civil Rights and Restorative Justice Project Community Resolutions Conflict resolution Distributive justice Hoʻoponopono International Institute for Restorative Practices Instrumental theories of justice Reparations (transitional justice) Right to an effective remedy Sentencing disparity Therapeutic jurisprudence Transformative justice Transitional justice Victimology Victims' rights Youth intervention References [ edit ] ^ "Report series № 52. Restorative Justice Theory and Practice: Addressing the Discrepancy" .

Heuni . 2024-06-18 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Teoria e Prática da Justiça Restaurativa: abordando a discrepância - RJ4ALL PUBLICATIONS" . 2020-06-30 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ Wilson, Jon.

"Victim-Centered Restorative Justice: An Essential Distinction" (PDF) .

^ a b "Restorative Justice 101 for Victims – Just Alternatives" . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ "RJU0049 - Evidence on Restorative justice" .

committees.parliament.uk . Retrieved 2025-05-09 .

^ Lia, Andrea de (2024).

La giustizia riparativa negli Stati Uniti d'America [ The Restorative Justice in the United States of America ] (in Italian). Roma: Dike Giuridica Editrice.

ISBN 978-88-582-1687-3 .

OCLC 1512965173 .

^ "The RJ4All Restorative Justice Practice Framework: 10 steps to delivering safe and compliant restorative justice practice - RJ4ALL PUBLICATIONS" . 2024-04-22 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ Rebecca Webber, "A New Kind of Criminal Justice" , Parade , October 25, 2009, p. 6. Retrieved 8 July 2019 ^ a b c d Lawrence W Sherman & Heather Strang (2007).

"Restorative Justice: The Evidence" (PDF) . University of Pennsylvania.

^ Gavrielides, Theo, ed. (2021).

"Comparative Restorative Justice" .

SpringerLink .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-74874-6 .

ISBN 978-3-030-74873-9 .

^ a b Gade, Christian B. N. (2021).

"Is restorative justice punishment?" .

Conflict Resolution Quarterly .

38 (3): 127– 155.

doi : 10.1002/crq.21293 .

S2CID 230548330 .

^ Gavrielides, Theo (2025), Gavrielides, Theo (ed.), "Rehabilitation and Restorative Justice Reconstructed: A New Vision and Practice of Punishment as Cathartic Pain" , Addressing Violent Radicalisation and Extremism: A Restorative Justice & Psychosocial Approach , Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, pp.

27– 39, doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-84032-6_2 , ISBN 978-3-031-84032-6 , retrieved 2025-05-09 ^ a b c Latimer, Jeff; Dowden, Craig; Muise, Danielle (2005).

"The Effectiveness of Restorative Justice Practices: A Meta-Analysis" The Prison Journal. 85(2):127–144" (PDF) .

^ a b c Government of Canada, Department of Justice (2002-03-11).

"Victims' Experiences with, Expectations and Perceptions of Restorative Justice: A critical Review of the Literature" .

www.justice.gc.ca . Retrieved 2023-05-30 .

^ Barshay, Jill (2019-05-06).

"The promise of 'restorative justice' starts to falter under rigorous research" .

The Hechinger Report . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ a b c d Hennessey Hayes, "Assessing Reoffending in Restorative Justice Conferences" (2005) 38(1) Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology 77 ^ a b Sbicca, Joshua (2016). "These Bars Can't Hold Us Back: Plowing Incarcerated Geographies with Restorative Food Justice".

Antipode .

48 (5): 1359– 1379.

Bibcode : 2016Antip..48.1359S .

doi : 10.1111/anti.12247 .

^ a b c d John Braithwaite, "Restorative Justice: assessing optimistic and pessimistic accounts" in Michael Tonry (ed), Crime and Justice: A Review of Research (Volume 25, 1999) 1 ^ Joanna Shapland (December 2013). "Implications of growth: Challenges for restorative justice".

International Review of Victimology .

20 : 111– 127.

doi : 10.1177/0269758013510808 .

S2CID 145088610 .

^ "Routledge International Handbook of Restorative Justice" .

Routledge & CRC Press . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Accountability Dialogues – Just Alternatives" . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ Capstick, Lily (18 September 2019).

"Restorative Justice Circles and the Community Member's Role" .

The Conflict Center . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ "Restorative Justice Literature Review" (PDF) .

Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention . Dept. of Justice Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ Jackson-Green, Bryant (6 August 2015).

"Restorative-justice programs ensure that property-crime victims are compensated for their losses and reduce prison costs" .

Illinois Policy .

^ Braithwaite, John (2001-11-15), Braithwaite, John (ed.), "Responsive Regulation" , Restorative Justice & Responsive Regulation , Oxford University Press, p. 0, ISBN 978-0-19-513639-5 , retrieved 2025-07-20 ^ a b Braithwaite, John (2004-01-01). "Restorative Justice and De-Professionalization".

The Good Society .

13 (1): 28– 31.

doi : 10.1353/gso.2004.0023 .

ISSN 1538-9731 .

S2CID 143707224 .

^ Boyes-Watson, C. (2014). Suffolk University, College of Arts & Sciences, Center for Restorative Justice ^ "Victim-Offender Reconciliation Programs: Pro and Con | Office of Justice Programs" .

www.ojp.gov . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ Zehr, Howard. Changing Lenses – A New Focus for Crime and Justice. Scottdale PA: 2005 (3rd ed), 271.

^ Zehr, Howard.

The Little Book of Restorative Justice , Intercourse, PA: Good Books, 2002.

^ Braithwaite, J.

Restorative Justice & Responsive Regulation 2002 , Oxford University Press, at 249.

ISBN 0-19-515839-3 ^ "See pages 13–18 in Gade, C.B.N. 2013. Restorative Justice and the South African Truth and Reconciliation Process, South African Journal of Philosophy 32(1), 10–35" (PDF) . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ Van Ness, Daniel W., Karen Heetderks Strong.

Restoring Justice – An Introduction to Restorative Justice . 4th ed. New Province, N.J.: Matthew Bender & Co., Inc., 2010: 21–22.

^ "Vol. 17, No. 1, January 1977 of The British Journal of Criminology on JSTOR" .

www.jstor.org . Retrieved 2024-09-29 .

^ Halvorsen, Vidar (2014).

"Nils Christie" .

academic.oup.com . pp.

335– 352.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199673612.003.0018 .

ISBN 978-0-19-967361-2 . Retrieved 2024-09-29 .

^ Zehr, Howard.

Changing Lenses – A New Focus for Crime and Justice . Scottdale PA: 2005, 268–269.

^ "Utu" .

Ministry of Justice, New Zealand . Archived from the original on 10 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 September 2013 .

^ Takagi, Paul; Shank, Gregory (2004).

"Critique of Restorative Justice" .

Social Justice .

31 (3 (97)): 147– 163.

ISSN 1043-1578 .

JSTOR 29768262 .

^ Justin Blake Richland; Sarah Deer (2009).

Introduction to Tribal Legal Studies . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

347 .

ISBN 978-0-7591-1211-7 .

^ Dorne, Clifford K.

Restorative Justice in the United States . N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008: 167.

^ Van Ness, Daniel W., Karen Heetderks Strong.

Restoring Justice – An Introduction to Restorative Justice . 4th ed. New Province, N.J.: Matthew Bender & Co., Inc., 2010: 24.

^ Dorne, Clifford K.

Restorative Justice in the United States . N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008: 8.

^ Johnstone, Gerry, Daniel W. Van Ness. Handbook of Restorative Justice. Devon, UK: Willan Publishing, 2007: 55 (footnote).

^ Van Ness, Daniel W., Karen Heetderks Strong.

Restoring Justice – An Introduction to Restorative Justice . 4th ed. New Province, N.J.: Matthew Bender & Co., Inc., 2010: 27.

^ Johnstone, Gerry, Daniel W. Van Ness. Handbook of Restorative Justice. Devon, UK: Willan Publishing, 2007: 76–77.

^ Johnstone, Gerry, Daniel W. Van Ness. Handbook of Restorative Justice. Devon, UK: Willan Publishing, 2007: 77.

^ Umbreit, Mark, Marilyn Peterson Armour.

Restorative Justice Dialogue – An Essential Guide for Research and Practice . New York: Springer Publishing Co., 2011: 2.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Johnstone, Gerry, Daniel W. Van Ness.

Handbook of Restorative Justice . Devon, UK: Willan Publishing, 2007: 512.

^ a b Dorne, Clifford K.

Restorative Justice in the United States . N.J.: Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008: 166–167.

^ Pelikan, Christa/Trenczek, Thomas: Victim offender mediation and Restorative Justice – the European landscape, in Sullivan, D./Tifft, L. (eds.) Handbook of Restorative Justice: A Global Perspective; Taylor and Francis, London (UK) 2006, pp. 63–90; Trenczek, T.: Restorative Justice, TOA und Mediation – Grundlagen, Praxisprobleme und Perspektiven; in: Baier, D. et al. (eds.): Festschrift für Christian Pfeiffer; Baden-Baden Febr. 2014, pp. 605–623; Trenczek, T. Restorative justice: new paradigm, sensitising theory or even practice?. Restorative Justice: an International Journal, Routledge 2015, 3:3, 453–459.

^ "Mediation und Konfliktmanagement – Literatur" . Steinberg-mediation-hannover.de. 2006-05-15 . Retrieved 2016-09-14 .

^ Trenczek , T. Restorative justice: new paradigm, sensitising theory or even practice?. Restorative Justice: an International Journal, Routledge 2015, 3:3, 453–459; Trenczek, T. (2013): Beyond Restorative Justice to Restorative Practice; in Cornwell, D./Blad, J./Wright, M. (eds.) Civilizing Criminal Justice, Hook, Hampshire (UK) 2013, pp. 409–428.

^ "Recommendation CM/Rec(2018)8 of the Committee of Ministers to member States concerning restorative justice in criminal matters" . 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 7 March 2019 .

^ Leebaw, Bronwyn (2003). "Legitimation or Judgment? South Africa's Restorative Approach to Transitional Justice".

Polity .

36 (1): 23– 51.

doi : 10.1086/POLv36n1ms3235422 .

S2CID 158001669 .

^ Leo Zaibert, Punishment And Retribution (Ashgate Publishing 2006).

^ "Pono Kaulike: A Hawaii Criminal Court Provides Restorative Justice Practices for Healing Relationships" . Uscourts.gov. Archived from the original on 2015-03-01 . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ "Lesson 1: What Is Restorative Justice?" .

Restorative Justice . Retrieved 2021-02-17 .

^ Toews, Barb (2006).

The Little Book of Restorative Justice for People in Prison – Rebuilding the Web of Relationships . Intercourse, PA: Good Books.

ISBN 978-1-68099-250-2 .

OCLC 969446118 – via Internet Archive.

^ Walker, Lorenn; Tarutani, Cheri; McKibben, Diana (2015).

"Benefits of Restorative Reentry Circles for Children of Incarcerated Parents in Hawai'i" . In Gal, Ṭali; Faedi Duramy, Benedetta (eds.).

International Perspectives and Empirical Findings on Child Participation . Oxford University Press. pp.

333– 354.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199366989.003.0015 .

ISBN 978-0-19-936699-6 .

OCLC 903531558 .

SSRN 2666828 .

^ Albrecht, Berit (2011). "The Limits of Restorative Justice in Prison".

Peace Review .

23 (3): 327– 334.

doi : 10.1080/10402659.2011.596059 .

S2CID 143537764 .

^ Walker, Lorenn (Fall 2005).

"E Makua Ana Youth Circles: A Transition Planning Process for Youth Exiting Foster Care" .

VOMA Connections (21).

^ Braithwaite, J., Restorative Justice and Responsive Regulation, 2002.

^ "The International Institute for Restorative Practices" . Iirp.org . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ Restorative Justice in Somerset [ permanent dead link ] ^ Jeanne Stinchcomb; Gordon Bazemore; Nancy Riestenberg (April 2006).

"Beyond Zero Tolerance: Restoring Justice in Secondary Schools" .

Youth Violence and Juvenile Justice .

4 (2): 123– 147.

doi : 10.1177/1541204006286287 .

S2CID 56257601 .

^ a b Smith, D (2015).

Punitive or Restorative: The Choice Is Yours .

^ a b alvis, m (2015). "Teachers' perceptions about using restorative practices based on programs in school".

The College at Brockport: State of University of New York .

^ a b Robbins, Brian (2014). "A study of the implementation of restorative justice at a public high school in southern California".

Claremont College : 1– 60.

^ Government of Canada, Department of Justice (2002-03-11).

"Victims' Experiences with, Expectations and Perceptions of Restorative Justice: A critical Review of the Literature" .

www.justice.gc.ca . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ a b c Livingstone, Nuala; MacDonald, Geraldine; Carr, Nicola (2013).

"Restorative justice conferencing for reducing recidivism in young offenders (aged 7 to 21)" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2020 (2): CD008898.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD008898.pub2 .

PMC 7388302 .

PMID 23450592 .

^ "Victim Impact Statements – Just Alternatives" . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ "Restorative Justice – What Works" .

College of Policing . 2015-08-27 . Retrieved 2018-05-25 .

^ Peachey, D. (1989) ‘The Kitchener experiment,’ min M. Wright and B. Galaway (eds.) Mediation and Criminal Justice; victims, offenders and community, London: Sage.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ Williams, Clifford (1997) ‘Offenders and Victims of Crime; Mediation and reparation in the criminal justice system, including case studies of mediation and reparation projects organised by the probation service’ Unpublished PhD University of Bradford (1997) ^ Lead Daniel Penny prosecutor secured light sentence for thug who killed 87-year-old in ATM robbery , Fox News, December 4, 2024 ^ Restorative justice in action: A man killed another man, then he sat in a circle with his victim’s family , New York Daily News, December 9, 2019 ^ Manhattan DA's First Restorative Justice Sentencing Helps Victim's Family Find Peace , Gothamist, December 9, 2019 ^ Doolan, M. (August 7, 1999).

"The family group conference – 10 years on. Paper presented at "Building Strong Partnerships for Restorative Practices Conference" " . Burlington, VT. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013.

^ Whitehead, John; Roffee, James (Mar 2016).

"Child sexual abuse in Fiji: Authority, risk factors and responses" .

Current Issues in Criminal Justice .

27 (3): 323– 334.

doi : 10.1080/10345329.2016.12036049 .

hdl : 1959.17/178208 .

S2CID 151430646 .

^ "Toward Peace and Justice in Brazil Dominic Barter and Restorative Circles" (PDF) . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ Lyubansky, Mikhail; Barter, Dominic (1970-01-01). "A restorative approach to interpersonal racial conflict".

Peace Review .

23 : 37– 44.

doi : 10.1080/10402659.2011.548248 .

S2CID 9008785 .

^ Restorative Circles – A Reentry Planning Process for Hawaii Inmates Restorative circles Archived 2011-10-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Restorative Justice: An Alternative to Court" .

mineslaw.com . Archived from the original on 2014-11-12 . Retrieved 2014-11-12 .

^ O'Connell, Terry; Wachtel, Ben; Wachtel, Ted (1999).

Conferencing Handbook: The New Real Justice Training Manual . Pipersville, PA: The Piper's Press.

^ Morris, A.; Maxwell, G. (2001), "Restorative conferencing", in Bazemore, G.; Schiff, M. (eds.), Restorative community justice: Repairing harm and transforming communities , Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing Co., pp.

173– 197 ^ a b Marsavelski, Aleksandar; Sheremeti, Furtuna; Braithwaite, John (2018). "Did Nonviolent Resistance Fail in Kosovo?".

British Journal of Criminology .

58 : 218– 236.

doi : 10.1093/bjc/azx002 .

^ "Circles of Support & Accountability: A Canadian National Replication of Outcome Findings" Robin J. Wilson, Franca Cortoni, Andrew J. McWhinnie, 2007 ^ Ruggiero, Vincenzo (2011).

"An Abolitionist View of Restorative Justice" (PDF) .

International Journal of Law, Crime and Justice .

39 (2): 100– 110.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijlcj.2011.03.001 .

^ Latimer, Jeff; Dowden, Craig; Muise, Danielle (June 2005).

"The Effectiveness of Restorative Justice Practices: A Meta-Analysis" .

The Prison Journal .

85 (2): 127– 144.

doi : 10.1177/0032885505276969 .

ISSN 0032-8855 .

S2CID 18534688 .

^ "Community Justice: Transforming Communities Through Restorative Justice?" , Restorative Community Justice , Routledge, pp.

131– 154, 2015-05-20, doi : 10.4324/9781315721347-12 , ISBN 978-1-315-72134-7 , retrieved 2023-05-30 ^ Choi, Jung Jin; Gilbert, Michael J. (June 2010).

" 'Joe everyday, people off the street': a qualitative study on mediators' roles and skills in victim–offender mediation" .

Contemporary Justice Review .

13 (2): 207– 227.

doi : 10.1080/10282581003748305 .

ISSN 1028-2580 .

S2CID 145272795 .

^ "Securing Restorative Justice for the 'Non-Participating' Victim" , New Visions of Crime Victims , Hart Publishing, 2002, doi : 10.5040/9781472559258.ch-005 , ISBN 978-1-84113-280-8 , retrieved 2023-05-30 ^ a b Choi, Jung Jin; Bazemore, Gordon; Gilbert, Michael J. (2012-01-01).

"Review of research on victims' experiences in restorative justice: Implications for youth justice" .

Children and Youth Services Review .

34 (1): 35– 42.

doi : 10.1016/j.childyouth.2011.08.011 .

ISSN 0190-7409 .

^ Gerkin, Patrick M. (2008-11-24).

"Participation in Victim— Offender Mediation" .

Criminal Justice Review .

34 (2): 226– 247.

doi : 10.1177/0734016808325058 .

ISSN 0734-0168 .

S2CID 29218371 .

^ Peleg-Koriat, Inbal; Weimann-Saks, Dana (2020-12-17).

"The Role of Proneness to Guilt and Shame Among People in Custody in Promoting Restorative Justice Processes" .

Criminal Justice and Behavior .

48 (7): 999– 1017.

doi : 10.1177/0093854820980506 .

ISSN 0093-8548 .

S2CID 230555494 .

^ Wahlin, Lottie (2005), "Victim-Offender Mediation in Sweden" , Victim-Offender Mediation with Youth Offenders in Europe , Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp.

77– 100, doi : 10.1007/1-4020-3879-8_4 , ISBN 1-4020-3766-X , retrieved 2023-05-30 ^ Government of Canada, Department of Justice (2021-10-30).

"Victims of Crime Research Digest No. 14" .

www.justice.gc.ca . Retrieved 2023-05-30 .

^ ICTJ; Simon Robins (2011-01-07).

" "To Live as Other Kenyans Do": A Study of the Reparative Demands of Kenyan Victims of Human Rights Violations | International Center for Transitional Justice" . Ictj.org . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ "| European Forum for Restorative Justice" .

www.euforumrj.org . Retrieved 2025-04-12 .

^ "Sharon Daniel: Inside The Distance" .

National Center on Restorative Justice . 2021-11-17 . Retrieved 2025-04-12 .

^ a b Jaimie Beven et al., "Restoration or Renovation: Evaluating Restorative Justice Outcomes" (2005) 12(1) Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 194 ^ Katherine Basire, "Taking Restorative Justice Seriously" (2004) 13 Canterbury Law Review 31 ^ James Bonta et al., "Restorative Justice and Recidivism: Promises Made, Promises Kept?" in Dennis Sullivan and Larry Tifft (eds), Handbook of Restorative Justice: A Global Perspective (2006) 108 ^ William R. Nugent; Mark S. Umbreit; Lizabeth Wiinamaki; Jeff Paddock.

"Participation in Victim-Offender Mediation Reduces Recidivism" (PDF) .

VOMA Connections (summer 1999) .

^ "Crime meetings 'cut re-offences' " . BBC News. 2007-02-05 . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ McCold, Paul; Wachtel, Benjamin (May 1998).

Restorative policing experiment: the Bethlehem Pennsylvania police family group conferencing project (PDF) (Technical report). Pipersville, PA: Community Service Foundation.

^ a b Fulham, Lindsay; Blais, Julie; Rugge, Tanya; Schultheis, Elizabeth A (2023-11-30).

"The effectiveness of restorative justice programs: A meta-analysis of recidivism and other relevant outcomes" .

Criminology & Criminal Justice .

doi : 10.1177/17488958231215228 .

ISSN 1748-8958 .

OCLC 10080560272 .

^ Morris, Allison (2002). "Critiquing the Critics: A Brief Response to Critics of Restorative Justice".

The British Journal of Criminology .

42 (3): 596– 615.

doi : 10.1093/bjc/42.3.596 .

^ Dzur, Albert W.; Susan M. Olson (2004). "Revisiting Informal Justice: Restorative Justice And Democratic Professionalism".

Law & Society Review .

38 (1): 139– 176.

doi : 10.1111/j.0023-9216.2004.03801005.x .

^ Shank, Gregory; Paul Takagi (2004). "Critique of Restorative Justice".

Social Justice .

31 (3): 147– 163.

^ Lofton, Bonnie Price. "Does Restorative Justice Challenge Systemic Injustices?" in Critical Issues in Restorative Justice (2004), edited by Howard Zehr and Barb Toews.

^ Armour, M (2013). "Restorative Justice in School Communities:Successes, Obstacles, and Areas for Improvement".

The University of Texas School of Social Wor .

^ Albrecht, Berit (July 2011). "The Limits of Restorative Justice in Prison".

Peace Review .

23 (3): 327– 334.

doi : 10.1080/10402659.2011.596059 .

S2CID 143537764 .

^ Richards, Kelly M. (2005). "Unlikely Friends? Oprah Winfrey And Restorative Justice".

Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology .

38 (5): 381– 399.

doi : 10.1375/acri.38.3.381 .

S2CID 143492676 .

^ De Mesmaecker, Vicky (2010). "Building Social Support For Restorative Justice Through The Media: Is Taking the Victim Perspective The Most Appropriate Strategy?".

Contemporary Justice Review .

13 (3): 239– 267.

doi : 10.1080/10282580.2010.498225 .

S2CID 218554174 .

^ "The key to forgiveness is the refusal to seek revenge" .

The Guardian . 8 February 2013 . Retrieved Feb 21, 2013 .

^ "Beyond Right & Wrong: Stories of Justice and Forgiveness" . Forgiveness Project. February 1, 2013. Archived from the original on March 2, 2013 . Retrieved Feb 22, 2013 .

^ Augusta-Scott, T., (2017). Preparing Men to Help the Women They Abused Achieve Just Outcomes: A Restorative Approach. In T. Augusta-Scott, K. Scott, & L. Tutty (Eds.).  Innovations in Interventions to Address Intimate Partner Violence: Research and Practice. New York: Routledge Press.

^ "Courage To Change: What It Takes to Shift to Restorative Discipline" .

KQED . NPR. 24 October 2017.

^ "Restorative Justice on the Rise!" .

The Peace Alliance . 27 January 2015 . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

^ New Beginnings .

The Punch .

BBC Radio 4 .

External links [ edit ] A Survey of Doctoral Dissertations in Restorative Justice (1997–2018) BBC story on 2007 Cambridge University report Conference Facilitator's Script v t e Types of justice In philosophy Commutative Distributive Divine Interactional Global Natural Organizational Procedural Victor's Recognition Areas Climate Criminal Economic Environmental Equality Fairness Gender Military Racial Reproductive Restorative Retributive Resource Social Spatial Speedy Trade Transformative Utilitarian Other Frontier Poetic Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Restorative_justice&oldid=1302756199 " Categories : Restorative justice Concepts in political philosophy Criminal justice Crime prevention Mediation Positive criminology Relational ethics Social work Theories of law Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Pages with missing ISBNs All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles prone to spam from March 2016 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 09:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Restorative justice 23 languages Add topic

