Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Work 3 Ideas and influence 4 Publications 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Carl von Savigny 39 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malti مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German jurist and historian (1779–1861) Friedrich Carl von Savigny Born ( 1779-02-21 ) 21 February 1779 Frankfurt am Main , Holy Roman Empire Died 25 October 1861 (1861-10-25) (aged 82) Berlin , Kingdom of Prussia Philosophical work Era 19th century philosophy Region Western philosophy German philosophy School German Historical School Main interests Legal studies , legal philosophy Minister of Justice of Prussia (Minister for the Revision of Laws) In office 28 February 1842 – 20 March 1848 Monarch Frederick William IV Preceded by Karl Albert von Kamptz Succeeded by Friedrich Wilhelm Ludwig Bornemann [ de ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Friedrich Carl von Savigny (21 February 1779 – 25 October 1861) was a German jurist and historian.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Savigny was born at Frankfurt am Main , of a family recorded in the history of Lorraine , deriving its name from the castle of Savigny near Charmes in the valley of the Moselle . Left as orphan at the age of 13, Savigny was brought up by a guardian. In 1795, he entered the University of Marburg , where, though in poor health, he studied under Professors Anton Bauer (jurist) [ de ; eo ; es ; fr ; ru ; sv ] and Philipp Friedrich Weiss [ de ] , the former a pioneer in the reform of the German criminal law, the latter distinguished for his knowledge of medieval jurisprudence. After the fashion of German students, Savigny visited several universities, notably Jena , Leipzig and Halle ; and returning to Marburg, took his doctorate in 1800. At Marburg he lectured as Privatdozent on criminal law and the Pandects .

Work [ edit ] In 1803 Savigny published Das Recht des Besitzes (The Law of Possession).

[ 3 ] Anton Thibaut hailed it as a masterpiece which brought the old uncritical study of Roman law to an end. It quickly obtained a European reputation, and remains a prominent landmark in the history of jurisprudence. In 1804 he married Kunigunde Brentano, sister of Bettina von Arnim and Clemens Brentano the poet. The same year he embarked on an extensive tour through France and south Germany in search of fresh sources of Roman law.

In 1808 Savigny was appointed full professor of Roman law at Landshut . He remained in this position for a year and a half. In 1810 he was appointed to the chair of Roman law at the new University of Berlin , chiefly at the insistence of Wilhelm von Humboldt . Here, in connection with the faculty of law, he created a Spruch-Collegium , an extraordinary tribunal competent to deliver opinions on cases remitted to it by the ordinary courts; and he took an active part in its labours. This was the busiest time of his life. He was engaged in lecturing, in government of the university (of which he was the third rector), and as tutor to the crown prince in Roman, criminal and Prussian law. During his time in Berlin, Savigny befriended Barthold Georg Niebuhr and Karl Friedrich Eichhorn .

In 1814 Savigny wrote the pamphlet Vom Beruf unserer Zeit für Gesetzgebung und Rechtswissenschaft [ de ; ja ] (Of the Vocation of our Age for Legislation and Legal Science). In an earlier pamphlet, Thibaut advocated for the creation of a unified legal code for Germany, free from the influence of foreign legal systems. In contrast, Savigny contended that such codification would have a detrimental effect. In his view, the damage that had been caused by the neglect of former generations of jurists could not be quickly repaired, and more time was required to set the house in order. Moreover, a unified legal code would almost certainly be influenced by natural law, with its "infinite arrogance" and its "shallow philosophy". It was Savigny's opinion that legal science should be saved from the "hollow abstractions" of such a work as Christian Wolff 's Institutiones juris naturae et gentium .  Savigny opposed this conception of legal science to the "historical study of positive law", which according to him is "a condition precedent to right understanding of the science of all law". Savigny did not oppose the introduction of new laws or of a new system of laws, but considered that the laws of any nation should reflect the "national spirit ( Volksgeist )".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1815 Savigny, together with Eichhorn and Johann Friedrich Ludwig Göschen [ de ; hu ; it ; ru ; sv ] , founded the Zeitschrift für geschichtliche Rechtswissenschaft [ de ; no ] (Journal for Historical Legal Science), the organ of the new historical school . In this periodical (vol. iii. p. 129 seq.) Savigny made known to the world the discovery by Niebuhr in Verona of the lost Institutes of Gaius . Savigny pronounced it to be the work of Gaius himself and not, as Niebuhr had suggested, of Ulpian .

The same year, 1815, Savigny published the first volume of his Geschichte des römischen Rechts im Mittelalter (History of Roman Law in the Middle Ages), [ 6 ] the sixth and final volume of which did not appear until 1831. He had been prompted to write this work by his early instructor Weiss. Savigny intended it to be a literary history of Roman law from Irnerius to the present time. His design was in some respects narrowed; in others it was widened. He did not continue the narrative beyond the 16th century, when the separation of nationalities disturbed the foundations of the science of law. In the first volume, Savigny treated the history of Roman law from the breaking up of the empire until the beginning of the 12th century. According to Savigny, Roman law, although considered dead, lived on in local customs, in towns, in ecclesiastical doctrines and school teachings, until it once again reappeared in Bologna and other Italian cities.

In 1817 Savigny was appointed a member of the commission for organizing the Prussian provincial estates, and also a member of the department of justice in the Staatsrath (State Council). In 1819 he became a member of the supreme court of appeal for the Rhine Provinces. In 1820 he was made a member of the commission for revising the Prussian code. In 1822 he was afflicted with nervous illness, which compelled him to seek relief in travel. In 1835 Savigny began his elaborate work on contemporary Roman law, System des heutigen römischen Rechts (8 vols., 1840–1849). His activity as professor ceased in March 1842, when he was appointed " Grosskanzler " (High Chancellor), the head of the Prussian legal system. In this position he carried out several important law reforms in regard to bills of exchange and divorce. He held the office until 1848, when he resigned.

In 1850, on the occasion of the jubilee of obtaining his doctor's degree, appeared in five volumes his Vermischte Schriften (Miscellaneous Writings), consisting of a collection of minor works published between 1800 and 1844. Savigny was hailed throughout Germany as "the great master" and founder of modern jurisprudence. In 1851 and 1853 he published the two volumes of his treatise on the law of obligations, Das Obligationenrecht , mostly on what English-speaking lawyers consider as contract law. It was a supplement to his work on modern Roman law, in which he again argued for the necessity of the historical treatment of law.

Savigny died in Berlin. His son, Karl Friedrich von Savigny (1814–1875), was Prussian minister of foreign affairs in 1849. He represented Prussia in important diplomatic transactions, especially in 1866.

Ideas and influence [ edit ] Savigny belongs to the German historical school of jurists , founded by Gustav Hugo , and served a role in its consolidation. The works for which Savigny is best known are the Recht des Besitzes and the Beruf unserer Zeit für Gesetzgebung . According to Jhering "with the Recht des Besitzes the juridical method of the Romans was regained, and modern jurisprudence born." It was seen as a great advance both in results and method, and rendered obsolete a large body of literature. Savigny argued that in Roman law possession had always reference to "usucapion" or to "interdicts". It did not include a right to continuance in possession but only to immunity from interference as possession is based on the consciousness of unlimited power. These and other propositions were derived by the interpretation and harmonization of the Roman jurists. However, many of Savigny's conclusions did not meet with universal acclaim. They were opposed by, among others, Jhering , Gans , and Bruns.

Savigny argued in the Beruf unserer Zeit that law is part and parcel of national life. He opposed the idea, common to French 18th century jurists and Bentham, that law can be arbitrarily imposed on a country irrespective of its state of civilization and history. Another important idea of Savigny is that the practice and theory of jurisprudence cannot be divorced without injury to both.

Publications [ edit ] Major publications by Savigny include: von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1803).

Das Recht des Besitzes. Eine civilistische Abhandlung (in German) (1 ed.). Gießen: Heyer.

English translation by Perry, Thomas Erskine (1848): " Von Savigny's Treatise on Possession: Or, the Jus Possessionis of the Civil Law ", (6 ed.). London: S. Sweet.

Abridged English translation by Kelleher, J. (1888): " Possession in the civil law. Abridged from the Treatise of von Savigny to which added the Text of the Title on Possession from the Digest ". Calcutta: Thacker.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1814).

Vom Beruf unserer Zeit für Gesetzgebung und Rechtswissenschaft (in German) (1 ed.). Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer.

doi : 10.11588/diglit.11451 .

English translation by Hayward, Abraham (1831): " Of the Vocation of our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence ". London: Littlewood.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1840).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 1. Berlin: Veit.

English translation of Volume 1 by Holloway, William (1867): " System of the Modern Roman Law, Volume I ". Madras: Higginbotham.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1840).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 2. Berlin: Veit.

English translation of Volume 2 by Rattigan, Henry (1884): " Jural Relations: Or, The Roman Law of Persons as Subjects of Jural Relations ". London: Wildly.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1840).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 3. Berlin: Veit.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1841).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 4. Berlin: Veit.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1841).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 5. Berlin: Veit.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1847).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 6. Berlin: Veit.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1848).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 7. Berlin: Veit.

von Savigny, Friedrich Carl (1849).

System des heutigen römischen Rechts (in German). Vol. 8. Berlin: Veit.

English translation of Volume 8 by Guthrie, William (1869): " Private International Law. A Treatise on the Conflict of Laws ". London: T & T Clark.

References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Savigny, Friedrich Karl von" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

242– 243.

^ Montmorency, James E. G. de (1913).

"Friedrich Carl von Savigny" . In Macdonell, John ; Manson, Edward William Donoghue (eds.).

Great Jurists of the World . London: John Murray. pp.

561– 589 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 – via Internet Archive.

^ archive.org ^ von Savigny, Frederick Charles (1831).

Of the Vocation of Our Age for Legislation and Jurisprudence . Translated by Abraham Hayward (2 ed.). London: Littlewood.

ISBN 9781584771890 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hattenhauer, Hans, ed. (2002).

Thibaut und Savigny: ihre programmatischen Schriften (2 ed.). München: Verlag Franz Vahlen.

^ Geschichte des römischen Rechts im Mittelalter , erster Band Sources [ edit ] Beiser, Frederick C. (2011), "Savigny and the Historical School of Law", The German Historist Tradition , Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.

214– 252, doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199691555.003.0006 , ISBN 9780199691555 Berkowitz, Roger (2005), "From Science to Technique: Friedrich Carl von Savigny, the BGB, and the Self-Overcoming of Legal Science", The Gift of Science: Leibniz and the Modern Legal Tradition , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp.

109– 158, doi : 10.4159/9780674020795 , ISBN 978-0-674-02079-5 .

Bethmann-Hollweg, Moritz August (1867).

Erinnerung an Friedrich Carl von Savigny als Rechtslehrer, Staatsmann und Christ (in German). Weimar: Böhlau.

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Savigny, Friedrich Karl von" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

242– 243.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Karl Friedrich Savigny" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Kantorowicz, Hermann (1937).

"Savigny and the Historical School of Law" .

Law Quarterly Review .

53 : 326.

Klenner, Hermann (1989). "Savigny's Research Program of the Historical School of Law and Its Intellectual Impact in 19th Century Berlin".

American Journal of Comparative Law .

37 (1): 67– 80.

doi : 10.2307/840441 .

JSTOR 840441 .

Landsberg, Ernst (1890).

Friedrich Karl von Savigny (in German). Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot.

de Montmorency, James Edward Geoffrey (1914).

"Friedrich Carl von Savigny" . In Macdonell, John ; Manson, Edward (eds.).

Great Jurists of the World . Little, Brown, and Company. pp.

561– 589.

LCCN 14013574 .

Rudorff, Adolf August Friedrich (1862).

Friedrich Carl von Savigny: Erinnerung an sein Wesen und Wirken (in German). Weimar: Böhlau.

Stinzing, Johann August Roderich (1862).

Friedrich Carl von Savigny. Ein Beitrag zu seiner Würdigung (in German). Berlin: Reimer.

External links [ edit ] Complete works and editions from Savigny at ParalipomenaIuris v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Carl_von_Savigny&oldid=1300660297 " Categories : 1779 births 1861 deaths Writers from Frankfurt Lorraine nobility Jurists from Hesse Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) University of Jena alumni Leipzig University alumni University of Halle alumni German monarchists Scholars of comparative law University of Marburg alumni Academic staff of the University of Marburg Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin Members of the Prussian House of Lords Members of the Prussian State Council (1817-1918) German legal scholars Justice ministers of Prussia Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Carl von Savigny 39 languages Add topic

