Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description 3 In oceanography and marine biology Toggle In oceanography and marine biology subsection 3.1 Supralittoral zone 3.2 Eulittoral zone 3.3 Sublittoral zone 4 Habitats in littoral zones 5 In freshwater ecosystems 6 Other definitions 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Littoral zone 51 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a sea, lake, or river that is close to the shore "Littoral" and "Litoral" redirect here. For other uses, see Littoral (disambiguation) .

For the transfer of business or IT processes into a nearby country, see Nearshoring .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Littoral zone" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Different disciplines and agencies divide the littoral zone into different subregions, according to how they want to view the zone.

Marine habitats Coastal habitats Littoral zone Intertidal zone Estuaries Mangrove forests Seagrass meadows Kelp forests Coral reefs Continental shelf Neritic zone Ocean surface Surface microlayer Epipelagic zone Open ocean Pelagic zone Oceanic zone Sea floor Seamounts Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Benthic zone Marine sediment v t e The littoral zone , also called litoral or nearshore , is the part of a sea , lake , or river that is close to the shore .

[ 1 ] In coastal ecology , the littoral zone includes the intertidal zone extending from the high water mark (which is rarely inundated ), to coastal areas that are permanently submerged — known as the foreshore — and the terms are often used interchangeably. However, the geographical meaning of littoral zone extends well beyond the intertidal zone to include all neritic waters within the bounds of continental shelves .

Etymology [ edit ] The word littoral may be used both as a noun and as an adjective . It derives from the Latin noun litus, litoris , meaning "shore". (The doubled t is a late-medieval innovation, and the word is sometimes seen in the more classical-looking spelling litoral .) [ 2 ] Description [ edit ] The term has no single definition. What is regarded as the full extent of the littoral zone, and the way the littoral zone is divided into subregions, varies in different contexts. For lakes, the littoral zone is the nearshore habitat where photosynthetically active radiation penetrates to the lake bottom in sufficient quantities to support photosynthesis.

[ 1 ] The use of the term also varies from one part of the world to another, and between different disciplines. For example, military commanders speak of the littoral in ways that are quite different from the definition used by marine biologists .

The adjacency of water gives a number of distinctive characteristics to littoral regions. The erosive power of water results in particular types of landforms , such as sand dunes , and estuaries . The natural movement of the littoral along the coast is called the littoral drift . Biologically, the ready availability of water enables a greater variety of plant and animal life, and particularly the formation of extensive wetlands . In addition, the additional local humidity due to evaporation usually creates a microclimate supporting unique types of organisms.

In oceanography and marine biology [ edit ] The littoral zone of an ocean is the area close to the shore and extending out to the edge of the continental shelf.

The intertidal zone of a beach is also part of the littoral zone.

Estuaries are also in the littoral zone.

Look up littoral in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Look up circumlittoral , infralittoral , sublittoral , or supralittoral in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

In oceanography and marine biology , the idea of the littoral zone is extended roughly to the edge of the continental shelf . Starting from the shoreline, the littoral zone begins at the spray region just above the high tide mark. From here, it moves to the intertidal region between the high and low water marks, and then out as far as the edge of the continental shelf . These three subregions are called, in order, the supralittoral zone , the eulittoral zone , and the sublittoral zone .

Supralittoral zone [ edit ] Main article: Supralittoral zone The supralittoral zone (also called the splash , spray or supratidal zone ) is the area above the spring high tide line that is regularly splashed, but not submerged by ocean water. Seawater penetrates these elevated areas only during storms with high tides. Organisms that live here must cope with exposure to fresh water from rain, cold, heat, dryness and predation by land animals and seabirds. At the top of this area, patches of dark lichens can appear as crusts on rocks. Some types of periwinkles , Neritidae and detritus feeding Isopoda commonly inhabit the lower supralittoral.

[ 3 ] Eulittoral zone [ edit ] See also: Intertidal zone The eulittoral zone (also called the midlittoral or mediolittoral zone ) is the intertidal zone , known also as the foreshore . It extends from the spring high tide line, which is rarely inundated, to the spring low tide line, which is rarely not inundated. It is alternately exposed and submerged once or twice daily. Organisms living here must be able to withstand the varying conditions of temperature, light, and salinity. Despite this, productivity is high in this zone. The wave action and turbulence of recurring tides shape and reform cliffs, gaps and caves, offering a huge range of habitats for sedentary organisms. Protected rocky shorelines usually show a narrow, almost homogenous, eulittoral strip, often marked by the presence of barnacles . Exposed sites show a wider extension and are often divided into further zones. For more on this, see intertidal ecology .

Sublittoral zone [ edit ] See also: Neritic zone The sublittoral zone starts immediately below the eulittoral zone. This zone is permanently covered with seawater and is approximately equivalent to the neritic zone .

In physical oceanography , the sublittoral zone refers to coastal regions with significant tidal flows and energy dissipation, including non-linear flows, internal waves , river outflows and oceanic fronts. In practice, this typically extends to the edge of the continental shelf , with depths around 200 meters.

In marine biology, the sublittoral zone refers to the areas where sunlight reaches the ocean floor, that is, where the water is never so deep as to take it out of the photic zone . This results in high primary production and makes the sublittoral zone the location of the majority of sea life. As in physical oceanography, this zone typically extends to the edge of the continental shelf . The benthic zone in the sublittoral is much more stable than in the intertidal zone; temperature, water pressure, and the amount of sunlight remain fairly constant. Sublittoral corals do not have to deal with as much change as intertidal corals.

Corals can live in both zones, but they are more common in the sublittoral zone.

Within the sublittoral, marine biologists also identify the following: The infralittoral zone is the algal dominated zone, which may extend to five metres below the low water mark.

The circalittoral zone is the region beyond the infralittoral, that is, below the algal zone and dominated by sessile animals such as mussels and oysters .

Shallower regions of the sublittoral zone, extending not far from the shore, are sometimes referred to as the subtidal zone .

Habitats in littoral zones [ edit ] Many vertebrates (e.g., mammals, waterfowl, reptiles) and invertebrates (insects, etc.) use both the littoral zone as well as the terrestrial ecosystem for food and habitat. Biota that are commonly assumed to reside in the pelagic zone often rely heavily on resources from the littoral zone.

[ 4 ] Littoral areas of ponds and lakes are typically better oxygenated, structurally more complex, and afford more abundant and diverse food resources than do profundal sediments. All these factors lead to a high diversity of insects and very complex trophic interactions.

[ 4 ] The great lakes of the world represent a global heritage of surface freshwater and aquatic biodiversity. Species lists for 14 of the world's largest lakes reveal that 15% of the global diversity (the total number of species) of freshwater fishes, 9% of non-insect freshwater invertebrate diversity, and 2% of aquatic insect diversity live in this handful of lakes. The vast majority (more than 93%) of species inhabit the shallow, nearshore littoral zone, and 72% are completely restricted to the littoral zone, even though littoral habitats are a small fraction of total lake areas.

[ 5 ] Because the littoral zone is important for many recreational and industrial purposes, it is often severely affected by many human activities that increase nutrient loading, spread invasive species, cause acidification and climate change , and produce increased fluctuations in water level.

[ 4 ] Littoral zones are both more negatively affected by human activity and less intensively studied than offshore waters. Conservation of the remarkable biodiversity and biotic integrity of large lakes will require better integration of littoral zones into our understanding of lake ecosystem functioning and focused efforts to alleviate human impacts along the shoreline.

[ 5 ] In freshwater ecosystems [ edit ] The three primary zones of a lake are the littoral zone, the open-water (also called the photic or limnetic ) zone, and the deep-water (also called the aphotic or profundal ) zone.

Shoreline of a lake with nearly unvegetated littoral zone In freshwater situations, the littoral zone is the nearshore habitat where photosynthetically active radiation penetrates to the lake bottom in sufficient quantities to support photosynthesis.

[ 1 ] Sometimes other definitions are used. For example, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources defines littoral as that portion of the lake that is less than 15 feet in depth.

[ 6 ] Such fixed-depth definitions often do not accurately represent the true ecological zonation, but are sometimes used because they are simple measurements to make bathymetric maps or when there are no measurements of light penetration. The littoral zone comprises an estimated 78% of Earth's total lake area.

[ 1 ] The littoral zone may form a narrow or broad fringing wetland, with extensive areas of aquatic plants sorted by their tolerance to different water depths. Typically, four zones are recognized, from higher to lower on the shore: wooded wetland, wet meadow , marsh and aquatic vegetation .

[ 7 ] The relative areas of these four types depends not only on the profile of the shoreline, but upon past water levels. The area of wet meadow is particularly dependent upon past water levels; [ 8 ] in general, the area of wet meadows along lakes and rivers increases with natural water level fluctuations.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Many of the animals in lakes and rivers are dependent upon the wetlands of littoral zones, since the rooted plants provide habitat and food. Hence, a large and productive littoral zone is considered an important characteristic of a healthy lake or river.

[ 8 ] Littoral zones are at particular risk for two reasons. First, human settlement is often attracted to shorelines, and settlement often disrupts breeding habitats for littoral zone species. For example, many turtles are killed on roads when they leave the water to lay their eggs in upland sites. Fish can be negatively affected by docks and retaining walls which remove breeding habitat in shallow water. Some shoreline communities even deliberately try to remove wetlands since they may interfere with activities like swimming. Overall, the presence of human settlement has a demonstrated negative impact upon adjoining wetlands.

[ 11 ] An equally serious problem is the tendency to stabilize lake or river levels with dams. Dams removed the spring flood, which carries nutrients into littoral zones and reduces the natural fluctuation of water levels upon which many wetland plants and animals depend.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Hence, over time, dams can reduce the area of wetland from a broad littoral zone to a narrow band of vegetation. Marshes and wet meadows are at particular risk.

Other definitions [ edit ] For the purposes of naval operations, the US Navy divides the littoral zone in the ways shown on the diagram at the top of this article. The US Army Corps of Engineers and the US Environmental Protection Agency have their own definitions, which have legal implications.

The UK Ministry of Defence defines the littoral as those land areas (and their adjacent areas and associated air space) that are susceptible to engagement and influence from the sea .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Ballantine scale – Marine biology measurement scale Benthic zone – Ecological region at the lowest level of a body of water Coastal fish – Fish that inhabit the sea between the shoreline and the edge of the continental shelf Intertidal Zone – Area of coast exposed only at low tide Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Limnetic zone – Photic zone above the benthic zone in a freestanding body of water Littoral combat ship – Ship designed for operations near shore Littoral series – Shoreline where the land descends gradually into the sea Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Littoral warfare – Military operations in coastal waters Longshore drift – Sediment moved by the longshore current Marine debris – Human-created solid waste in the sea or ocean Neritic zone – Relatively shallow part of the ocean above the drop-off of the continental shelf Pelagic zone – Water column of the open ocean Profundal zone Shingle beach – Beach composed of gravel References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Seekell, D.; Cael, B.; Norman, S.; Byström, P. (2021).

"Patterns and variation of littoral habitat size among lakes" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

48 (20): e2021GL095046.

Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4895046S .

doi : 10.1029/2021GL095046 .

ISSN 1944-8007 .

S2CID 244253181 .

^ "littoral" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Yip and Madl ^ a b c Mandal, Abhishek; Dutta, Ahana; Das, Reshmi; Mukherjee, Joydeep (September 2021). "Role of intertidal microbial communities in carbon dioxide sequestration and pollutant removal: A review".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

170 : 112626.

Bibcode : 2021MarPB.17012626M .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2021.112626 .

^ a b Vadeboncoeur, Yvonne; McIntyre, Peter B.; Vander Zanden, M. Jake (July 2011). "Borders of Biodiversity: Life at the Edge of the World's Large Lakes".

BioScience .

61 (7): 526– 537.

doi : 10.1525/bio.2011.61.7.7 .

^ "Fisheries lake surveys" .

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources .

^ Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. Chapter 2.

^ a b Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

^ Wilcox, D.A, Thompson, T.A., Booth, R.K. and Nicholas, J.R. 2007. Lake-level variability and water availability in the Great Lakes. USGS Circular 1311. 25 p.

^ Hughes, F.M.R. (ed.). 2003. The Flooded Forest: Guidance for policy makers and river managers in Europe on the restoration of floodplain forests. FLOBAR2, Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. 96 p.

^ Houlahan, J. E.; Keddy, P. A.; Makkay, K.; Findlay, C. S. (2006). "The effects of adjacent land use on wetland species richness and community composition".

Wetlands .

26 (1): 79– 96.

doi : 10.1672/0277-5212(2006)26[79:TEOALU]2.0.CO;2 .

S2CID 8050261 .

^ Middleton, B. A., ed. (2002).

Flood Pulsing in Wetlands: Restoring the Natural Hydrological Balance . New York: John Wiley.

Bibcode : 2002fpwr.book...12M .

^ Keddy, P.A. 2010. Wetland Ecology: Principles and Conservation (2nd edition). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 497. Chapter 2.

^ "Joint Doctrine Publication 0-10, UK Maritime Power" (PDF) (Fifth ed.). Ministry of Defense. October 2017.

Sources [ edit ] Haslett, Simon K (2001) Coastal Systems.

Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-21302-8 Mann, Kenneth Henry (2000) Ecology of Coastal Waters Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-86542-550-7 Yip, Maricela and Madl, Pierre (1999) Littoral University of Salzburg .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Authority control databases National Germany Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6r6bd
Cached time: 20250814214943
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.579 seconds
Real time usage: 0.751 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4027/1000000
Revision size: 17473/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 126276/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1744/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86232/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.365/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24764476/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  602.202      1 -total
 25.46%  153.311     14 Template:Annotated_link
 20.00%  120.437      1 Template:Reflist
 13.07%   78.687      4 Template:Cite_journal
 10.81%   65.079      6 Template:Navbox
 10.64%   64.064      1 Template:Ocean_habitat_topics
 10.42%   62.747      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.03%   54.404      1 Template:Short_description
  8.30%   49.983      1 Template:Physical_oceanography
  7.17%   43.153      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:581326:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214943 and revision id 1292078097. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Littoral_zone&oldid=1292078097 " Categories : Aquatic biomes Marine biology Aquatic ecology Habitats Coasts Fisheries science Coastal geography Oceanographical terminology Limnology Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Littoral zone 51 languages Add topic

