Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" 2.2 "The Language of Theories" 2.3 "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man" 2.4 "Meaning as Functional Classification" 3 Politics 4 Legacy 5 Bibliography 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Wilfrid Sellars 22 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Kantian empiricism ) American philosopher (1912–1989) Wilfrid Sellars Born Wilfrid Stalker Sellars ( 1912-05-20 ) May 20, 1912 Ann Arbor, Michigan , U.S.

Died July 2, 1989 (1989-07-02) (aged 77) Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania , U.S.

Education Education University of Michigan (B.A., 1933) University at Buffalo (M.A., 1934) [ 1 ] Oriel College, Oxford (B.A., 1936; MA, 1940) Academic advisors Marvin Farber [ 4 ] Thomas Dewar Weldon Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Pittsburgh School Process philosophy [ 2 ] Critical realism (philosophy of perception) Anti-foundationalism [ 3 ] Institutions University of Pittsburgh Doctoral students Jay Rosenberg György Márkus Paul Churchland Robert Kane Christopher Gauker Héctor-Neri Castañeda Richard Creath Notable students Fred Dretske Main interests Philosophy of mind Philosophy of perception Epistemology Meaning Pragmatism Behaviorism History of philosophy Expressivism Notable ideas Critical realism (philosophy of perception) Criticism of foundationalist epistemology (the " Myth of the Given ") Psychological nominalism Kantian empiricism [ 1 ] The distinction between the 'manifest' and the 'scientific' image Logical space of reasons (the realm of the semantic ) [ 1 ] Sellarsian dilemma for foundationalism [ 6 ] Synoptic vision [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Rylean myth [ 9 ] Wilfrid Stalker Sellars ( / ˈ s ɛ l ər z / ; May 20, 1912 – July 2, 1989) was an American philosopher and prominent developer of critical realism [ 10 ] who "revolutionized both the content and the method of philosophy in the United States".

[ 11 ] His work has had a profound impact in virtually all areas of analytic philosophy beginning in the latter half of the 20th century, including in epistemology , philosophy of language , philosophy of mind , philosophy of perception , and philosophy of science . His most notable contributions include his critique of foundationalist epistemology (the " Myth of the Given "), a synoptic philosophy aiming to unite what he called the manifest and scientific images , and an inferentialist account of meaning.

Life and career [ edit ] His father was the Canadian-American philosopher Roy Wood Sellars , a leading American philosophical naturalist in the first half of the twentieth-century.

[ 12 ] Wilfrid was educated at the University of Michigan (BA, 1933), the University at Buffalo , and Oriel College, Oxford (1934–1937), where he was a Rhodes Scholar , obtaining his highest earned degree, an MA, in 1940. During World War II, he served in military intelligence. He then taught at the University of Iowa (1938–1946), the University of Minnesota (1947–1958), Yale University (1958–1963), and from 1963 until his death, at the University of Pittsburgh .

[ 13 ] He served as president of the Metaphysical Society of America in 1977. He was a founder of the journal Philosophical Studies .

Sellars is well known as a critic of foundationalist epistemology —the " Myth of the Given " as he called it.

[ 9 ] However, his philosophical works are more generally directed toward the ultimate goal of reconciling intuitive ways of describing the world (both those of common sense and traditional philosophy) with a thoroughly naturalist, scientific account of reality. He is widely regarded both for great sophistication of argument and for his assimilation of many and diverse subjects in pursuit of a synoptic vision . Sellars was perhaps the first philosopher to synthesize elements of American pragmatism with elements of British and American analytic philosophy and Austrian and German logical positivism . His work also reflects a sustained engagement with German idealism , most notably in his 1966 John Locke Lectures , published two years later as Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Sellars coined certain now-common idioms in philosophy, such as the "space of reasons". This idiom refers to two things. It: Describes the conceptual and behavioral web of language that humans use to get intelligently around their world, Denotes the fact that talk of reasons, epistemic justification, and intention is not the same as, and cannot necessarily be mapped onto, talk of causes and effects in the sense that physical science speaks of them.

Note: (2) corresponds in part to the distinction Sellars makes between the manifest image and the scientific image.

"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" [ edit ] See also: Perceptual conceptualism Sellars's most famous work is "Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind" (1956).

[ 14 ] In it, he criticizes the view that knowledge of what we perceive can be independent of the conceptual processes which result in perception. He named this " The Myth of the Given ," attributing it to sense-data theories of knowledge.

The work targets several theories at once, especially C. I. Lewis ' Kantian pragmatism and Rudolf Carnap 's positivism. He draws out "The Myth of Jones," to defend the possibility of a strict behaviorist world-view. The parable explains how thoughts, intelligent action, and even subjective inner experience can be attributed to people within a scientific model. Sellars used a fictional tribe, the "Ryleans," since he wanted to address Gilbert Ryle 's The Concept of Mind .

Sellars's idea of "myth", heavily influenced by Ernst Cassirer , [ 15 ] is not necessarily negative. He saw it as something that can be useful or otherwise, rather than true or false. He aimed to unite the conceptual behavior of the "space of reasons" with the concept of a subjective sense experience . This was one of his most central goals, which his later work described as Kantian .

"The Language of Theories" [ edit ] In his paper "The Language of Theories“ (1961), Sellars introduces the concept of Kantian empiricism .

Kantian empiricism features a distinction between (1) claims whose revision requires abandonment or modification of the system of concepts in terms of which they are framed (i.e., modification of the fallible set of constitutive principles underlying knowledge, otherwise known as framework-relative a priori truths) and (2) claims revisable on the basis of observations formulated in terms of a system of concepts which remained fixed throughout.

[ 1 ] "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man" [ edit ] In his "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man" (1962), Sellars distinguishes between the "manifest image" and the "scientific image" of the world. It also includes his famous quote about "the aim of philosophy, abstractly formulated," being "to understand how things, in the broadest possible sense of the term, hang together, in the broadest possible sense of the term." The manifest image includes intentions, thoughts, and appearances. Sellars allows that the manifest image may be refined through 'correlational induction', but he rules out appeal to imperceptible entities.

The scientific image describes the world in terms of the theoretical physical sciences. It includes notions such as causality and theories about particles and forces.

The two images sometimes complement one another, and sometimes conflict. For example, the manifest image includes practical or moral claims, whereas the scientific image does not. There is conflict, e.g. where science tells us that apparently solid objects are mostly empty space. Sellars favors a synoptic vision, wherein the scientific image takes ultimate precedence in cases of conflict, at least with respect to empirical descriptions and explanations.

[ 16 ] "Meaning as Functional Classification" [ edit ] In "Meaning as Functional Classification" (1974) Sellars elaborated upon a version of functional role semantics that he had previously defended in prior publications.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] For Sellars, thoughts are analogous to linguistic utterances, and both thoughts and linguistic utterances gain their content through token thoughts or utterances standing in certain relations with other thoughts, stimuli, and responses.

[ 20 ] Politics [ edit ] The son of a socialist, [ 21 ] Sellars was involved in left-wing politics. As a student at the University of Michigan , Wilfrid Sellars was one of the founding members of the first North-American cooperative house for university students , which was then called " Michigan Socialist House " (and which was later renamed " Michigan Cooperative House ").

[ 22 ] He also campaigned for the socialist candidate Norman Thomas of the Socialist Party of America .

[ 23 ] Legacy [ edit ] Robert Brandom , his junior colleague at Pittsburgh, named Sellars and Willard Van Orman Quine as the two most profound and important philosophers of their generation.

[ 24 ] Sellars's goal of a synoptic philosophy that unites the everyday and scientific views of reality is the foundation and archetype of what is sometimes called the Pittsburgh School , whose members include Brandom, John McDowell , and John Haugeland .

[ 25 ] Especially Brandom introduced a Hegelian variety of the Pittsburgh School, often called analytic Hegelianism .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Sellars himself viewed his work as moving analytic philosophy from its Humean (i.e.

logical positivist ) to its Kantian phase, and Richard Rorty suggested that Brandom's work continues that movement into its Hegelian phase.

[ 28 ] Other philosophers strongly influenced by Sellars span the full spectrum of contemporary English-speaking philosophy, from neopragmatism (Rorty) to eliminative materialism ( Paul Churchland ) to rationalism ( Laurence BonJour ). Sellars's philosophical heirs also include Ruth Millikan , Daniel Dennett , Héctor-Neri Castañeda , Bruce Aune , Jay Rosenberg , Johanna Seibt , Matthew Burstein , Ray Brassier , Andrew Chrucky , Jeffrey Sicha , Pedro Amaral, Thomas Vinci , Willem A. de Vries , David Rosenthal , Ken Wilber and Michael Williams . Sellars's work has been drawn upon in feminist standpoint theory , for example in the work of Quill Kukla .

[ 29 ] Sellars's death in 1989 was the result of long-term alcohol use.

[ 30 ] A collection of essays devoted to 'Sellars and his Legacy' was published by Oxford University Press in 2016 (James O'Shea, ed., Wilfrid Sellars and his Legacy ), with contributions from Brandom, deVries, Kraut, Kukla, Lance, McDowell, Millikan, O'Shea, Rosenthal, Seibt, and Williams.

Bibliography [ edit ] Pure Pragmatics and Possible Worlds-The Early Essays of Wilfrid Sellars , [PPPW], ed. by Jeffrey F. Sicha, (Ridgeview Publishing Co; Atascadero, CA; 1980). [Contains a long introductory essay by Sicha and an extensive bibliography of Sellars's work through 1979.] Science, Perception and Reality , [SPR], (Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd; London, and The Humanities Press: New York; 1963) [Reissued in 1991 by Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA. This edition contains a complete bibliography of Sellars's published work through 1989.] Philosophical Perspectives , [PP], (Charles C. Thomas: Springfield, IL; 1967). Reprinted in two volumes, Philosophical Perspectives: History of Philosophy and Philosophical Perspective: Metaphysics and Epistemology, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA; 1977).

Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes . [S&M], (Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd; London, and The Humanities Press; New York; 1968). The 1966 John Locke Lectures. [Reissued in 1992 by Ridgeview Publishing Co., Atascadero, CA. This edition contains a complete bibliography of Sellars's published work through 1989, a register of Sellars's philosophical correspondence, and a listing of circulated but unpublished papers and lectures.] Essays in Philosophy and Its History , [EPH], (D. Reidel Publishing Co.; Dordrecht, Holland; 1975).

Naturalism and Ontology , [N&O], (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 1979). [An expanded version of the 1974 John Dewey Lectures] The Metaphysics of Epistemology: Lectures by Wilfrid Sellars , edited by Pedro Amaral, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA; 1989). [Contains a complete bibliography of Sellars's published work through 1989.] Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind [EPM*], edited by Robert Brandom, (Harvard University Press.; Cambridge, Massachusetts; 1997). [The original, 1956, version of [EPM] (see below), lacking footnotes added in [SPR], with an Introduction by Richard Rorty and Study Guide by Brandom.] Kant and Pre-Kantian Themes: Lectures by Wilfrid Sellars , edited by Pedro Amaral, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 2002). [A transcription of Sellars's Kant lectures, plus essays on Descartes, Locke, Spinoza, and Leibniz.] Kant's Transcendental Metaphysics: Cassirer Lecture Notes and Other Essays , edited by Jeffrey F. Sicha, (Ridgeview Publishing Co.; Atascadero, CA: 2002). [Contains a complete bibliography of Sellars's published work, philosophical correspondence, and circulated manuscripts through 2002.] See also [ edit ] American philosophy Definitions of philosophy List of American philosophers The Myth of the Framework Transcendental empiricism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Wilfrid Sellars (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 Edition) ^ "Process Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ Ted Poston, "Foundationalism" (Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ a b James R. O'Shea, Wilfrid Sellars and His Legacy , Oxford University Press, 2016, p. 4.

^ Hunter, Bruce, 2016 " Clarence Irving Lewis " in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ Wilfrid Sellars (1962). "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man," in: Robert Colodny, ed., Frontiers of Science and Philosophy , Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 35–78. Reprinted in Science, Perception and Reality (1963).

^ Jay F. Rosenberg (1990). "Fusing the Images: Nachruf for Wilfrid Sellars." Journal for General Philosophy of Science , 21: 1–23.

^ a b deVries, Willem (June 30, 2017). "Wilfrid Sellars". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Wilfrid Sellars – The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Willem deVries, 2014. " Wilfrid Sellars ," Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Aug. 11, ^ "A Philosopher Who Shattered Our Complacency" .

The New York Times . August 15, 1989.

^ "Sellars, Roy Wood - Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.iep.utm.edu .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Introduction to Wilfrid Sellars lecture, Naturalism and Ontology" .

YouTube . September 16, 2012.

^ "EMPIRICISM AND THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND" .

ditext.com .

^ Endres, Tobias (2021).

"Ernst Cassirer's Influence on the Philosophy of Wilfrid Sellars" .

Cassirer Studies . 13/14: 149– 170 – via Torrossa.

^ Brassier, Ray, Nihil Unbound (2007) p.3 ^ Sellars, W. (1974). Meaning as Functional Classification: A perspective on the relation of syntax to semantics. Synthese, 27(3-4), 417-437.

^ Sellars, W. (1954). Some reflections on language games. Philosophy of Science, 21(3), 204-228.

^ Sellars, W. (1950). Language, Rules and Behavior.

^ Piccinini, G. (2004). Functionalism, computationalism, and mental contents. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 34(3), 375-410.

^ The Oxford Companion to Philosophy (Second ed.). Oxford University Press. 2005. p. 863.

^ Jones, Jim (2007–2008).

"Remembering the Mich House founders" (PDF) .

The Alumni Cooperator .

Ann Arbor, Michigan : Inter-Cooperative Council : 15.

^ "Wilfrid Sellars" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ Brandom, Robert (2015).

From Empiricism to Expressivism .

Harvard University Press . p. 1.

ISBN 9780674187283 .

^ Chauncey Maher, The Pittsburgh School of Philosophy . Routledge. 2012.

^ Robert Brandom , A Spirit of Trust: A Reading of Hegel's Phenomenology , Harvard University Press, 2019.

^ deVries, Willem A. "Hegel's Revival in Analytic Philosophy". In: The Oxford Handbook of Hegel . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017. pp. 743–766: "Analytic philosophy is rediscovering Hegel. [There is] a particularly strong thread of new analytic Hegelianism, sometimes called 'Pittsburgh Hegelianism' ... The sociality and historicity of reason, the proper treatment of space and time, conceptual holism, inferentialism, the reality of conceptual structure, the structure of experience, and the nature of normativity are the central concerns of Pittsburgh Hegelianism." ^ Brandom, Robert (2015).

From Empiricism to Expressivism .

Harvard University Press . p. 32.

ISBN 9780674187283 .

^ Rebecca Kukla, "Objectivity and Perspective in Empirical Knowledge". Episteme 3(1): 80–95. 2006.

^ "Susanna Felder" .

www.ditext.com .

Further reading [ edit ] Dionysis Christias.

Normativity, Lifeworld, and Science in Sellars' Synoptic Vision . Palgrave Macmillan, 2023.

John McDowell .

Mind and World . Harvard University Press, 1996.

Richard Rorty .

Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature . Princeton University Press, 1979.

External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Wilfrid Sellars – Willem deVries.

"Wilfrid Sellars: Philosophy of Mind" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Wilfrid Sellars web site. Includes complete bibliography of his writings, some readable online, and a list of the Ph.Ds he supervised.

Autobiographical Reflections .

Dictionary of the Philosophy of Mind – Wilfrid Sellars – Article by Christopher Gauker on Sellars's contributions to the philosophy of mind.

Finding Aid for the Wilfrid S. Sellars Archive at the University of Pittsburgh Notre Dame Lectures 1969-1986 – Transcribed from recordings by Sellars's student Pedro Amaral.

The Wilfrid Sellars Society [ usurped ] – Homepage of the Wilfrid Sellars Society.

Wilfrid Sellars L'immagine scientifica e l'immagine manifesta a cura di: Carlo Marletti, Giacomo Turbanti, Edizioni ETS 2013 Wilfrid S. Sellars Papers (Wilfrid S. Sellars Papers, 1899–1990, ASP.1991.01, Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections Department, University of Pittsburgh.) v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wilfrid_Sellars&oldid=1288808735#"The_Language_of_Theories" " Categories : 1912 births 1989 deaths 20th-century American philosophers University of Pittsburgh faculty American people of Canadian descent Analytic philosophers Kantian philosophers Pragmatists American philosophers of mind Presidents of the Metaphysical Society of America American epistemologists University of Michigan alumni 20th-century American historians People from Ann Arbor, Michigan University at Buffalo alumni Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 21:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wilfrid Sellars 22 languages Add topic

