Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography and Kingship 2 Intellectual life Toggle Intellectual life subsection 2.1 Mathematics 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud 15 languages العربية Aragonés Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Al-Mu'taman ibn Hud ) Ruler of Zaragoza (from 1081 to 1085) Yusuf al-Mu'taman Billah Ruler of Zaragoza Reign 1081–1085 Predecessor Ahmad al-Muqtadir Successor Al-Mustain II Born Zaragoza Died 1085 Names al-Mu'taman Billah Abu Amir Yusuf ibn Ahmad ibn Hud House Banu Hud Abu Amir Yusuf ibn Ahmad ibn Hud ( Arabic : أبو عامر يوسف بن أحمد بن هود , romanized : Abū ʿĀmir Yūsuf ibn Aḥmad ibn Hūd ; died c.

1085 ), more commonly known as al-Mu'taman , was a mathematician, and also one of the kings of the Taifa of Zaragoza . The name al-Mu'taman is itself a shortening of his full regnal name al-Mu'taman Billah ( Arabic : المؤتمن بالله , romanized : al-Mūʾtaman bi-ʾLlāh , lit.

'Trustee through God').

Al-Mu'taman was the third king of the Banu Hud dynasty, reigning from 1081 to 1085, at the height of power of Muslim Zaragoza, following the thriving period of his father Ahmad al-Muqtadir . He continued his father's efforts and created around him a court of intellectuals, living in the beautiful palace of Aljafería , nicknamed as "the palace of joy".

As king, Al-Mu'taman was a patron of science, philosophy and arts, and was himself a scholar of considerable accomplishment. He knew astrology , philosophy , and especially mathematics , a discipline in which he wrote the most important treatise to come out of the al-Andalus region in the 11th century, [ 1 ] the Kitab al-Istikmal ("Book of Perfection").

Biography and Kingship [ edit ] Yusuf was born on an unknown date, certainly in Zaragoza, in the palace of Aljaferia . When he ascended to the throne on the death of his father in 1081, the taifa of Zaragoza was at its peak. Al-Muqtadir divided his lands between his two sons: al-Mu'taman received the western part of the taifa with Zaragoza , Tudela , Huesca and Calatayud , while Mundhir received the coastal zone of the kingdom, including Lérida , Monzón , Tortosa and Dénia .

The first external concern of the king was the threat posed by the King of Aragon , Sancho Ramírez who aimed to extend his territories to the south, at the expense of Zaragoza. Al-Mu'taman counted on the services of the mercenary troops of the Castilian lord El Cid , who had been exiled by King Alfonso VI for conducting raids against his interests in the Taifa of Toledo , then a tributary of the king. In 1081, El Cid therefore offered his service to the king of Zaragoza, al-Muqtadir, and remained with al-Mu'taman during his reign.

Al-Mu'taman also assigned to El Cid the task of reincorporating into Zaragoza the eastern territories of his relative Mundhir, an ally of Aragon. Clashes in the border area were constant, but neither managed to reunite the paternal territory.

El Cid contained the attacks of the Aragonese until 1083, when Sancho managed to take the line of fortifications that protected Zaragoza like Graus in the east, as well as Ayerbe , Bolea, Arascués and Arguedas. El Cid served Yusuf al-Mu'tamin until 1086, when he broke his ties with Zaragoza. The circumstances in which he refused to continue serving al-Mu'tamin and his heir Ahmad II al-Mustaʿin are not fully clear and still debated.

Al-Mu'taman also tried to strengthen relations with his vassal king of Valencia , Abu Bakr, through marriage alliances. But Valencia was entangled in a complex game of alliances. Alfonso VI, skilfully using diplomacy, got al-Kadir, the king of Toledo , to hand over the city in 1085 in exchange for his help to drive Abu Bakr from Valencia, which meant, in fact, the capture of Toledo for the king of Castile. Thus, the kingdom of Zaragoza was cut off from the rest of al-Andalus, which seriously weakened its economy and made it even more vulnerable to Christian attacks. The year of the loss of Valencia was also the year of the death of Yusuf al-Mu'tamin.

Intellectual life [ edit ] Although it was common practice for royals to be well educated, both al-Mu'taman and his father were exceptional mathematicians. In medieval Islam, there was a movement dedicated to the translation of ancient Greek texts, ranging from philosophy , to medicine , to astronomy , and the more influential mathematical texts. Both father and son, as well as medieval Islamic translators such as the Banu Musa were known for their expansions on ancient Greek and Roman ideals. There was a stigma in the periods following medieval Islam that Islamic scholars only copied the ancient texts, offering no intellectual addition. Later it was proven that scholars such as Ibn Qurra and al-Mu'taman offered their own input and original contributions beyond their transmission of ancient ideas.

Mathematics [ edit ] Ceva's theorem , discovered at the end of the 11th  century by al-Mutaman.

Construction of a circle tangent to two given circles and passing through a given point, Book of Perfection / Kitab al-Istikmal, by al-Mu'taman ibn Hud. Manuscript at Leiden University Libraries .

The main work of al-Mu'taman was his Kitab al-Istikmal ( Book of Perfection ). This book was a compendium of the Greek mathematics of Euclid and Archimedes among others, but also contained the teachings of Thabit ibn Qurra , the Banu Musa and Ibn al-Haytham , and included some theorems and proofs not found in earlier extant sources. The book only persists as fragments from several anonymous manuscripts, not including any preface or introduction, but it is clear from the remaining content that the intention was to organize and comprehensively describe the known results in Euclidean geometry in a single self-contained work.

[ 2 ] It is possible al-Mu'taman listed his sources in a now-lost introductory section, but none of the remaining fragments credit past authors or works for any of the content.

[ 2 ] The Kitab al-Istikmal was not completed but it was still seen as an important work from the eleventh-century king. The encyclopedist Ibn al-Akfani said that had the Istikmal been completed, it would have made the existing geometrical literature superfluous.

[ 2 ] Ibn Aknin suggested that the Istikmal should be read by mathematicians alongside such works as the Elements of Euclid , On the Sphere and Cylinder of Archimedes , and Conics of Apollonius . Because this was not a completed piece of work it was never as widely copied or taught as the works of Euclid or Archimedes. A copy was sent to Egypt by Maimonides , and from there it spread to Baghdad in the 14th century, but did not directly influence later European mathematicians.

[ citation needed ] The Kitab al-Istikmal deals with irrational numbers , conic sections , quadrature of the parabolic segment , volumes and areas of various geometric objects, and the drawing of the tangent to a circle, among other mathematical problems. In the work appears an attempt to classify mathematics into Aristotelian categories. The classification includes a chapter for arithmetic , two chapters for geometry and two others for stereometry .

The Kitab al-Istikmal contains the first known formulation of Ceva's theorem , which only became known in Europe after 1678 from Italian geometer Giovanni Ceva 's treatise De lineis rectis . It is unknown whether Al-Mu'taman discovered this theorem himself or obtained it from another source, and it is also unknown whether Ceva rediscovered the theorem independently.

[ 3 ] The theorem can be stated as follows: "Let ABC be a triangle and D, E, F points on the sides BC, CA, and AB. We draw the lines AD, BE and CF. These three lines intersect at one point if and only if A F F B = E A C E D C B D {\displaystyle {\frac {AF}{FB}}={\frac {EA}{CE}}{\frac {DC}{BD}}} .

See also [ edit ] List of Arab scientists and scholars References [ edit ] ^ Glick, Thomas F.; Livesey, Steven John; Wallis, Faith (2005). Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia. Psychology Press. p. 243.

^ a b c Hogendijk, Jan P. (1986). "Discovery of an 11th-century geometrical compilation: The Istikmāl of Yūsuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hūd, King of Saragossa".

Historia Mathematica .

13 : 43– 52.

doi : 10.1016/0315-0860(86)90227-2 .

^ Holme, Audun (2010).

Geometry: Our Cultural Heritage . Springer. p. 210.

ISBN 3-642-14440-3 .

http://www.jphogendijk.nl/publ.html List of Muslim rulers External links [ edit ] Richard Covington, Rediscovering Arabic Science , 2007, Saudi Aramco World Wikimedia Commons has media related to Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud .

Preceded by Ahmad al-Muqtadir King of Zaragoza 1081-1085 Succeeded by Al-Musta'in II v t e Al-Andalusian rulers of Zaragoza Banu Tujib al-Mundhir I ibn Yahya al-Tujibi Yahya ibn al-Mundhir al-Mundhir II ibn Yahya Abd Allah ibn al-Hakam al-Tujibi Banu Hud al-Musta'in I, Sulayman ibn Hud al-Judhami Ahmad ibn Sulayman al-Muqtadir Yusuf ibn Ahmad al-Mu'taman Al-Musta'in II, Ahmad ibn Yusuf Abd al-Malik Imad ad-Dawla Almoravids Aragonese v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Netherlands Academics zbMATH Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yusuf_al-Mu%27taman_ibn_Hud&oldid=1286774347 " Categories : 11th-century Arab people Mathematicians from al-Andalus 11th-century mathematicians Emirs of Zaragoza 11th-century monarchs in Al-Andalus Banu Hud 1085 deaths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Commons link is the pagename This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 22:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud 15 languages Add topic

