Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Finding morals Toggle Finding morals subsection 1.1 Arts 1.2 Moral tales 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Moral 19 languages العربية Български Català Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili Македонски Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Message that is conveyed or lesson to be learned from a story or event This article is about the use of the moral in storytelling. For other uses, see Morality and Moral (disambiguation) .

"Moral of the story" redirects here. For the song by Ashe, see Moral of the Story (song) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Moral" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A moral (from Latin morālis ) is a message that is conveyed or a lesson to be learned from a story or event .

[ 1 ] The moral may be left to the hearer, reader, or viewer to determine for themselves, or may be explicitly encapsulated in a maxim .

[ 2 ] A moral is a lesson in a story or real life.

[ 3 ] Finding morals [ edit ] As an example of an explicit maxim, at the end of Aesop's fable of the Tortoise and the Hare , in which the plodding and determined tortoise won a race against the much-faster yet extremely arrogant hare, the stated moral is "slow and steady wins the race".

[ 4 ] However, other morals can often be taken from the story itself; for instance, that arrogance or overconfidence in one's abilities may lead to failure or the loss of an event, race, or contest.

The use of stock characters is a means of conveying the moral of the story by eliminating the complexity of personality and depicting the issues arising in the interplay between the characters, enabling the writer to generate a clear message.

[ 5 ] With more rounded characters, such as those typically found in Shakespeare 's plays , the moral may be more nuanced but no less present, and the writer may point it out in other ways (see, for example, the Prologue to Romeo and Juliet ).

[ 6 ] Arts [ edit ] Throughout the history of recorded literature, most fictional writing has served not only to entertain but also to instruct, inform, or improve their audiences or readership.

[ 7 ] In classical drama , for example, the role of the chorus was to comment on the proceedings and draw out a message for the audience to take away with them. At the same time, the novels of Charles Dickens are a vehicle for morals regarding the social and economic system of Victorian Britain.

[ 8 ] Morals have typically been more obvious in children's literature , sometimes even being introduced with the phrase: " moral of the story is …". Such explicit techniques have grown increasingly out of fashion in modern storytelling, and are now usually only included for ironic purposes.

Some examples are: "Better to be safe than sorry" ( precautionary principle ), "The evil deserves no aid", "Be friends with whom you don't like", "Don't judge people by the way they look", "Slow and steady wins the race", "Once started down the dark path, forever will it hold your destiny", and "Your overconfidence is your weakness".

[ 9 ] Aesop's Fables is one of the most famous collections of stories with strong moral conclusions.

Moral tales [ edit ] Moral tales were one of the main purposes of literature during 1780–1830, especially in children's literature . Part of the reason for this was the writings of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau in the 18th century, which brought attention to children as an audience for literature. Following in their line of thought, Thomas Day (1748–1789) wrote Sandford and Merton , elevating the outstanding morals of one young boy above the rapscallion nature of another.

Maria Edgeworth (1776–1849) was another prominent author of moral tales, writing about how a wise adult can educate a child; one of her more famous stories is " The Purple Jar ". During this time, the theme of "a young heroine or hero gaining wisdom and maturity" was taken up by many other writers.

[ 10 ] The ability of children to derive moral lessons from stories and visual media develops around the age of 9 or 10 years.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Research in developmental psychology has shown that children’s ability to understand and apply moral lessons from stories typically begins to develop between the ages of 9 and 10, as they become more capable of abstract thinking.

[ 13 ] In more recent children's literature, moral lessons continue to be conveyed through fantasy and adventure stories. For example, in J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series, themes of friendship, courage, and standing up for what is right are central moral messages that resonate with young readers.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Allegory Morality play References [ edit ] ^ The Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. 1989. p. 456.

ISBN 978-0198611868 .

^ Simon Blackburn (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0198610137 .

^ James Rachels (2009).

The Elements of Moral Philosophy . McGraw-Hill Education. pp.

12– 14.

ISBN 978-0073386713 .

^ Aesop (1996).

Aesop's Fables . Penguin Classics.

ISBN 978-0140369847 .

^ Jack Zipes (2000).

The Oxford Companion to Fairy Tales . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198601159 .

^ Harold Bloom (1998).

Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human . Riverhead Books.

ISBN 978-1573227513 .

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (2022).

The Kingfisher Story Collection . AISDL.

ISBN 979-8353946595 .

^ K.J. Fielding (1967).

Charles Dickens: A Critical Study . London: Oxford University Press. pp.

101– 110.

ISBN 978-0192813466 .

^ "Aesop's Fables: Online Collection - Selected Fables" . Retrieved 18 March 2013 .

^ Dennis Butts (2006). Jack Zipes (ed.).

Children's Literature . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

93– 96.

ISBN 978-0195146561 .

^ Pai, Seeta (8 January 2015).

"And The Moral Of The Story Is ... Kids Don't Always Understand The Moral" .

NPR .

^ Alan Richardson (1994).

Literature, Education, and Romanticism: Reading as Social Practice, 1780-1832 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

45– 50.

ISBN 978-0521462761 .

^ Lawrence Kohlberg (1981).

The Philosophy of Moral Development . San Francisco: Harper & Row. pp.

45– 52.

ISBN 978-0060647605 .

^ Elizabeth E. Heilman (2008).

Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter . New York: Routledge. pp.

22– 29.

ISBN 978-0415964845 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of moral at Wiktionary v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral&oldid=1295494213 " Categories : Narratology Literary theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 03:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral 19 languages Add topic

