Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Slope 3 Accompanying Structures Toggle Accompanying Structures subsection 3.1 Alluvial Fans 3.2 Abyssal Plain 4 References Toggle the table of contents Continental rise 20 languages Aragonés Български Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Македонски Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Underwater feature connecting the continental slope and the abyssal plain Cross Section of Continental Margin The continental rise is a low-relief zone of accumulated sediments that lies between the continental slope and the abyssal plain .

[ 1 ] It is a major part of the continental margin , covering around 10% of the ocean floor.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Formation [ edit ] This geologic structure results from deposition of sediments, mainly due to mass wasting , the gravity-driven downhill motion of sand and other sediments.

[ 1 ] Mass wasting can occur gradually, with sediments accumulating discontinuously, or in large, sudden events.

[ 1 ] Large mass wasting occurrences are often triggered by sudden events such as earthquakes or oversteepening of the continental slope.

[ 1 ] More gradual accumulation of sediments occurs when hemipelagic sediments suspended in the ocean slowly settle to the ocean basin.

[ 1 ] Slope [ edit ] Because the continental rise lies below the continental slope and is formed from sediment deposition, it has a very gentle slope, usually ranging from 1:50 to 1:500.

[ 1 ] As the continental rise extends seaward, the layers of sediment thin, and the rise merges with the abyssal plain, typically forming a slope of around 1:1000.

[ 1 ] Accompanying Structures [ edit ] Alluvial Fans [ edit ] The continental rise of Australia , which is proximate to the coasts of Newcastle and Sydney (bottom left) Deposition of sediments at the mouth of submarine canyons may form enormous fan-shaped accumulations called submarine fans on both the continental slope and continental rise.

[ 2 ] Alluvial or sedimentary fans are shallow cone-shaped reliefs at the base of the continental slope that merge together, forming the continental rise.

[ 2 ] Erosional submarine canyons slope downward and lead to alluvial fan valleys with increasing depth.

[ 2 ] It is in this zone that sediment is deposited, forming the continental rise. Alluvial fans such as the Bengal Fan , which stretches 3,000 kilometers (1,900 miles), make up one of the largest sedimentary structures in the world.

[ 1 ] Many alluvial fans also contain critical oil and natural gas reservoirs, making them key points for the collection of seismic data.

[ 1 ] Abyssal Plain [ edit ] Beyond the continental rise stretches the abyssal plain , which lies on top of basaltic oceanic crust and spans the majority of the seafloor .

[ 2 ] The abyssal plain hosts life forms which are uniquely adapted to survival in its cold, high pressure, and dark conditions.

[ 1 ] The flatness of the abyssal plain is interrupted by massive underwater mountain chains near the tectonic boundaries of Earth's plates .

[ 2 ] The sediments are mostly silt and clay .

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Mitchell, N. C. (2015), "Submarine Geomorphology☆" , Reference Module in Earth Systems and Environmental Sciences , Elsevier, ISBN 978-0-12-409548-9 ^ a b c d e f Patruno, Stefano; Helland-Hansen, William (2018).

"Clinoforms and clinoform systems: Review and dynamic classification scheme for shorelines, subaqueous deltas, shelf edges and continental margins" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

185 : 202– 233.

Bibcode : 2018ESRv..185..202P .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.05.016 .

hdl : 1956/18533 .

ISSN 0012-8252 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal This oceanography article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continental_rise&oldid=1271890748 " Categories : Oceanography Oceanography stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 26 January 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Continental rise 20 languages Add topic

