Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope Toggle Scope subsection 1.1 Modelling 1.2 Data collection 1.3 Summarising data 1.4 Interpreting data 1.5 Applied statistical inference 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Sources 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Statistical theory 6 languages العربية Català فارسی Sunda Tagalog Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of statistics The theory of statistics provides a basis for the whole range of techniques, in both study design and data analysis , that are used within applications of statistics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The theory covers approaches to statistical-decision problems and to statistical inference , and the actions and deductions that satisfy  the basic principles stated for these different approaches. Within a given approach, statistical theory gives ways of comparing statistical procedures; it can find the  best possible procedure within a given context for given statistical problems, or can provide guidance on the choice between alternative procedures.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Apart from philosophical considerations about how to make statistical inferences and decisions, much of statistical theory consists of mathematical statistics , and is closely linked to probability theory , to utility theory , and to optimization .

Scope [ edit ] Statistical theory provides an underlying rationale and provides a consistent basis for the choice of methodology used in applied statistics .

Modelling [ edit ] Statistical models describe the sources of data and can have different types of formulation corresponding to these sources and to the problem being studied. Such problems can be of various kinds: Sampling from a finite population Measuring observational error and refining procedures Studying statistical relations Statistical models, once specified, can be tested to see whether they provide useful inferences for new data sets.

[ 4 ] Data collection [ edit ] Statistical theory provides a guide to comparing methods of data collection , where the problem is to generate informative data using optimization and randomization while measuring and controlling for observational error .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Optimization of data collection reduces the cost of data while satisfying statistical goals, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] while randomization allows reliable inferences.  Statistical theory provides a basis for good data collection and the structuring of investigations in the topics of: Design of experiments to estimate treatment effects, to test hypotheses, and to optimize responses.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Survey sampling to describe populations [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Summarising data [ edit ] The task of summarising statistical data in conventional forms (also known as descriptive statistics ) is considered in theoretical statistics as a problem of defining what aspects of statistical samples need to be described and how well they can be described from a typically limited sample of data. Thus the problems theoretical statistics considers include: Choosing summary statistics to describe a sample Summarising probability distributions of sample data while making limited assumptions about the form of distribution that may be met Summarising the relationships between different quantities measured on the same items with a sample Interpreting data [ edit ] Besides the philosophy underlying statistical inference , statistical theory has the task of considering the types of questions that data analysts might want to ask about the problems they are studying and of providing data analytic techniques for answering them. Some of these tasks are: Summarising populations in the form of a fitted distribution or probability density function Summarising the relationship between variables using some type of regression analysis Providing ways of predicting the outcome of a random quantity given other related variables Examining the possibility of reducing the number of variables being considered within a problem (the task of Dimension reduction ) When a statistical procedure has been specified in the study protocol, then statistical theory provides well-defined probability statements for the method when applied to all populations that could have arisen from the randomization used to generate the data. This provides an objective way of estimating parameters, estimating confidence intervals, testing hypotheses, and selecting the best. Even for observational data, statistical theory provides a way of calculating a value that can be used to interpret a sample of data from a population, it can provide a means of indicating how well that value is determined by the sample, and thus a means of saying corresponding values derived for different populations are as different as they might seem; however, the reliability of inferences from post-hoc observational data is often worse than for planned randomized generation of data.

Applied statistical inference [ edit ] Statistical theory provides the basis for a number of data-analytic approaches that are common across scientific and social research.

Interpreting data is done with one of the following approaches: Estimating parameters Providing a range of values instead of a point estimate Testing statistical hypotheses Many of the standard methods for those approaches rely on certain statistical assumptions (made in the derivation of the methodology) actually holding in practice. Statistical theory studies the consequences of departures from these assumptions. In addition it provides a range of robust statistical techniques that are less dependent on assumptions, and it provides methods checking whether particular assumptions are reasonable for a given data set.

See also [ edit ] List of statistical topics Foundations of statistics References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Cox & Hinkley (1974, p.1) ^ a b Rao, C. R.

(1981). "Foreword". In Arthanari, T. S.; Dodge, Yadolah (eds.).

Mathematical Programming in Statistics . New York: John Wiley & Sons . pp.

vii– viii.

ISBN 0-471-08073-X .

MR 0607328 .

^ Lehmann & Romano (2005) ^ Freedman (2009) ^ Charles Sanders Peirce and Joseph Jastrow (1885).

"On Small Differences in Sensation" .

Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences .

3 : 73– 83.

http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/Peirce/small-diffs.htm ^ Hacking, Ian (September 1988). "Telepathy: Origins of Randomization in Experimental Design".

Isis .

79 (3): 427– 451.

doi : 10.1086/354775 .

JSTOR 234674 .

MR 1013489 .

S2CID 52201011 .

^ Stephen M. Stigler (November 1992). "A Historical View of Statistical Concepts in Psychology and Educational Research".

American Journal of Education .

101 (1): 60– 70.

doi : 10.1086/444032 .

S2CID 143685203 .

^ a b Atkinson et al. (2007) ^ Kiefer, Jack Carl (1985).

Brown, Lawrence D.

; Olkin, Ingram ; Sacks, Jerome; et al. (eds.).

Jack Carl Kiefer: Collected papers III—Design of experiments . Springer-Verlag and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics. pp. 718+xxv.

ISBN 0-387-96004-X .

^ Hinkelmann & Kempthorne (2008) ^ Bailey (2008).

^ Kish (1965) ^ Cochran (1977) ^ Särndal et al. (1992) Sources [ edit ] Atkinson, A. C.; Donev, A. N.; Tobias, R. D. (2007).

Optimum Experimental Designs, with SAS .

Oxford University Press . pp. 511+xvi.

ISBN 978-0-19-929660-6 .

Bailey, R. A (2008).

Design of Comparative Experiments .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-68357-9 .

Pre-publication chapters are available on-line.

Cochran, William G.

(1977).

Sampling Techniques (Third ed.).

John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 0-471-16240-X .

Cox, D.R., Hinkley, D.V. (1974) Theoretical Statistics , Chapman & Hall .

ISBN 0-412-12420-3 Freedman, David A.

(2009).

Statistical Models: Theory and Practice (Second ed.).

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-67105-7 .

Hinkelmann, Klaus and Kempthorne, Oscar (2008).

Design and Analysis of Experiments . Vol. I, II (Second ed.).

John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 978-0-470-38551-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Kish, L.

(1965), Survey Sampling , John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 0-471-48900-X Lehmann, E. L.

; Romano, J. P. (2005), Testing Statistical Hypotheses (third ed.), Springer .

Särndal, Carl-Erik, Swensson, Bengt, and Wretman, Jan (1992).

Model Assisted Survey Sampling .

Springer-Verlag .

ISBN 0-387-40620-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Peirce, C. S.

(1876), "Note on the Theory of the Economy of Research" in Coast Survey Report , pp. 197–201 (Appendix No. 14), NOAA PDF Eprint . Reprinted 1958 in Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce 7 , paragraphs 139–157 and in 1967 in Operations Research 15 (4): pp. 643–648, Abstract from JSTOR .

(1967) Peirce, C. S. (1967). "Note on the Theory of the Economy of Research".

Operations Research .

15 (4): 643– 648.

doi : 10.1287/opre.15.4.643 .

(1877–1878), " Illustrations of the Logic of Science " (1883), " A Theory of Probable Inference " and Jastrow, Joseph (1885), "On Small Differences in Sensation" in Memoirs of the National Academy of Sciences 3 : pp. 73–83.

Eprint .

Bickel, Peter J. & Doksum, Kjell A. (2001).

Mathematical Statistics: Basic and Selected Topics . Vol. I (Second (updated printing 2007) ed.). Pearson Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 0-13-850363-X .

Davison, A.C. (2003) Statistical Models . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-77339-3 Lehmann, Erich (1983).

Theory of Point Estimation .

Liese, Friedrich & Miescke, Klaus-J. (2008).

Statistical Decision Theory: Estimation, Testing, and Selection . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-73193-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Statistical theory at Wikimedia Commons v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Statistical_theory&oldid=1274784469 " Category : Statistical theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 06:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Statistical theory 6 languages Add topic

