Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political support 2 Economic analysis Toggle Economic analysis subsection 2.1 Trends 3 Expropriation 4 Marxist theory 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nationalization 69 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Malagasy मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transfer of privately owned assets to the national government See also: List of nationalizations by country Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Nationalization ( nationalisation in British English ) 
is the process of transforming privately owned assets into public assets by bringing them under the public ownership of a national government or state .

[ 1 ] Nationalization contrasts with privatization and with demutualization . When previously nationalized assets are privatized and subsequently returned to public ownership at a later stage, they are said to have undergone renationalization (or deprivatization ). Industries often subject to nationalization include telephones , electric power , fossil fuels , railways , airlines , iron ore , media , postal services , banks , and water (sometimes called the commanding heights of the economy ), and in many jurisdictions such entities have no history of private ownership.

Nationalization may occur with or without financial compensation to the former owners . Nationalization is distinguished from property redistribution in that the government retains control of nationalized property . Some nationalizations take place when a government seizes property acquired illegally. For example, in 1945 the French government seized the car-maker Renault because its owners had collaborated with the 1940–1944 Nazi occupiers of France .

[ 2 ] Economists distinguish between nationalization and socialization , which refers to the process of restructuring the economic framework, organizational structure, and institutions of an economy on a socialist basis. By contrast, nationalization does not necessarily imply social ownership and the restructuring of the economic system . Historically, states have carried out nationalizations for various different purposes under a wide variety of different political systems and economic systems .

[ 3 ] Political support [ edit ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Nationalization was one of the major mechanisms advocated by democratic socialists and social democrats for gradually transitioning to socialism. In this context, the goals of nationalization were to dispossess large capitalists, redirect the profits of industry to the public purse, and establish some form of workers' self-management as a precursor to the establishment of a socialist economic system.

[ 4 ] Although sometimes undertaken as part of a strategy to build socialism, more commonly nationalization was also undertaken and used to protect and develop industries perceived as being vital to a nation's competitiveness (such as aerospace and shipbuilding), or to protect jobs in certain industries.

Nationalization has had varying levels of support throughout history. After the Second World War , nationalization was supported by social democratic and democratic socialist parties in Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. In the United States, potentially nationalizing healthcare is often a topic of political disagreement and makes frequent appearances in debates between political candidates. A 2020 poll shows that a majority (63%) of Americans support a nationalized healthcare system.

[ 5 ] A re-nationalization occurs when state-owned assets are privatized and later nationalized again, often when a different political party or faction is in power. A re-nationalization process may also be called "reverse privatization". Nationalization has been used to refer to either direct state-ownership and management of an enterprise or to a government acquiring a large controlling share of a publicly listed corporation .

[ citation needed ] According to research by Paasha Mahdavi, leaders who consider nationalization face a dilemma: "nationalize and reap immediate gains while risking future prosperity, or maintain private operations, thereby passing on revenue windfalls but securing long-term fiscal streams." [ 6 ] He argues that leaders "nationalize extractive resources to extend the duration of their power" by using "this increased capital to secure political support." [ 6 ] Economic analysis [ edit ] Nationalization can have positive and negative effects.

[ 7 ] In 2019, research based on studies from Greenwich University found that the nationalization of key services such as water, bus, railways and broadband in the United Kingdom could save £13bn every year.

[ 8 ] Nationalization may produce other effects, such as reducing competition in the marketplace, which in turn reduces incentives to innovation and maintains high prices. In the short run, nationalization can provide a larger revenue stream for government but may cause that industry to falter depending on the motivations of the nationalizing party.

[ 9 ] Nationalization was employed by the Panamanian Government towards the Panama Canal , which came under the Panama Canal Authority in 1999 to internationally positive effect.

[ 10 ] Likewise, the Suez Canal was nationalized multiple times throughout history.

[ 11 ] In Germany, the Federal Press [ Bundesdruckerei ] was nationalized in 2008 with positive revenue and net income since.

[ 12 ] Trends [ edit ] Studies have found that nationalization follows a cyclical trend. Nationalization rose in the 1960s and 1970s, followed by an increase in privatization in the 80s and 90s, followed again by an increase in nationalization in the 2000s and 2010s.

[ 13 ] Expropriation [ edit ] "Expropriation" redirects here. For the 1974 Chilean film, see The Expropriation .

See also: Alienation (property law) Expropriation is the seizure of private property by a public agency for a purpose deemed to be in the public interest. It may also be used as a penalty for criminal proceedings.

[ 14 ] Expropriation differs from eminent domain in that the property owner is not compensated for the seized property. Unlike eminent domain, expropriation may also refer to the taking of private property by a private entity authorized by a government to take property in certain situations.

Due to political risks that are involved when countries engage in international business, it is important to understand the expropriation risks and laws within each of the countries in which business is conducted in order to understand the risks as an investor in that country.

[ 15 ] Marxist theory [ edit ] The term appears as "expropriation of expropriators ( ruling classes )" in Marxist theory , and also as the slogan "Loot the looters!" ("грабь награбленное"), which was very popular during the Russian Revolution .

[ 16 ] The term is also used to describe nationalization campaigns by communist states , such as dekulakization and collectivization in the USSR .

[ 17 ] However, nationalization is not a specifically socialist strategy, and Marxism's founders were skeptical of its value. As Engels put it: Therein precisely lies the rub; for, so long as the propertied classes remain at the helm, nationalisation never abolishes exploitation but merely changes its form — in the French, American or Swiss republics no less than in monarchist Central, and despotic Eastern, Europe.

— Friedrich Engels, Letter from Engels to Max Oppenheim, 24 March 1891 Nikolai Bukharin also criticised the term nationalisation , preferring the term statisation instead.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Compulsory purchase Constitutional economics Confiscation Eminent domain List of nationalizations by country List of privatizations by country Municipalization Nationalization of oil supplies Planned economy Privatization Public ownership Railway nationalization Sequestration State ownership State capitalism State socialism State sector Statism References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of NATIONALIZATION" .

Merriam-Webster . 13 September 2024.

nationalize [...] 2 : to invest control or ownership of in the national government[.] ^ Chrisafis, Angelique (December 14, 2011).

"Renault descendants demand payout for state confiscation" .

The Guardian . London.

^ Alistair, Mason; Pyper, Hugh (21 December 2000). Hastings, Adrian (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Christian Thought . Oxford University Press. p.

677 .

ISBN 978-0198600244 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

At the heart of its vision has been social or common ownership of the means of production. Common ownership and democratic control of these was far more central to the thought of the early socialists than state control or nationalization, which developed later. [...] Nationalization in itself has nothing particularly to do with socialism and has existed under non-socialist and anti-socialist regimes. Kautsky in 1891 pointed out that a 'co-operative commonwealth' could not be the result of the 'general nationalization of all industries' unless there was a change in 'the character of the state'[.] ^ The Economics of Feasible Socialism Revisited , by Nove, Alexander. 1991. (P.176): "Nationalisation arouses no enthusiasm, in the minds of most socialists and anti-socialists. It would probably be agreed that hopes which reposed on nationalisation have been disappointed. Conservatives hold that this is due to defects inherent in nationalisation, that private enterprise based on private ownership is inherently superior. (Mrs Thatcher's government tried to ensure that this was so by preventing essential investments and ordering the nationalized industries to sell off their more successful undertakings.)...The original notion was that nationalization would achieve three objectives. One was to dispossess the big capitalists. The second was to divert the profits from private appropriation to the public purse. Thirdly, the nationalized sector would serve the public good rather than try to make private profits...To these objectives some (but not all) would add some sort of workers' control, the accountability of management to employees." ^ Jones, Bradley (2020-09-29).

"Increasing share of Americans favor a single government program to provide health care coverage" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved 2024-09-15 .

^ a b Mahdavi, Paasha (2021).

Power grab: political survival through extractive resource nationalization . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108781350 .

ISBN 9781108781350 .

S2CID 243736481 . Retrieved 2020-03-12 .

^ "Nationalization | economic policy" .

^ Ellis, Mark (2019-11-24).

"Nationalisation of public services could save £13billion every year" .

mirror . Retrieved 2020-01-06 .

^ "Nationalization" .

Corporate Finance Institute . Retrieved 2021-09-29 .

^ "My opinion Andrés Oppenheimer : Panama delivers a lesson to isolationists" .

www.azstarnet.com . 2006-10-29. Archived from the original on 2006-11-06 . Retrieved 2024-09-15 .

^ "Britannica Money" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-09-15 .

^ "Lagebericht und Jahresabschluss 2021" (PDF) .

Bundesdruckerei Gruppe GMBH . 2023-02-27.

^ Chang, Roberto; Hevia, Constantino; Loayza, Norman (March 2018).

"Privatization and Nationalization Cycles" .

Macroeconomic Dynamics .

22 (2): 331– 361.

doi : 10.1017/S1365100516000195 .

hdl : 10986/4227 .

ISSN 1365-1005 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 251.

^ Flynn, Chris.

Avoiding Expropriation and Managing Political Risk in Emerging Market . Lexology. p. 1.

^ Orlando Figes , A People's Tragedy: Russian Revolution , 1996, ISBN 0-7126-7327-X .

^ Richard Pipes Property and Freedom , Vintage Books, A division of Random House, Inc., New York, 1999, ISBN 0-375-70447-7 , page 214.

^ Economy of transition period, Chapter Seven 'The latter term, indeed, certainly is not perfect. First, it mixes "nation" ("whole") with the state, i.e. the ruling class. Second, it has shade of national states epoch. We keep it because it is absolutely rooted, though there are no logical grounds for its existence.' External links [ edit ] Library resources about Nationalization Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Look up nationalization in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The importance of public banking [ usurped ] , article on Indian public sector banks Time for Permanent Nationalization by economist Fred Moseley in Dollars & Sense , January/February 2009 The Corporate Governance of Banks – a concise discussion of concepts and evidence Davies, Albert Emil (1922).

"Nationalization" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.).

v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐8qcnv
Cached time: 20250818154406
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.605 seconds
Real time usage: 0.798 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2598/1000000
Revision size: 15607/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 125990/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3578/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 96944/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.348/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8006777/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  662.032      1 -total
 31.45%  208.182      1 Template:Reflist
 20.82%  137.855      7 Template:Cite_web
 18.67%  123.594      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.77%  111.013      1 Template:Economic_systems_sidebar
  9.75%   64.531      1 Template:Short_description
  6.26%   41.423      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.10%   40.370      2 Template:Fix
  5.22%   34.547      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.07%   33.540      5 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1062429:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818154406 and revision id 1303023292. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nationalization&oldid=1303023292 " Categories : Nationalization Economic policy Economic systems Ownership Social democracy Democratic socialism Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 18:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nationalization 69 languages Add topic

