Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Early political activity 2 Revolutionary years Toggle Revolutionary years subsection 2.1 1916 Easter Rising 2.2 President of Dáil Éireann 2.3 President of the Republic 2.4 Anglo-Irish Treaty 2.5 Civil War 3 Founding of Fianna Fáil 4 President of the Executive Council 5 Taoiseach (1937–1948) Toggle Taoiseach (1937–1948) subsection 5.1 Anglo-Irish Trade Agreement 5.2 Constitution of Ireland 5.3 The Emergency (World War II) 6 Post-war period: Taoiseach/Opposition leader Toggle Post-war period: Taoiseach/Opposition leader subsection 6.1 Opposition leader (1948–1951) 6.2 Final years as Taoiseach 7 Presidency 8 Death 9 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 9.1 Catholic social policy 10 In popular culture 11 Governments 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Sources 16 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 16.1 Historiography 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Éamon de Valera 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Latina Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский سرائیکی Scots Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish statesman (1882–1975) "De Valera" redirects here. For other people with the surname, see De Valera (surname) .

Éamon de Valera De Valera, c.

1918–1921 President of Ireland In office 25 June 1959 – 24 June 1973 Taoiseach Seán Lemass Jack Lynch Liam Cosgrave Preceded by Seán T. O'Kelly Succeeded by Erskine H. Childers Taoiseach In office 20 March 1957 – 23 June 1959 President Seán T. O'Kelly Tánaiste Seán Lemass Preceded by John A. Costello Succeeded by Seán Lemass In office 13 June 1951 – 2 June 1954 President Seán T. O'Kelly Tánaiste Seán Lemass Preceded by John A. Costello Succeeded by John A. Costello In office 29 December 1937 – 18 February 1948 President Douglas Hyde Seán T. O'Kelly Tánaiste Seán T. O'Kelly Seán Lemass Preceded by Himself as president of the Executive Council Succeeded by John A. Costello President of the Executive Council In office 9 March 1932 – 29 December 1937 Vice President Seán T. O'Kelly Preceded by W. T. Cosgrave Succeeded by Himself as Taoiseach Leader of the Opposition In office 2 June 1954 – 20 March 1957 President Seán T. O'Kelly Taoiseach John A. Costello Preceded by John A. Costello Succeeded by John A. Costello In office 18 February 1948 – 13 June 1951 President Seán T. O'Kelly Taoiseach John A. Costello Preceded by Richard Mulcahy Succeeded by John A. Costello In office 11 August 1927 – 9 March 1932 President W. T. Cosgrave Preceded by Thomas Johnson Succeeded by W. T. Cosgrave Leader of Fianna Fáil In office 23 March 1926 – 23 June 1959 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Seán Lemass President of the Irish Republic In office 26 August 1921 – 9 January 1922 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Office abolished President of Dáil Éireann In office 1 April 1919 – 26 August 1921 Preceded by Cathal Brugha Succeeded by Arthur Griffith Parliamentary offices Teachta Dála In office August 1922 – June 1959 Constituency Clare In office December 1918 – June 1922 Constituency Clare East Member of the Northern Ireland Parliament for South Down In office 30 November 1933 – 9 February 1938 Preceded by John Henry Collins Succeeded by James Brown Member of the Northern Ireland Parliament for Down In office 24 May 1921 – 22 May 1929 Preceded by Constituency established Succeeded by Constituency abolished Member of Parliament for East Clare In office 10 July 1917 – 15 November 1922 Preceded by Willie Redmond Succeeded by Constituency abolished Personal details Born George de Valero ( 1882-10-14 ) 14 October 1882 New York City, U.S.

Died 29 August 1975 (1975-08-29) (aged 92) Blackrock, Dublin , Ireland Resting place Glasnevin Cemetery , Dublin, Ireland Nationality Irish American [ 1 ] Political party Fianna Fáil Other political affiliations Anti-Treaty Sinn Féin (1923–1926) Cumann na Poblachta (1922–1923) Sinn Féin (1916–1922) Spouse Sinéad Flanagan ​ ​ ( m.

1910 ; died 1975 ) ​ Children 7, including Vivion , Máirín , Éamon and Rúaidhrí Parents Juan Vivion de Valera (father) Catherine Coll (mother) Relatives Éamon Ó Cuív (grandson) Síle de Valera (granddaughter) Education C.B.S. Charleville Blackrock College Alma mater Royal University of Ireland (B.A., 1904) Trinity College Dublin (1904–1905, no degree) Profession Teacher politician Signature Éamon de Valera's voice Éamon de Valera speaks on an ideal Ireland Recorded 17 March 1943 Éamon de Valera [ a ] [ b ] ( / ˈ eɪ m ən ˌ d ɛ v ə ˈ l ɛər ə , - ˈ l ɪər -/ AY -mən DEH -və- LAIR -ə, -⁠ LEER - ; Irish: [ˈeːmˠən̪ˠ dʲɛ ˈwalʲəɾʲə] ; first registered as George de Valero ; changed some time before 1901 to Edward de Valera ; [ 2 ] 14 October 1882 – 29 August 1975) was an American-born Irish statesman and political leader. He served as the 3rd President of Ireland from 1959 to 1973, and several terms as the Taoiseach . He had a leading role in introducing the Constitution of Ireland in 1937, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and was a dominant figure in Irish political circles from the early 1930s to the late 1960s, when he served terms as both the head of government and head of state .

De Valera was a commandant of the Irish Volunteers (Third Battalion) at Boland's Mill during the 1916 Easter Rising .

[ 5 ] He was arrested and sentenced to death, but released for a variety of reasons, including his American citizenship and the public response to the British execution of Rising leaders. He returned to Ireland after being jailed in England and became one of the leading political figures of the War of Independence . After the signing of the Anglo-Irish Treaty , de Valera served as the political leader of Anti-Treaty Sinn Féin until 1926, when he, along with many supporters, left the party to set up Fianna Fáil , a new political party which abandoned the policy of abstentionism from Dáil Éireann .

[ 6 ] From there, de Valera went on to be at the forefront of Irish politics until the turn of the 1960s. He took over as president of the Executive Council from W. T. Cosgrave and later became Taoiseach , with the adoption of the Constitution of Ireland in 1937. He served as Taoiseach on three different occasions: from 1937 to 1948, from 1951 to 1954, and finally from 1957 to 1959. He remains the longest serving Taoiseach by total days served in the post. He resigned in 1959 upon his election as president of Ireland . By then, he had been Leader of Fianna Fáil for 33 years and he, along with older founding members, began to take a less prominent role relative to newer ministers such as Jack Lynch , Charles Haughey and Neil Blaney . De Valera served as President of Ireland from 1959 to 1973, two full terms in office.

De Valera's political beliefs evolved from militant Irish republicanism to strong social , cultural and fiscal conservatism.

[ 7 ] He has been characterised as having a stern and unbending, and also devious demeanour. His roles in the Civil War have also been interpreted as making him a divisive figure in Irish history. Biographer Tim Pat Coogan sees his time in power as being characterised by economic and cultural stagnation, while Diarmaid Ferriter argues that the stereotype of de Valera as an austere, cold, and even backward figure was largely manufactured in the 1960s and is misguided.

[ 7 ] Early life [ edit ] Éamon de Valera was born on 14 October 1882 in Lenox Hill, New York .

[ 8 ] the son of Catherine Coll , who was originally from Bruree , County Limerick, [ 9 ] and Juan Vivion de Valera, described on the birth certificate as a Spanish artist born in 1853. Some researchers have placed his father's place of birth in Cuba , [ 10 ] while others have suggested other locations; according to Antonio Rivero Taravillo, he was born in Seville , [ 11 ] while Ronan Fanning has him born in the Basque Country .

[ 12 ] He was born at the Nursery and Child's Hospital , [ 13 ] Lexington Avenue , a home for destitute orphans and abandoned children.

[ 14 ] His parents were reportedly married on 18 September 1881 at St Patrick's Church in Jersey City, New Jersey , but archivists have not located any marriage certificate or any birth, baptismal, or death certificate information for anyone called Juan Vivion de Valera (nor for "de Valeros", an alternative spelling). On de Valera's original birth certificate, his name is given as George de Valero and his father is listed as Vivion de Valero. Although he was known as Edward de Valera before 1901, an amended birth certificate was issued, when de Valera was an adult, in which his first name was updated to Edward and his father's surname given as "de Valera".

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] As a child, he was known as "Eddie" or "Eddy".

[ 17 ] An article, published in 2024 in the Journal of the Westmeath Archaeological and History Society , suggested that de Valera's baptismal record and birth certificate were forged by Irish nationalists in New York City in 1916 as part of an effort to spare him from execution.

[ 18 ] According to Coll, Juan Vivion died in 1885 leaving Coll and her child in poor circumstances.

[ 19 ] Éamon was taken to Ireland by his uncle Ned at the age of two. When his mother remarried in the mid-1880s, he was not brought back to live with her, but was reared by his grandmother, Elizabeth Coll, her son Patrick and her daughter Hannie, in Bruree, County Limerick . He was educated locally at Bruree National School, County Limerick, and C.B.S. Charleville , County Cork . Aged sixteen, he won a scholarship. He was not successful in enrolling at two colleges in Limerick , but was accepted at Blackrock College , Dublin, at the instigation of his local curate.

[ 20 ] : 19–20 Blackrock College has since named one of their six student houses after him.

[ 21 ] He played rugby at Blackrock and Rockwell College , then for Munster around 1905. He remained a lifelong devotee of rugby, attending international matches even towards the end of his life when he was nearly blind.

[ 22 ] At the end of his first year at Blackrock College, he was student of the year. He also won further scholarships and exhibitions and in 1903 was appointed teacher of mathematics at Rockwell College, County Tipperary.

[ 23 ] It was here that de Valera was first given the nickname "Dev" by a teaching colleague, Tom O'Donnell.

[ 24 ] : 73 In 1904, he graduated in mathematics from the Royal University of Ireland . He then studied for a year at Trinity College Dublin but, owing to the necessity of earning a living, did not proceed further and returned to teaching, this time at Belvedere College .

[ 24 ] : 87–90 In 1906, he secured a post as a teacher of mathematics at Carysfort Teachers' Training College for women in Blackrock, Dublin . His applications for professorships in colleges of the National University of Ireland were unsuccessful, but he obtained a part-time appointment at St Patrick's College, Maynooth [ 25 ] and also taught mathematics at various Dublin schools, including Castleknock College (1910–1911; under the name Edward de Valera) and Belvedere College.

[ 26 ] His interest in mathematics and science continued later in life, and he was involved in the foundation of the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies in 1940, to which he invited scientists such as Erwin Schrödinger .

[ 27 ] He also reportedly did mathematics, while jailed and awaiting possible execution, in 1916.

[ 28 ] There were occasions when de Valera seriously contemplated the religious life like his half-brother, Fr. Thomas Wheelwright, but ultimately he did not pursue this vocation. As late as 1906, when he was 24 years old, he approached the President of Clonliffe Seminary in Dublin for advice on his vocation.

[ 29 ] De Valera was throughout his life portrayed as a deeply religious man, and in death asked to be buried in a religious habit. His biographer, Tim Pat Coogan , speculated that questions surrounding de Valera's legitimacy may have been a deciding factor in his not entering religious life. Being illegitimate would have ordinarily been a bar to receiving priestly orders as a secular priest, but not to becoming a priest or religious in some religious orders .

[ 30 ] As a young Gaeilgeoir (Irish speaker), de Valera became an activist for the Irish language . In 1908, he joined the Árdchraobh of Conradh na Gaeilge (the Gaelic League), where he met Sinéad Flanagan , a teacher by profession and four years his senior. They were married on 8 January 1910 at St Paul's Church, Arran Quay, Dublin .

The couple had five sons: Vivion (1910–1982), Éamon (1913–1986), Brian (1915–1936), Rúaidhrí (1916–1978), and Terence (Terry; 1922–2007); and two daughters: Máirín (1912–1984) and Emer (1918–2012). Brian de Valera predeceased his parents.

Early political activity [ edit ] De Valera in March 1918 While he was already involved in the Gaelic revival , de Valera's involvement in the political revolution began on 25 November 1913, when he joined the Irish Volunteers . The organisation was formed to oppose the Ulster Volunteers and ensure the enactment of the Irish Parliamentary Party 's Third Home Rule Act won by its leader John Redmond . After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, de Valera rose through the ranks and it was not long before he was elected captain of the Donnybrook branch. Preparations were pushed ahead for an armed revolt, and he was made commandant of the Third Battalion and adjutant of the Dublin Brigade. He took part in the Howth gun-running .

[ 31 ] He was sworn by Thomas MacDonagh into the oath-bound Irish Republican Brotherhood , which secretly controlled the central executive of the Volunteers. He opposed secret societies, but this was the only way he could be guaranteed full information on plans for the Rising.

[ 20 ] : 32 Revolutionary years [ edit ] 1916 Easter Rising [ edit ] De Valera addressing a crowd on the steps of Ennis Courthouse , County Clare, in July 1917 On 24 April 1916, the Easter Rising began. Forces commanded by de Valera occupied Boland's Mill [ 32 ] on Grand Canal Street in Dublin. His chief task was to cover the southeastern approaches to the city. After a week of fighting, the order came from Pádraig Pearse to surrender. De Valera was court-martialled, convicted, and sentenced to death, but the sentence was immediately commuted to penal servitude for life.

De Valera was among the few republican leaders the British did not execute.

[ 32 ] It has been argued that his life was saved by four facts. First, he was one of the last to surrender and he was held in a different prison from other leaders, thus his execution was delayed by practicalities. Second, the US Consulate in Dublin made representations before his trial (i.e., was he actually a United States citizen and if so, how would the United States react to the execution of one of its citizens?) while the full legal situation was clarified.

[ citation needed ] The UK was trying to bring the US into the war in Europe at the time, and the Irish American vote was important in US politics.

[ 32 ] Third, when Lt-Gen Sir John Maxwell reviewed his case he said, "Who is he? I haven't heard of him before. I wonder would he be likely to make trouble in the future?" On being told that de Valera was unimportant, he commuted the court-martial's death sentence to life imprisonment.

[ 33 ] : 93 De Valera had no Fenian family or personal background and his MI5 file in 1916 was very slim, detailing only his open membership in the Irish Volunteers.

[ 33 ] : 92 Fourth, by the time de Valera was court-martialled on 8 May, political pressure was being brought to bear on Maxwell to halt the executions; Maxwell had already told British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith that only two more were to be executed, Seán Mac Diarmada and James Connolly , although they were court-martialled the day after de Valera. His late trial, representations made by the American Consulate, his lack of Fenian background and political pressure all combined to save his life, though had he been tried a week earlier he would probably have been shot.

[ 33 ] : 91–94 The Kilmainham Gaol cell of Éamon de Valera De Valera's supporters and detractors argue about his bravery during the Easter Rising. His supporters claim he showed leadership skills and a capacity for meticulous planning. His detractors claim he suffered a nervous breakdown during the Rising. According to accounts from 1916, de Valera was seen running about, giving conflicting orders, refusing to sleep and on one occasion, having forgotten the password, almost getting himself shot in the dark by his own men. According to one account, de Valera, on being forced to sleep by one subordinate who promised to sit beside him and wake him if he was needed, suddenly woke up, his eyes "wild", screaming, "Set fire to the railway! Set fire to the railway!" Later in the Ballykinlar internment Camp, one de Valera loyalist approached another internee, a medical doctor, recounted the story, and asked for a medical opinion as to de Valera's condition. He also threatened to sue the doctor, future Fine Gael TD and Minister, Dr. Tom O'Higgins , if he ever repeated the story.

[ 34 ] The British reportedly, however, considered de Valera's forces the best-trained and best-led among the rebels.

[ 32 ] De Valera's latest biographer, Anthony J. Jordan , writes of this controversy, "Whatever happened in Boland's Mills, or any other garrison, does not negate or undermine in any way the extraordinary heroism of "Dev" and his comrades".

[ 20 ] : 37 After imprisonment in Dartmoor , Maidstone and Lewes prisons, de Valera and his comrades were released under an amnesty in June 1917. On 10 July 1917, he was elected as the Member of Parliament (MP) for East Clare (the constituency which he represented until 1959) in a by-election caused by the death of the previous incumbent Willie Redmond , brother of the Irish Party leader John Redmond, who had died fighting in World War I. In the 1918 general election he was elected both for that seat and Mayo East .

[ 35 ] As an abstentionist de Valera would not have gone to Westminster, but was not able to do so regardless because in early 1918 he was again arrested.

[ 32 ] Because most other Irish rebellion leaders were dead, in 1917 de Valera had been elected President of Sinn Féin , [ 32 ] the party which had been blamed incorrectly for provoking the Easter Rising.

[ citation needed ] This party became the political vehicle through which the survivors of the Easter Rising channelled their republican ethos and objectives.

[ 36 ] The previous President of Sinn Féin, Arthur Griffith , had championed an Anglo-Irish dual-monarchy based on the Austro-Hungarian model, with independent legislatures for both Ireland and Britain.

President of Dáil Éireann [ edit ] Sinn Féin won a huge majority in the 1918 general election, largely thanks to the British executions of the 1916 leaders, the threat of conscription with the Conscription Crisis of 1918 and the first-past-the-post ballot. They won 73 out of 105 Irish seats, with about 47% of votes cast. 25 seats were uncontested. On 21 January 1919, 27 Sinn Féin MPs (the rest were imprisoned or impaired), calling themselves Teachtaí Dála (TDs), assembled in the Mansion House in Dublin and formed an Irish parliament, known as Dáil Éireann (translatable into English as the Assembly of Ireland ). The Ministry of Dáil Éireann was formed, under the leadership of the Príomh Aire (also called President of Dáil Éireann) Cathal Brugha . De Valera had been re-arrested in May 1918 and imprisoned and so could not attend the January session of the Dáil. He escaped from Lincoln Gaol , England in February 1919.

[ 37 ] As a result, he replaced Brugha as Príomh Aire in the April session of Dáil Éireann.

[ citation needed ] De Valera in academic dress to receive an honorary degree from College of the Holy Cross in Massachusetts In the hope of securing international recognition, Seán T. O'Kelly was sent as an envoy to Paris to present the Irish case to the Peace Conference convened by the great powers at the end of World War I. When it became clear by May 1919 that this mission could not succeed, de Valera decided to visit the United States. The mission had three objectives: to ask for official recognition of the Irish Republic , to float a loan to finance the work of the Government (and by extension, the Irish Republican Army ), and to secure the support of the American people for the republic. His visit lasted from June 1919 to December 1920 and had mixed success, including a visit to Fenway Park in Boston in front of 50,000 supporters.

[ 38 ] One negative outcome was the splitting of the Irish-American organisations into pro- and anti-de Valera factions.

[ 20 ] : 63–70 He met the young Harvard-educated leader from Puerto Rico , Pedro Albizu Campos , and forged a lasting and useful alliance with him.

[ 39 ] It was during this American tour that he recruited his long-serving personal secretary, Kathleen O'Connell , an Irish emigrant who would return to Ireland with him.

[ 40 ] In October 1919, he visited the University of Notre Dame campus in Indiana, where he planted a tree and also laid a wreath by the statue of William Corby . He toured the university archives and spoke in Washington Hall about the cause of Ireland in front of twelve hundred students.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] De Valera at the College of the Holy Cross in 1920 De Valera managed to raise $5,500,000 from American supporters, an amount that far exceeded the hopes of the Dáil.

[ 43 ] Of this, $500,000 was devoted to the American presidential campaign in 1920, helping him gain wider public support there.

[ 44 ] In 1921, it was said that $1,466,000 had already been spent, and it is unclear when the net balance arrived in Ireland.

[ 45 ] Recognition was not forthcoming in the international sphere. He also had difficulties with various Irish-American leaders, such as John Devoy and Judge Daniel F. Cohalan , who resented the dominant position he established, preferring to retain their control over Irish affairs in the United States.

[ citation needed ] While American recognition for the Republic had been his priority, in February 1921, De Valera redirected Patrick McCartan from Washington to Moscow. McCartan was told by Maxim Litvinov , that the opportunity of recognition and assistance had passed. The Soviet priority was a trade agreement with Britain (signed in March). In June the British government (with a view to both domestic and American opinion) published the proposed treaty between the Dáil government and the Soviets, and related correspondence.

[ 46 ] Meanwhile, in Ireland, the conflict between the British authorities and the Dáil (which the British declared illegal in September 1919), escalated into the Irish War of Independence . De Valera left day-to-day government, during his eighteen-month absence in the United States, to Michael Collins , his 29-year-old Minister for Finance . De Valera and Collins would later become opponents during the Irish Civil War.

[ 47 ] President of the Republic [ edit ] In January 1921, in his first appearance in the Dáil , after his return to a country gripped by the War of Independence, de Valera introduced a motion calling on the IRA to desist from ambushes and other tactics that were allowing the British to successfully portray it as a terrorist group, [ 48 ] and to take on the British forces with conventional military methods. This they strongly opposed, and de Valera relented, issuing a statement expressing support for the IRA, and claiming it was fully under the control of the Dáil. He then, along with Cathal Brugha and Austin Stack , brought pressure to bear on Michael Collins to undertake a journey to the United States himself, on the pretext that only he could take up where de Valera had left off. Collins successfully resisted this move and stayed in Ireland. In the May 1921 elections , all candidates in Southern Ireland were returned unopposed, Nationalists and Sinn Féin secured 12 seats in Northern Ireland including leaders such as de Valera, Michael Collins, Eoin MacNeill and Arthur Griffith .

[ 49 ] Following the Truce of July 1921 that ended the war, de Valera went to see Prime Minister David Lloyd George in London on 14 July. No agreement was reached, and by then the Parliament of Northern Ireland had already met. It became clear that neither a republic nor independence for all 32 counties, was going to be offered; Lloyd George told de Valera he could "put a soldier in Ireland for every man, woman and child in it" if the IRA did not immediately agree to stop fighting.

[ 50 ] In August 1921, de Valera secured Dáil Éireann's approval to change the 1919 Dáil Constitution to upgrade his office from prime minister or chairman of the cabinet to a full President of the Republic.

[ 51 ] Declaring himself now the Irish equivalent of King George V , he argued that as Irish head of state, in the absence of the British head of state from the negotiations, he too should not attend the peace conference called the Treaty Negotiations (October–December 1921) at which British and Irish government leaders agreed to the effective independence of twenty-six of Ireland's thirty-two counties as the Irish Free State , with Northern Ireland choosing to remain under British sovereignty. It is generally agreed by historians that whatever his motives, it was a mistake for de Valera not to have travelled to London.

[ 20 ] : 91 Having effected these changes, the Irish Boundary Commission met in 1922-25 to redraw the Irish border.

Nationalists expected its report to recommend that largely nationalist areas of Northern Ireland (South Armagh, South Down, Derry City and the Counties Tyrone and Fermanagh) become part of the Free State, and many hoped this would make Northern Ireland so small it would not be economically viable. A Council of Ireland was also provided in the Treaty as a model for an eventual all-Irish parliament. Hence neither the pro- nor anti-Treaty sides made many complaints about partition in the Treaty Debates .

Anglo-Irish Treaty [ edit ] The Republic's delegates to the Treaty Negotiations were accredited by de Valera and his cabinet as plenipotentiaries (that is, negotiators with the legal authority to sign a treaty without reference back to the cabinet), but were given secret cabinet instructions by de Valera that required them to return to Dublin before signing the Treaty.

[ 52 ] The Treaty proved controversial in Ireland insofar as it replaced the Republic by a dominion of the British Commonwealth with the King represented by a Governor-General of the Irish Free State . The Irish delegates Arthur Griffith, Robert Barton and Michael Collins supported by Erskine Childers as Secretary-General set up their delegation headquarters at 22 Hans Place in Knightsbridge . It was there, at 11.15 am on 5 December 1921, that the decision was made to recommend the Treaty to Dáil Éireann . The Treaty was finally signed by the delegates after further negotiations which closed at 02:15 on 6 December 1921.

[ 53 ] De Valera baulked at the agreement. His opponents claimed that he had refused to join the negotiations because he knew what the outcome would be and did not wish to receive the blame. De Valera claimed that he had not gone to the treaty negotiations because he would be better able to control the extremists at home, and that his absence would allow leverage for the plenipotentiaries to refer back to him and not be pressured into any agreements. Because of the secret instructions given to the plenipotentiaries, he reacted to news of the signing of the Treaty not with anger at its contents (which he refused even to read when offered a newspaper report of its contents), but with anger over the fact that they had not consulted him , their president, before signing. His ideal drafts, presented to a secret session of the Dáil during the Treaty Debates and publicised in January 1922, were ingenious compromises [ original research?

] but they included dominion status, the Treaty Ports , the fact of partition subject to veto by the parliament in Belfast, and some continuing status for the King as head of the Commonwealth. Ireland's share of the imperial debt and the payment of war pensions was to be paid.

[ 54 ] After the Treaty was narrowly ratified by 64 to 57, de Valera and a large minority of Sinn Féin TDs left Dáil Éireann. He then resigned and Arthur Griffith was elected President of Dáil Éireann in his place, though respectfully still calling him 'The President'. On a speaking tour of the more republican province of Munster , starting on 17 March 1922, de Valera made controversial speeches at Carrick on Suir , Lismore , Dungarvan and Waterford , saying that: " If the Treaty were accepted, [by the electorate] the fight for freedom would still go on, and the Irish people, instead of fighting foreign soldiers, will have to fight the Irish soldiers of an Irish government set up by Irishmen.

" At Thurles , several days later, he repeated this imagery and added that the IRA: " ..would have to wade through the blood of the soldiers of the Irish Government, and perhaps through that of some members of the Irish Government to get their freedom.

" In a letter to the Irish Independent on 23 March de Valera accepted the accuracy of their report of his comment about "wading" through blood, but deplored that the newspaper had published it.

[ 55 ] De Valera objected to the oath of allegiance to the King that the treaty required Irish parliamentarians to take.

[ 56 ] He also was concerned that Ireland could not have an independent foreign policy as part of the British Commonwealth when the British retained several naval ports (see Treaty Ports ) around Ireland's coast. As a compromise, de Valera proposed " external association " with the British Empire , which would leave Ireland's foreign policy in her own hands and a republican constitution with no mention of the British monarch (he proposed this as early as April, well before the negotiations began, under the title "Document No. 2"). Michael Collins was prepared to accept this formula and the two wings (pro- and anti-Treaty) of Sinn Féin formed a pact to fight the 1922 Irish general election together and form a coalition government afterwards. Collins later called off the pact on the eve of the election. De Valera's opponents won the election and civil war broke out shortly afterwards in late June 1922.

[ 57 ] Civil War [ edit ] Main article: Irish Civil War Relations between the new Irish government, which was backed by most of the Dáil and the electorate, and the anti-treatyites, under the nominal leadership of de Valera, now descended into the Irish Civil War (June 1922 to May 1923), in which the pro-treaty Free State forces defeated the anti-treaty IRA. Both sides had wanted to avoid civil war, but fighting broke out over the takeover of the Four Courts in Dublin by anti-treaty members of the IRA. These men were not loyal to de Valera and initially were not even supported by the executive of the anti-treaty IRA. However, Michael Collins was forced to act against them when Winston Churchill threatened to re-occupy the country with British troops unless action was taken. When fighting broke out in Dublin between the Four Courts garrison and the new Free State Army , republicans backed the IRA men in the Four Courts, and civil war broke out. De Valera, though he held no military position, backed the anti-treaty IRA , or irregulars , and said that he was re-enlisting in the IRA as an ordinary volunteer. On 8 September 1922, he met in secret with Richard Mulcahy in Dublin to try to halt the fighting. However, according to de Valera, they "could not find a basis" for agreement.

[ 58 ] Though nominally head of the anti-treatyites, de Valera had little influence. He does not seem to have been involved in any fighting and had little or no influence with the revolutionary military leadership, headed by IRA Chief of Staff Liam Lynch . De Valera and the anti-treaty TDs formed a " republican government " on 25 October 1922 from anti-treaty TDs to "be temporarily the Supreme Executive of the Republic and the State, until such time as the elected Parliament of the Republic can freely assemble, or the people being rid of external aggression are at liberty to decide freely how they are to be governed and what shall be their political relations with other countries" .

[ 59 ] However, it had no real authority and was a pale shadow of the Dáil government of 1919–21 .

[ citation needed ] In March 1923, de Valera attended the meeting of the IRA Army Executive to decide on the future of the war. He was known to be in favour of a truce but he had no voting rights and it was narrowly decided to continue hostilities.

[ 20 ] : 131 The leader of the Free State, W. T. Cosgrave , insisted that there could be no acceptance of a surrender without disarming.

[ 60 ] On 30 April 1923, the IRA's new Chief of Staff, Frank Aiken (Lynch had been killed), called a ceasefire. This was followed on 24 May by an order for volunteers to "dump arms". De Valera, who had wanted an end to the internecine fighting for some time, backed the ceasefire order with a message in which he called the anti-treaty fighters "the Legion of the Rearguard", saying that "The Republic can no longer be successfully defended by your arms. Further sacrifice on your part would now be in vain and the continuance of the struggle in arms unwise in the national interest and prejudicial to the future of our cause. Military victory must be allowed to rest for the moment with those who have destroyed the republic. Other means must be sought to safeguard the nation's right." [ 61 ] After this point, many of the republicans were arrested in Free State round-ups when they had come out of hiding and returned home. De Valera remained in hiding for several months after the ceasefire was declared; however, he emerged in August to stand for election in County Clare . Referring to the Clare electorate he said: "If the people of Clare elect me as their candidate again, I will be with them and nothing but a bullet will stop me".

[ 62 ] Making a campaign appearance in Ennis on 15 August, de Valera was arrested on the platform and interned at Kilmainham jail. He was moved to Arbour Hill barracks briefly prior to his release on 16 July 1924.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Founding of Fianna Fáil [ edit ] De Valera surrounded by founding members of Fianna Fáil in 1927, including Constance Markiewicz , P. J. Ruttledge , Frank Aiken , Seán Lemass and many others.

After the IRA dumped their arms rather than surrender them or continue a now fruitless war, de Valera returned to political methods. In 1924, he was arrested in Newry for "illegally entering Northern Ireland" and later arrested in Derry. When at trial in Belfast on 1 November 1924 he refused to recognize the court saying that it was: "a creature of a foreign power and therefore had not the sanction of the Irish people".

[ 65 ] He was held in solitary confinement for a month in Crumlin Road Gaol , Belfast .

[ 66 ] During this time, de Valera came to believe that abstentionism was not a workable tactic in the long term. He now believed that a better course would be to try to gain power and turn the Free State from a constitutional monarchy into a republic. He tried to convince Sinn Féin to accept this new line. However, a vote to accept the Free State Constitution (contingent on the abolition of the Oath of Allegiance ) narrowly failed. Soon afterwards, de Valera resigned from Sinn Féin and seriously considered leaving politics.

[ citation needed ] However, one of his colleagues, Seán Lemass , convinced de Valera to found a new republican party.

[ 67 ] In March 1926, with Lemass, Constance Markievicz and others, de Valera formed a new party, Fianna Fáil ( The Warriors of Destiny ), a party that was to dominate 20th-century Irish politics.

[ 68 ] While Sinn Féin still held to an abstentionist line, Fianna Fáil was dedicated to republicanising the Free State from within if it gained power.

Having attracted most of Sinn Féin's branches due to Lemass' organisational skill, [ 67 ] the new party made swift electoral gains in the general election on 9 June 1927 . In the process, it took much of Sinn Féin's previous support, winning 44 seats to Sinn Féin's five. It refused to take the Oath of Allegiance (portrayed by opponents as an 'Oath of Allegiance to the Crown' but actually an Oath of Allegiance to the Irish Free State with a secondary promise of fidelity to the King in his role in the Treaty settlement ).

[ 69 ] The oath was largely the work of Collins and based on three sources: British oaths in the dominions, the oath of the Irish Republican Brotherhood and a draft oath prepared by de Valera in his proposed treaty alternative, "Document No. 2". De Valera began a legal case to challenge the requirement that members of his party take the Oath, but the assassination of the Vice-President of the Executive Council (deputy prime minister) Kevin O'Higgins on 10 July 1927 led the Executive Council under W. T. Cosgrave to introduce a Bill on 20 July [ 70 ] requiring all Dáil candidates to promise on oath that if they were elected they would take the Oath of Allegiance. Forced into a corner, and faced with the option of staying outside politics forever or taking the oath and entering, de Valera and his TDs took the Oath of Allegiance on 12 August 1927, though de Valera himself described the Oath as "an empty political formula".

[ 71 ] De Valera never organised Fianna Fáil in Northern Ireland and it was not until 7 December 2007 that Fianna Fáil was registered there by the UK Electoral Commission .

[ 72 ] President of the Executive Council [ edit ] 1932 Fianna Fáil poster displaying De Valera's new cabinet, featuring prominent figures such as Lemass , Aiken and Boland De Valera on the cover of Time magazine in 1932 In the 1932 general election Fianna Fáil secured 72 seats and became the largest party in the Dáil, although without a majority. Some Fianna Fáil members arrived at the first sitting of the new Dáil carrying arms, amid fears that Cumann na nGaedheal would not voluntarily surrender power. However, the transition was peaceful.

[ 73 ] De Valera was elected President of the Executive Council (Prime Minister) by the Dáil by a vote of 81–68, with the support of the Labour Party and Independent politicians , and took office on 9 March.

[ 74 ] He at once initiated steps to fulfil his election promises to abolish the oath and withhold land annuities owed to the UK for loans provided under the Irish Land Acts and agreed as part of the 1921 Treaty. This launched the Anglo-Irish Trade War when the UK in retaliation imposed economic sanctions against Irish exports. De Valera responded in kind with levies on British imports. The ensuing "Economic War" lasted until 1938.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] After De Valera had urged King George V to dismiss McNeill as Governor-General, the King suggested an alternative course of action: that McNeill, instead, carry on a while longer as viceroy and only then resign, which he did on 1 November 1932. Subsequently, a 1916 veteran, Domhnall Ua Buachalla , was appointed Governor-General. To strengthen his position against the opposition in the Dáil and Seanad, de Valera directed the Governor-General to call a snap election in January 1933 and de Valera's party won 77 seats, giving Fianna Fáil an overall majority. Under de Valera's leadership, Fianna Fáil won further general elections in 1937 , 1938 , 1943 , and 1944 .

[ 77 ] De Valera took charge of Ireland's foreign policy as well by also acting as Minister for External Affairs . In that capacity, he attended meetings of the League of Nations . He was president of the Council of the League on his first appearance at the league in Geneva , Switzerland , in 1932 and, in a speech that made a worldwide impression, appealed for genuine adherence by its members to the principles of the covenant of the league. In 1934, he supported the admission of the Soviet Union into the league. In September 1938, he was elected the nineteenth president of the Assembly of the League, [ 78 ] a tribute to the international recognition he had won by his independent stance on world questions.

[ 79 ] De Valera's government followed the policy of unilaterally dismantling the treaty of 1921. In this way, he would be pursuing republican policies and lessening the popularity of republican violence and the IRA. De Valera encouraged IRA members to join the Irish Defence Forces and the Gardaí . He also refused to dismiss from office those Cumann na nGaedheal, Cosgrave supporters, who had previously opposed him during the Civil War. He did, however, dismiss Eoin O'Duffy from his position as Garda Commissioner after a year. Eoin O'Duffy was then invited to be head of the Army Comrades Association (ACA) formed to protect and promote the welfare of its members, previously led by J.F. O'Higgins, Kevin O'Higgins's brother. This organisation was an obstacle to de Valera's power as it supported Cumann na nGaedheal and provided stewards for their meetings. Cumann na nGaedheal meetings were frequently disrupted by Fianna Fáil supporters following the publication of the article: No Free Speech for Traitors by Peadar O'Donnell , an IRA member.

[ citation needed ] The ACA changed its name to the National Guard under O'Duffy and adopted the uniform of black berets and blue shirts, using the straight-armed salute, and were nicknamed the Blueshirts . They were outwardly fascist and planned a march in August 1933 through Dublin to commemorate Michael Collins, Kevin O'Higgins, and Arthur Griffith. This march struck parallels with Mussolini's march on Rome (1922), in which he had created the image of having toppled the democratic government in Rome. De Valera revived a military tribunal, which had been set up by the previous administration, to deal with the matter. O'Duffy backed down when the National Guard was declared an illegal organisation and the march was banned. Within a few weeks, O'Duffy's followers merged with Cumann na nGaedhael and the Centre Party to form United Ireland , or Fine Gael, and O'Duffy became its leader. Smaller local marches were scheduled for the following weeks, under different names. Internal dissension set in when the party's TDs distanced themselves from O'Duffy's extreme views, and his movement fell asunder.

[ 80 ] Taoiseach (1937–1948) [ edit ] Bust of De Valera in Fitzgerald's Park , Cork Fianna Fáil having won the 1937 election held the same day as the plebiscite that ratified the constitution, de Valera continued as President of the Executive Council until 29 December 1937, when the new constitution was enacted. On that date, de Valera's post automatically became that of Taoiseach which was a considerably more powerful office. Notably, he could advise the President to dismiss Ministers individually – advice that the President was bound to follow by convention. The old Executive Council had to be dissolved and reformed en bloc if its President wanted to remove a Minister. Additionally, he could request a parliamentary dissolution on his own authority. Previously, the right to seek a dissolution was vested with the Council as a whole.

[ citation needed ] In social policy, de Valera's first period as Taoiseach saw the introduction (in 1947) of means-tested allowances for people suffering from infectious diseases.

[ 81 ] Anglo-Irish Trade Agreement [ edit ] With the new constitution in place, de Valera determined that the changed circumstances made swift resolution to Ireland's ongoing trade war with the UK more desirable for both sides—as did the growing probability of the outbreak of war across Europe. In April 1938, de Valera and British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain signed the Anglo-Irish Trade Agreement , lifting all duties imposed during the previous five years and ending British use of the Treaty Ports it had retained in accordance with the Anglo-Irish Treaty. The return of the ports was of particular significance since it ensured Irish neutrality during the coming Second World War.

[ 82 ] Constitution of Ireland [ edit ] During the 1930s, de Valera systematically stripped the Irish Free State constitution – a constitution originally drafted by a committee under the nominal chairmanship of his rival, Collins – of features tying Ireland to the United Kingdom, limiting its independence and the republican character of its state. De Valera was able to carry out this program of constitutional change by taking advantage of three earlier modifications of constitutional arrangements. First, though the 1922 constitution originally required a public plebiscite for any amendment enacted more than eight years after its passage, the Free State government under W. T. Cosgrave had amended that period to sixteen years. This meant that, until 1938, the Free State constitution could be amended by the simple passage of a Constitutional Amendment Act through the Oireachtas . Secondly, while the Governor-General of the Irish Free State could reserve or deny Royal Assent to any legislation, from 1927, the power to advise the Governor-General to do so no longer rested with the British government in London but with His Majesty's Government in the Irish Free State, which meant that, in practice, the Royal Assent was automatically granted to legislation; the government was hardly likely to advise the governor-general to block the enactment of one of its own bills. Thirdly, though in its original theory, the constitution had to be in keeping with the provisions of the Anglo-Irish Treaty as the fundamental law of the state, that requirement had been abrogated a short time before de Valera gained power.

[ 83 ] The Oath of Allegiance was abolished, as were appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council . The opposition-controlled Senate , when it protested and slowed down these measures, was also abolished. In 1931, the British Parliament passed the Statute of Westminster , which established the legislative equal status of the self-governing Dominions of the then British Commonwealth, including the Irish Free State, to one another and the United Kingdom. Though a few constitutional links between the Dominions and the United Kingdom remained, this is often seen as the moment at which the Dominions became fully sovereign states.

[ citation needed ] De Valera, in his capacity as Prime Minister of His Majesty's Government in the Irish Free State, wrote in July 1936 to King Edward VIII in London indicating that he planned to introduce a new constitution, the central part of which was to be the creation of an office de Valera provisionally intended to call President of Saorstát Éireann ( Irish : Uachtarán Shaorstát Éireann ), which would replace the Governor-General.

[ 84 ] De Valera used the sudden abdication of Edward VIII as King to pass two bills: one amended the constitution to remove all mention of the monarch and Governor-General, while the second brought the monarch back, this time through statute law, for use in representing the Irish Free State at a diplomatic level. With the implementation of the Constitution of Ireland ( Irish : Bunreacht na hÉireann ), the title ultimately given to the president was President of Ireland ( Irish : Uachtarán na hÉireann ).

The constitution contained reforms and symbols intended to assert Irish sovereignty. These included: a new name for the state, " Éire " (in Irish) and "Ireland" (in English); a claim that the national territory was the entire island of Ireland, thereby challenging Britain's partition settlement of 1921; the removal of references to the King of Ireland [ 85 ] [ 86 ] and the replacement of the monarch's representative, the governor-general, with a popularly elected President of Ireland , who takes "precedence over all other persons in the State and who shall exercise and perform the powers and functions conferred on the President by this Constitution and by law"; [ 87 ] [ 88 ] recognition of the "special position" of the Catholic Church; a recognition of the Catholic concept of marriage which excluded civil divorce, even though civil marriage was retained; the declaration that the Irish language was the "national language" and the first official language of the nation although English was also included as "a" second official language; the use of Irish language terms to stress Irish cultural and historical identity (e.g., Uachtarán, Taoiseach, Tánaiste, etc.) Criticisms of some of the above constitutional reforms include that: the anti-partition articles needlessly antagonised Unionists in Northern Ireland, while simultaneously attracting criticism from hardline republicans by recognising the de facto situation.

similarly, the recognition of the "special position" of the Catholic Church was inconsistent with the identity and aspirations of northern Protestants (leading to its repeal in the 1970s ), while simultaneously falling short of the demands of hardline Catholics for Catholicism to be explicitly made the state religion.

the affirmation of Irish as the national and primary official language neither reflected contemporary realities nor led to the language's revival though the King was removed from the text of the constitution, he retained a leading role in the state's foreign affairs, and the legal position of the President of Ireland was accordingly uncertain ; there was also concern that the presidency would evolve into a dictatorial position elements of Catholic social teaching incorporated into the text, such as the articles on the role of women, the family and divorce, were inconsistent both with the practice of the Protestant minority and with contemporary liberal opinion As Paul Bew concludes, in the constitution of 1937 de Valera was "trying to placate left-wing Republicans with national phrases and pious people with expressly Catholic bits [and] patriarchal Catholicism".

[ 89 ] The Constitution was approved in a plebiscite on 1 July 1937 and came into force on 29 December 1937.

The Emergency (World War II) [ edit ] Main articles: The Emergency (Ireland) and Irish neutrality during World War II By September 1939, a general European war was imminent. On 2 September, de Valera advised Dáil Éireann that neutrality was the best policy for the country. This policy had overwhelming political and popular support, though some advocated Irish participation in the war on the Allied side, while others, believing that " England's difficulty is Ireland's opportunity ", were pro-German. Strong objections to conscription in the North were voiced by de Valera.

[ 90 ] In June 1940, to encourage the neutral Irish state to join with the Allies, Winston Churchill indicated to de Valera that the United Kingdom would push for Irish unity, but believing that Churchill could not deliver, de Valera declined the offer.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] The day after the attacks on Pearl Harbor Churchill wired de Valera: "Now is your chance. Now or never! A nation once again. I will meet you wherever you wish." [ 93 ] The British did not inform the Government of Northern Ireland that they had made the offer to the Irish government, and De Valera's rejection was not publicised until 1970.

The government secured wide powers for the duration of the Emergency, such as internment, censorship of the press and correspondence, and government control of the economy. The Emergency Powers Act lapsed on 2 September 1946, though the State of Emergency declared under the constitution was not lifted until the 1970s.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] This status remained throughout the war, despite pressure from Chamberlain and Churchill. However, de Valera did respond to a request from Northern Ireland for fire tenders to assist in fighting fires following the 1941 Belfast Blitz . His 1943 St Patrick's Day radio address , now widely derided, showcased his traditionalist views, extolling an Ireland "satisfied with frugal comfort", populated by "sturdy children" and "happy maidens".

Controversially, [ 96 ] [ 97 ] de Valera visited and offered condolences to the German ambassador in Dublin on the death of Adolf Hitler in 1945, in accordance with diplomatic protocol of neutral nations.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] This did some damage to Ireland's international reputation, particularly in the United States – and soon afterwards de Valera had a bitter exchange of words with Churchill in two famous radio addresses after the end of the war in Europe.

[ 101 ] De Valera denounced reports of Bergen-Belsen concentration camp as "anti-national propaganda"; according to Bew, this was not out of disbelief but rather because the Holocaust undermined the main assumption underlying Irish neutrality: moral equivalence between the Allies and the Axis.

[ 102 ] The de Valera government was reputedly harsh with Irish Army deserters who had enlisted to fight with the Allied armies against the Axis.

[ 103 ] The legislation in question was the Emergency Powers (No. 362) order which was passed in August 1945. On 18 October 1945, Thomas F. O'Higgins moved to annul the order.

[ 104 ] He did not condone desertion, but felt that the order was specifically harsh on those deserters who had served in the Allied forces. General Richard Mulcahy also spoke against the Order, disagreeing with the way in which it applied to enlisted men and not to officers. It was revoked with effect from 1 August 1946, [ 105 ] but was in effect continued by section 13 of the Defence Forces (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1946.

[ 106 ] Post-war period: Taoiseach/Opposition leader [ edit ] Opposition leader (1948–1951) [ edit ] After de Valera had spent sixteen years in power without answering the crucial questions of partition and republican status the public demanded a change from the Fianna Fáil government. In the 1948 election , de Valera lost the outright majority he had enjoyed since 1933. It initially looked as if the National Labour Party would give Fianna Fáil enough support to stay in office as a minority government, but National Labour insisted on a formal coalition agreement, something de Valera was unwilling to concede. However, while Fianna Fáil was six seats short of a majority, it was still by far the largest party in the Dáil, with 37 more TDs than the next largest party and rival, Fine Gael (the successor to Cumann na nGaedheal). Conventional wisdom held that de Valera would remain Taoiseach with the support of independent deputies.

This belief came to nought when (after the final votes were counted) the other parties realised that if they banded together, they would have only one seat fewer than Fianna Fáil, and would be able to form a government with the support of at least seven independents. The result was the First Inter-Party Government , with John A. Costello of Fine Gael as its compromise candidate for Taoiseach. Costello was duly nominated, consigning de Valera to opposition for the first time in 16 years. The following year, Costello declared Ireland as a republic , leaving partition as the most pressing political issue of the day.

[ 107 ] De Valera, now Leader of the Opposition , left the actual parliamentary practice of opposing the government to his deputy, Seán Lemass, and himself embarked on a world campaign to address the issue of partition. He visited the United States, Australia, New Zealand and India , and in the latter country, was the last guest of the Governor-General, Lord Mountbatten of Burma , before he was succeeded by the first Indian-born Governor-General.

[ 108 ] In Melbourne , Australia, de Valera was feted by the powerful Catholic Archbishop Daniel Mannix , at the centenary celebrations of the diocese of Melbourne. He attended mass meetings at Xavier College , and addressed the assembled Melbourne Celtic Club .

[ 109 ] In Brisbane, Australia, at the request of the influential and long-serving Archbishop Duhig , de Valera laid the foundation stone for the new High School building at Marist Brothers College Rosalie .

[ 110 ] In October 1950, just thirty years after his dramatic escape from Lincoln Gaol, he returned to Lincoln and received the freedom of the gaol.

[ 111 ] The Anti-Partition of Ireland League of Great Britain marked the occasion with a dinner in his honour and the toast was 'Anglo-Irish Friendship'.

[ 112 ] A key message in de Valera's campaign was that Ireland could not join the recently established North Atlantic Treaty Organization as long as Northern Ireland was in British hands; although Costello's government favoured alliance with NATO, de Valera's approach won more widespread support and prevented the state from signing the treaty.

[ 107 ] Final years as Taoiseach [ edit ] De Valera (right) with Mayor of Boston John F. Collins and his wife Mary Returning to Ireland during the Mother and Child Scheme crisis that racked the First Inter-Party Government, de Valera kept silent as Leader of the Opposition, preferring to stay aloof from the controversy. That stance helped return de Valera to power in the 1951 general election , but without an overall majority. His and Fianna Fáil's popularity was short-lived, however; his government introduced severe, deflationary budgetary and economic policies in 1952, causing a political backlash that cost Fianna Fáil several seats in the Dáil in by-elections of 1953 and early 1954. Faced with a likely loss of confidence in the Dáil, de Valera instead called an election in May 1954 , in which Fianna Fáil was defeated and a Second Inter-Party Government was formed with John A. Costello again as Taoiseach.

[ 113 ] On 16 September 1953, de Valera met British Prime Minister Winston Churchill for the first and only time, at 10 Downing Street . (The two men had seen each other at a party in 1949, but without speaking). He surprised the UK Prime Minister by claiming that if he had been in office in 1948 Ireland would not have left the Commonwealth.

[ 114 ] It was during this period that de Valera's eyesight began to deteriorate and he was forced to spend several months in the Netherlands , where he had six operations. In 1955, while in opposition, de Valera spoke against the formation of a European Parliament and European federalism , noting that Ireland " did not strive to get out of that British domination [...] to get into a worse [position] ".

[ 115 ] Like the first coalition government, the second lasted only three years. At the general election of 1957 , de Valera, then in his seventy-fifth year, won an absolute majority of nine seats, the greatest number he had ever secured. This was the beginning of another sixteen-year period in office for Fianna Fáil. A new economic policy emerged with the First Programme for Economic Expansion. In July 1957, in response to the Border Campaign (IRA) , Part II of the Offences Against the State Act was re-activated and he ordered the internment without trial of Republican suspects, an action which did much to end the IRA's campaign.

[ 116 ] De Valera's final term as Taoiseach also saw the passage of numerous reforms in health and welfare.

[ 117 ] In 1952, unemployment insurance was extended to male agricultural employees, child allowances were extended to the second child, and a maternity allowance for insured women was introduced. A year later, eligibility for maternity and child services and public hospital services was extended to approximately 85% of the population.

[ 81 ] Presidency [ edit ] De Valera in the 1960s as President of Ireland While Fianna Fáil remained popular among the electorate, 75-year-old de Valera had begun to be seen by the electorate as too old and out of touch to remain as head of government.

[ 118 ] At the urging of party officials, de Valera decided to retire from government and the Dáil and instead seek the presidency of Ireland. He won the 1959 presidential election on 17 June 1959 and resigned as Taoiseach, Leader of Fianna Fáil and a TD for Clare, six days later, handing over power to Seán Lemass.

De Valera was inaugurated as President of Ireland on 25 June 1959.

[ 68 ] By that stage he was "nearly blind", according to Down GAA captain Kevin Mussen who met him after the 1960 All-Ireland Senior Football Championship final and considered him "not a desperately warm sort of man".

[ 119 ] De Valera was re-elected President in 1966 aged 84, which until 2013 was a world record for the oldest elected head of state.

[ 120 ] At his retirement in 1973 at the age of 90, he was the oldest head of state in the world.

[ 118 ] As President of Ireland, de Valera received many state visits, including the 1963 visit of the US president John F. Kennedy . Five months later de Valera attended the state funeral for Kennedy in Washington, D.C., and accompanied a group of 24 Defence Forces cadets who performed a silent drill at his gravesite.

[ 118 ] In June 1964, he returned to Washington, D.C., as the second President of Ireland to address the United States Congress .

[ 121 ] In 1966, the Dublin Jewish community arranged the planting and dedication of the Éamon de Valera Forest in Israel, near Nazareth , in recognition of his support for Ireland's Jews.

[ 122 ] In January 1969, de Valera became the first President to address both houses of the Oireachtas, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of Dáil Éireann.

In 1969, seventy-three countries sent goodwill messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing. These messages still rest on the lunar surface. De Valera's message on behalf of Ireland stated, "May God grant that the skill and courage which have enabled man to alight upon the Moon will enable him, also, to secure peace and happiness upon the Earth and avoid the danger of self-destruction." [ 123 ] Death [ edit ] Éamon de Valera's grave in Glasnevin Cemetery in Dublin. His wife, Sinéad, and son, Brian (who was killed in a horse-riding accident in 1936) are buried there also.

Éamon de Valera died from pneumonia and heart failure in Linden Convalescent Home, Blackrock, Dublin, on 29 August 1975, aged 92.

[ 124 ] His wife, Sinéad de Valera, four years his senior, had died the previous January, on the eve of their 65th wedding anniversary. His body lay in state at Dublin Castle and was given a full state funeral on 3 September at St Mary's Pro-Cathedral , which was broadcast on national television. Over 200,000 people reportedly lined the three-mile funeral route from Dublin city centre to Glasnevin Cemetery .

[ 125 ] He is buried in Glasnevin alongside his wife and son Brian.

Legacy [ edit ] De Valera's political creed evolved from militant republicanism to social and cultural conservatism.

[ 7 ] Ireland's dominant political personality for many decades, de Valera received numerous honours. He was elected Chancellor of the National University of Ireland in 1921, holding the post until his death.

Pope John XXIII bestowed on him the Order of Christ (KSC).

[ 126 ] He received honorary degrees from universities in Ireland and abroad. In 1968, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS), [ 4 ] a recognition of his lifelong interest in mathematics. He also served as a member of the Parliament of Northern Ireland (for Down from 1921 to 1929 and for South Down from 1933 to 1937), although he held to the republican policy of abstentionism and did not take his seat in Stormont.

De Valera was criticised for becoming co-owner of one of Ireland's most influential group of newspapers, Irish Press Newspapers , funded by numerous small investors who received no dividend for decades.

[ 127 ] De Valera is alleged by critics to have helped keep Ireland under the influence of Catholic conservatism.

[ 128 ] De Valera rejected, however, demands by organisations like Maria Duce that Roman Catholicism be made the state religion of Ireland, just as he rejected demands by the Irish Christian Front for the Irish Free State to support Francisco Franco during the Spanish Civil War .

[ 129 ] De Valera's preoccupation with his part in history, and his need to explain and justify it, are reflected in innumerable ways. His faith in historians as trustworthy guardians of his reputation was not absolute. He made many attempts to influence their views and to adjust and refine the historical record whenever he felt this portrayed him, his allies or his cause inaccurately or unfavourably to his mind, these could often mean the same thing. He extended these endeavours to encompass the larger Irish public. An important function of his newspaper group, the Irish Press group, was to rectify what he saw as the errors and omissions of a decade in which he had been the subject of largely hostile commentary.

[ 130 ] In recent decades, his role in Irish history has no longer been unequivocally seen by historians as a positive one, and a biography by Tim Pat Coogan alleges [ 131 ] [ page needed ] that his failures outweigh his achievements, with de Valera's reputation declining while that of his great rival in the 1920s, Michael Collins, was rising. A more recent 2007 work on de Valera by historian Diarmaid Ferriter presents a more positive picture of de Valera's legacy.

[ 132 ] Bertie Ahern , at a book launch for Diarmaid Ferriter's biography of de Valera, [ 7 ] [ 133 ] described de Valera's achievements in political leadership during the formative years of the state: One of de Valera's finest hours was his regrouping of the Republican side after defeat in the civil war, and setting his followers on an exclusively peaceful and democratic path, along which he later had to confront both domestic Fascism and the IRA. He became a democratic statesman, not a dictator. He did not purge the civil service of those who had served his predecessors but made the best use of the talent available.

A notable failure was his attempt to reverse the provision of the 1937 Constitution in relation to the electoral system. On retiring as Taoiseach in 1959, he proposed that the Proportional Representation system enshrined in that constitution should be replaced. De Valera argued that Proportional Representation had been responsible for the instability that had characterised much of the post-war period. A constitutional referendum to ratify this was defeated by the people.

One aspect of de Valera's legacy is that since the foundation of the state, a de Valera has nearly always served in Dáil Éireann. Éamon de Valera served until 1959, and his son, Vivion de Valera , was a Teachta Dála (TD) from 1945 to 1981.

Éamon Ó Cuív , his grandson, served as a member of the Dáil from 1992 to 2024 (previously having served in the Seanad from 1989 to 1992) with one stint as deputy leader of Fianna Fáil , while his granddaughter, Síle de Valera , is also former TD, with both having served in ministries in the Irish Government.

Catholic social policy [ edit ] Éamon de Valera's heraldry as knight of the Supreme Order of Christ In 1931, de Valera said in the Dáil: "I believe that every citizen in this country is entitled to his share of public appointments, and that there should not be discrimination on the ground of religion, discrimination, mind you, in the sense that because a person was of a particular religion, religion should not be made an excuse for denying a person an appointment for which he or she was fully qualified. Then there comes the question, what are qualifications? If I thought that the principle that the librarian in a Catholic community should be Catholic was a new principle, introduced merely to deny a Protestant an appointment, I would vote against it, but I know from my youth that it is not so. ... if I had a vote on a local body, and if there were two qualified people who had to deal with a Catholic community, and if one was a Catholic and the other a Protestant, I would unhesitatingly vote for the Catholic. Let us be clear and let us know where we are." [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Ryle Dwyer, writing in 2008, said "If those were his honest views, one could also say without hesitation that the Long Fellow was a bigot. But, in fact, he was just playing the role of a political hypocrite. It was cynical, but it should be stressed that he behaved responsibly in this regard when he came to power." [ 137 ] De Valera led Fianna Fáil to adopt conservative social policies since he believed devoutly that the Catholic church and the family were central to Irish identity. He added clauses to the new Constitution of Ireland (1937) to "guard with special care the institution of marriage" and prohibit divorce. His constitution also recognised "the special position" of the Catholic Church and recognised other denominations including the Church of Ireland and Jewish congregations, while guaranteeing the religious freedom of all citizens; however, he resisted an attempt to make Roman Catholicism the state religion and his constitution forbids the establishment of a state religion. His policies were welcomed by a largely devout, conservative and rural electorate.

[ 138 ] The unenforceable articles in the constitution which reinforced the traditional view that a woman's place was in the home further illustrate the direction in which Ireland was moving. An act of 1935 prohibited the importation or sale of contraceptives. The most rigorous censorship laws in Western Europe complete the picture.

[ 139 ] The specific recognition of Roman Catholicism was deleted by the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland (1973) and the prohibition of divorce was removed by the Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland (1996). Nevertheless, the Irish Supreme Court declared in 1973 that the 1935 contraception legislation was not repugnant to the Constitution and therefore remained valid.

[ 140 ] Subsequent laws have liberalised the use of contraception, however (see Contraception in the Republic of Ireland ).

In popular culture [ edit ] De Valera's portrait illustrated the front cover of the 25 March 1940 issue of TIME magazine [ 141 ] accompanying the article EIRE: Prime Minister of Freedom .

[ 142 ] He has been portrayed by: Andre Van Gyseghem in a 1970 episode of ITV Playhouse entitled "Would You Look at Them Smashing all Those Lovely Windows?" Sonn Connaughton in a 1981 episode of The Life and Times of David Lloyd George entitled "Win or Lose" Barry McGovern in the 1991 TV movie The Treaty , which concerned the Anglo-Irish Treaty Arthur Riordan in the 1990s RTÉ television show Nighthawks [ 143 ] Alan Rickman in the 1996 film Michael Collins , which depicted the events surrounding Ireland's struggle for independence from Britain Andrew Connolly in the 2001 TV mini-series Rebel Heart concerning the 1916 Rising Stephen Mullan in the 2016 TV mini-series Rebellion Governments [ edit ] The following governments were led by de Valera: 2nd ministry of the Irish Republic 3rd ministry of the Irish Republic 6th executive council of the Irish Free State 7th executive council of the Irish Free State 8th executive council of the Irish Free State 1st government of Ireland 2nd government of Ireland 3rd government of Ireland 4th government of Ireland 6th government of Ireland 8th government of Ireland See also [ edit ] List of members of the Oireachtas imprisoned during the Irish revolutionary period List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland Éamon de Valera Forest Notes [ edit ] ^ His name is frequently misspelt Eamonn De Valera , but he never used the second "n" in his first name (the standard Irish spelling), and he always used a small "d" in "de Valera", which is proper for Spanish names ( de meaning "of").

^ Éamon(n) translates into English as "Edmond" or "Edmund". The correct Irish translation of "Edward" (his name as given in his amended birth certificate) is Éadhbhard .

References [ edit ] ^ Schmuhl, Robert (February 2016).

"Éamon de Valera: Man of Mystery" .

Irish America Magazine . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ UK Census 1901 held in the National Archives in the Republic of Ireland Archived 29 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine de Valera listed as Edward in a Roman Catholic boarding school, Blackrock College, in Dublin. This was the same boarding school which T.F. O'Rahilly attended, listed as Rahilly.

^ "Éamon de Valera" .

Oireachtas Members Database .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2018 . Retrieved 1 June 2009 .

^ a b Synge, J. L.

(1976).

"Eamon de Valera 14 October 1882 – 29 August 1975" .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

22 : 634– 653.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1976.0022 .

^ Macardle, Dorothy (1965).

The Irish Republic . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 169.

^ Macardle, p. 233 ^ a b c d Ferriter, Judging Dev: A Reassessment of the Life and Legacy of Eamon De Valera (2007), ISBN 1-904890-28-8 .

^ "Nursery and Child's Hospital Records: NYU Special Collections Finding Aids" .

^ "Mystery of 1916 leader and New Yorker Eamon de Valera's birth" . IrishCentral.com. 14 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2018 . Retrieved 5 January 2018 .

^ Castro, Aurora (29 December 2021). "Exploring the Spanish Roots of Éamon de Valera".

Zenodo .

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.5809396 .

^ José Francisco Fernández (March 2018 – February 2019).

"En busca de la Isla Esmeralda. Diccionario sentimental de la cultura Irlandesa (Antonio Rivero Taravillo)" .

Estudios Irlandeses - Journal of Irish Studies (13): 197.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ Fanning, Ronan (2016).

A Will To Power: Eamon De Valera . Harvard University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 9780674970557 .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 .

De Valera was born on 14 October 1882 in the Nursery and Child's Hospital, Lexington Avenue, Manhattan, New York; the only child of Juan Vivion de Valera and Catherine ('Kate') Coll ^ "Nursery and Child's Hospital Records - 1854-1934 - MS 443.20" . New-York Historical Society Museum & Library.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

^ Tim Pat Coogan (31 January 2005).

"De Valera's begrudging attitude to 'The Big Fellow' " .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2017 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ " "Eamon de Valera's father" 2006" . Homepage.eircom.net.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "Notable New Yorkers – Eamon de Valéra" .

nyc.gov . NYC Department of Records. Archived from the original on 8 February 2004.

^ "Myers on De Valera" .

The Irish Times . 9 December 1998.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ Murray, Sean Patrick (27 November 2024).

"The Case for Éamon de Valera's Birth and Baptismal Records Being Forgeries" (PDF) . Westmeath Archaeological and History Society (Iarmhí, Vol. 1, No. 4) . Retrieved 25 December 2024 – via debanked.com.

^ Mac Aonghusa, Proinsias (1983).

Quotations from Éamon de Valera . Mercier. p. 89.

ISBN 0-85342-684-8 .

^ a b c d e f Jordan, Anthony J.

Eamon de Valera 1882–1975. Irish; Catholic; Visionary (Westport Books, 2010) ^ "Commissioning of House Captains 2022/23" .

^ Jordan 2010 , p. 279.

^ "Éamon de Valera (1882–1975)" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ a b Farragher CSSp, Sean P. (1984).

Dev and his Alma Mater . Dublin & London: Paraclete Press.

ISBN 0-946639-01-9 .

^ Fanning, Ronan (October 2009).

"De Valera, Éamon ('Dev')" .

Dictionary of Irish Biography . Royal Irish Academy.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2021 . Retrieved 21 October 2021 .

^ "Éamon de Valera" .

UCC – Multitext Project in Irish History . Archived from the original on 25 December 2008 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ Maureen Julian (January 1983).

"Eamon de Valera, Erwin Schrödinger, and the Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies" .

Journal of Chemical Education .

^ Misner, Charles W.; Kip S. Thorne; John Archibald Wheeler (September 1973).

Gravitation . San Francisco: W. H. Freeman . p. 1135.

ISBN 0-7167-0344-0 .

^ Jordan 2010 , p. 23.

^ Driscoll, James H. (1907).

"The Defect of Birth" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2008 . Retrieved 2 November 2008 .

^ Dwane, David T. (1922).

Early Life of Eamonn De Valera . Dublin: The Talbott Press Limited. p. 43.

^ a b c d e f Gunther, John (1940).

Inside Europe . Harper & Brothers. p. 371.

^ a b c Barton, Brian.

From Behind a Closed Door, Secret Court Martial Records of 1916 , The History Press ^ Tim Pat Coogan, De Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow (Hutchinson, London, 1993). pp. 69–72.

ISBN 0-09-175030-X .

^ "Éamon de Valera" .

ElectionsIreland.org .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2009 .

^ "Eamon de Valera | president of Ireland" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

^ Macardle, p. 283 ^ "Eamon De Valera pleads Irish cause at Fenway Park" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ "Pedro Albizu Campos: El Ultimo Libertador de America" .

Alianza Bolivariana Para Los Pueblos de Nuestra America . 19 January 2006. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ Dolan, Anne (2009). "O'Connell, Kathleen". In McGuire, James; Quinn, James (eds.).

Dictionary of Irish Biography . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ "Notre Dame: Washington Hall" .

archives.nd.edu .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 4 March 2021 .

^ Hope, Arthur J. (1948).

Notre Dame, one hundred years . University Press.

OCLC 251881423 .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 4 March 2021 .

^ "Dáil Éireann – Volume 2 – Vote of thanks to the people of America" .

Houses of the Oireachtas . 17 August 1921. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ "Dáil Éireann – Volume 1 – Ministerial Motions. – Presidential election campaign in USA" .

Houses of the Oireachtas . 29 June 1920. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ "Dáil Éireann – Volume 1 – Debates on Reports. – Finance" .

Houses of the Oireachtas . 10 May 1921. Archived from the original on 19 November 2007 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ Arthur, Michell (1995).

Revolutionary Government in Ireland: Dáil Éireann 1919–1922 . Dublin: Gill & Macmillan. pp.

191– 192.

ISBN 9780717120154 .

^ Coogan, Tim Pat de Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow pp. 120–122, ISBN 0-09-995860-0 , ISBN 978-0-09-995860-4 .

^ D. G. Boyce , Englishmen and Irish Troubles: British Public Opinion and the Making of Irish Policy, 1918–1922 (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1972), pp. 92–93.

^ Macardle, p. 453 ^ Coogan, Tim Pat De Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow p. 234.

^ Mcardle, p. 502 ^ P. S. O'Hegarty, A History of Ireland Under the Union: 1801 to 1922 (New York: Kraus Reprint Co., 1969), 751.

^ Mcardle, p. 590 ^ "De Valera's Treaty proposals" .

Houses of the Oireachtas . Archived from the original on 18 February 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ J.J. O'Kelly ( Sceilg ) A Trinity of Martyrs , Irish Book Bureau, Dublin; pp. 66–68. "Sceilg" was a supporter of de Valera in 1922.

^ Mcardle, pgs. 578-579 ^ Coogan, Tim Pat de Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow p. 299, ISBN 0-09-995860-0 , ISBN 978-0-09-995860-4 .

^ Coogan, Tim Pat de Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow p. 338, ISBN 0-09-995860-0 , ISBN 978-0-09-995860-4 .

^ Mcardle, p. 808 ^ Jordan, Anthony J.

W. T. Cosgrave: Founder Of Modern Ireland . Westport Books, 2006, p. 89.

^ Bowyer Bell, J.

(1997).

The Secret Army: The IRA . Transaction Publishers. p.

38 .

ISBN 1-56000-901-2 .

^ Mcardle, p. 864 ^ 'Building a state in the shadow of civil war (Part 1)' Irish Times ^ " 'De Valera and Stack Are Set at Liberty; More Releases Expected Within 24 Hours', The New York Times , 17 July 1924" .

The New York Times . 17 July 1924.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2021 .

^ Mcardle, p.878 ^ McGarvey, Paul (31 March 2016).

"Crumlin Road Gaol: Evolution from symbol of conflict to concerts" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2022 . Retrieved 8 July 2023 .

^ a b Exam notes Archived 3 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine about Seán Lemass ^ a b "BBC – History – Eamon de Valera" .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

^ "Dáil Éireann – Volume 3–19 December 1921 - Debate on Treaty" . Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 4 March 2011 .

^ "Electoral (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 1927—First Stage" .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2018 . Retrieved 9 December 2018 .

^ "BBC's Short History of Ireland" . BBC. 1 January 1970. Archived from the original on 20 August 2010 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "FF officially recognised in Northern Ireland" .

RTÉ News . 7 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2007 . Retrieved 8 December 2007 .

^ O'Halpin, Eunan (2000).

Defending Ireland: the Irish state and its enemies since 1922 . Oxford University Press. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-19-924269-6 .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2021 . Retrieved 3 August 2011 .

^ Fanning, Ronan (25 April 2016).

Éamon de Valera . Harvard University Press. p. 219.

ISBN 9780674970557 .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 8 March 2019 .

^ Barry, Frank, and Mary E. Daly. "Irish Perceptions of the Great Depression" (No. iiisdp349. IIIS, 2011.) Online Archived 11 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Time (Magazine) – IRISH FREE STATE: Economic Civil War. Monday, 25 Jul. 1932" .

Time . 25 July 1932. Archived from the original on 11 November 2007 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Dáil Elections since 1918 (Report). ARK. 3 June 2007 . Retrieved 19 December 2024 .

^ Eamon de Valera, the eternal revolutionary Archived 23 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Fabien Aufrechter, Le Journal International, 22 October 2013.

^ Eamon de Valera , The Earl of Longford & Thomas P. O'Neill (1970), pp. 335–339.

^ Eamon de Valera , The Earl of Longford & Thomas P. O'Neill (1970), p. 301.

^ a b Flora, Peter, ed. (1986).

Growth to Limits: Germany, United Kingdom, Ireland, Italy . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter . p. 248.

ISBN 9783110111316 .

Archived from the original on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ Daly, Mary E. (1992), "The 1938 Anglo-Irish Trade Agreement: A New Equilibrium" , Industrial Development and Irish National Identity, 1922-1939 , Syracuse University Press, pp.

155– 170, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv64h6t9.13 , ISBN 978-0-8156-2719-7 , JSTOR j.ctv64h6t9.13 , retrieved 12 February 2025 ^ Delany, V. T. H. (1957).

"The Constitution of Ireland: Its Origins and Development" .

The University of Toronto Law Journal .

12 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.2307/824397 .

ISSN 0042-0220 .

JSTOR 824397 .

^ "Letter from Joseph P. Walshe to Michael McDunphy (Dublin) enclosing a memorandum on the draft Irish constitution (Secret)" .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 April 2011 .

^ "The Irish Free State (1922–1937): Saorstát Éireann" . Collins 22 Society.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2017 . Retrieved 24 May 2017 .

^ Cottrell, Peter (2008).

The Irish Civil War 1922–23 . Oxford: Osprey Publishing. p. 85.

ISBN 978-1-84603-270-7 .

^ Lloyd, Lorna (2007).

Diplomacy With a Difference: The Commonwealth Office of High Commissioner, 1880–2006 . Lieden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 72.

ISBN 978-90-04-15497-1 .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2020 .

^ Constitution of Ireland . 1937. 12.1 – via Wikisource .

^ Bew 2007 , p. 455.

^ "IRELAND: Too Much Trouble" .

Time . 9 June 1941. Archived from the original on 24 June 2010 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ "Anglo-Irish Relations, 1939–41: A Study in Multilateral Diplomacy and Military Restraint" in Twentieth Century British History (Oxford Journals, 2005), ISSN 1477-4674 ^ "did Dev Valera refuse an offer of Unity...?" .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2018 . Retrieved 9 December 2018 .

^ Bromage, Mary (1964).

Churchill and Ireland . Notre Dame IN: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 162.

^ "Emergency Powers (Continuance and Amendment) Act, 1945" .

Government of Ireland . 29 July 1945. pp. §4(1).

Archived from the original on 16 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 November 2007 .

The Principal Act shall, unless previously terminated under subsection (2) of this section, continue in force until the 2nd day of September, 1946, and shall then expire unless the Oireachtas otherwise determines.

^ "National Emergency: Motion (Resumed)" .

Dáil Debates .

292 .

Government of Ireland : 119– 256. 1 September 1976. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 2 November 2007 .

John M. Kelly : All the 1939 emergency legislation lapsed not later than 1946.

^ Girvin, Brian (2006).

The Emergency . London: MacMillan . p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-4050-0010-9 .

Officials of the Department of External Affairs tried to persuade him not to visit Hempel, although the secretary of the department, Joseph Walsh, who accompanied him, did support the action ^ McCullagh, David (10 September 2023).

"Why did de Valera offer condolences after Hitler died?" .

rte.ie . Retrieved 22 May 2024 .

^ An Irish Statesman and Revolutionary by Elizabeth Keane ( ISBN 978-1845111250 ), p. 106.

^ "Hyde (and de Valera) offered condolences on Hitler's death" .

Irish Independent . 31 December 2005 . Retrieved 26 April 2012 .

^ Dermot Keogh (1989).

"Éamon de Valera and Hitler" (PDF) .

Irish Studies in International Affairs, Vol. 3, No 1, p. 71 .

^ "Irish Public Service Broadcasting – 1940s: De Valera and Broadcasting" .

History of RTÉ . Raidió Teilifís Éireann.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2008 . Retrieved 30 October 2008 .

^ Bew 2007 , p. 474.

^ "Dev's treatment of Irish army deserters: vindictive or pragmatic?" .

History Ireland Magazine .

19 (9). 2011.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "Emergency Powers (362) Order, 1945 —Motion to Annual" .

Dáil Éireann Debate .

98 (4): 27. 18 October 1945.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ Department of the Taoiseach (29 March 1946).

"Emergency powers (no. 362) order 1945 (revocation) order 1946" (PDF) . Dublin: Stationery Office.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 September 2017 . Retrieved 16 May 2017 .

^ "Defence Forces (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1946, Section 13" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2014 . Retrieved 28 October 2014 .

^ a b Wilsford, David (1995).

Political Leaders of Contemporary Western Europe: A Biographical Dictionary . Greenwood. p.

96 .

ISBN 978-0-313-28623-0 .

^ Tim Pat Coogan, De Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow , London: Arrow, 1993, p. 639.

^ D. F. Bourke, A History of the Catholic Church in Victoria , Melbourne: Catholic Bishops of Victoria, 1988, p. 299; D. J. O'Hearn, Erin go bragh – Advance Australia Fair: a hundred years of growing , Melbourne: Celtic Club, 1990, p. 54.

^ "Sacred Heart Rosalie" .

website . Jubilee Parish.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 November 2020 .

^ Diarmuid Ferriter, Judging Dev , pp. 190–191.

^ Stanford, Jane (17 August 2013).

"That Irishman: p.279, footnote 530" (PDF) .

Look Back .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2015 . Retrieved 4 September 2014 .

^ Savage, Robert J. (1996).

Irish television: the political and social origins . Cork University Press. p. 224.

ISBN 978-1-85918-102-7 .

^ "Winston Churchill & Eamon De Valera: A Thirty Year "Relationship" " . Winstonchurchill.org. Archived from the original on 3 July 2010 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Arnold, Bruce (11 July 2009).

"Opinion: History warns us about the risks of ceding power to EU" .

Irish Independent .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2018 . Retrieved 1 August 2018 .

Eamon de Valera on [..] return from Strasbourg in 1955 where he had been attending a meeting that was part of the construction of the future Europe [...] said: 'We did not strive to get out of that British domination of our affairs by outside force, or we did not get out of that position to get into a worse one'.

^ Coogan, Tim Pat de Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow p. 669, ISBN 0-09-995860-0 , ISBN 978-0-09-995860-4 .

^ Social Security in Independent Ireland, 1922-52 by Adrian Kelly, M.A., 1995, P.217-218 ^ a b c Diarmaid Ferriter (2007).

Uachtaráin – Eamon de Valera (Television production) (in Irish). Dublin, Ireland: TG4. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved 7 February 2011 .

^ 'Kevin Mussen. The first man to bring Sam across the border' . BBC Sport, 17 June 2025. Retrieved 20 June 2025 ^ The new record was set by Giorgio Napolitano , re-elected President of Italy in 2013 aged 87.

^ The six Irish leaders who have addressed joint sessions of the US Congress are Seán T. O'Kelly (18 March 1959), Éamon de Valera (28 May 1964), Liam Cosgrave (17 March 1976), Garret FitzGerald (15 March 1984), John Bruton (11 September 1996), and Bertie Ahern (30 April 2008).

^ Tracy, Robert (1999).

"The Jews of Ireland" . bNet.com. p. 7. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 October 2009 .

^ "Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages" (PDF) .

Press release .

NASA . 13 July 1969.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 28 December 2007 .

^ RTE 1975 – Eamon De Valera is dead on YouTube RTÉ News (video). Retrieved 11 November 2011.

^ "State Funeral of Éamon de Valera at Glasnevin Cemetery" . Raidió Teilifís Éireann.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 16 May 2021 .

^ "President Eamon de Valera" .

papalorders.ie . Retrieved 30 December 2021 .

^ Sunday Times, 31 October 2004 p3; RTÉ broadcast on 2 November 2004.

^ Tom Garvin Preventing the future; why Ireland was so poor for so long.

(Dublin 2004) passim; ISBN 0-7171-3771-6 .

^ Eamon de Valera , The Earl of Longford & Thomas P. O'Neill (1970), p. 338.

^ Murray, Patrick (21 December 2001).

"Obsessive Historian: Eamon de Valera and the Policing of his Reputation" (PDF) . Royal Irish Academy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2003.

^ Coogan, Tim Pat de Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow , ISBN 0-09-995860-0 , ISBN 978-0-09-995860-4 .

^ "New book tries to reclaim Dev's legacy" .

Irish Independent . 15 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2007 .

^ "Speech by the Taoiseach, Mr. Bertie Ahern, TD, at the Launch of Judging Dev, A Reassessment of the Life and Legacy of Éamon De Valera by Diarmaid Ferriter" . Department of the Taoiseach. 14 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2007 .

^ Dáil Éireann debate - Wednesday, 17 Jun 1931 - Vol. 39 No. 4 ^ Dwyer, Ryle (2 February 2008).

"Political hypocrisy has long history, but Bertie is guilty of much worse" .

Irish Examiner . Retrieved 26 December 2021 .

^ Mohr, Thomas (8 November 2021).

"Religious Minorities under the Constitution of the Irish Free State, 1922–1937" .

American Journal of Legal History .

61 (2): 235– 272.

doi : 10.1093/ajlh/njab002 . Retrieved 26 December 2021 .

^ Dwyer, Ryle (2 February 2008).

"Political hypocrisy has long history, but Bertie is guilty of much worse" .

Irish Examiner . Retrieved 26 December 2021 .

^ Kissane, Bill (2007). "Eamon De Valera and the Survival of Democracy in Inter-war Ireland".

Journal of Contemporary History .

42 (2): 213– 226.

doi : 10.1177/0022009407075554 .

S2CID 159760801 .

^ Ryan, Louise (1998). "Constructing 'Irishwoman': Modern Girls and Comely Maidens".

Irish Studies Review .

6 (3): 263– 272.

doi : 10.1080/09670889808455611 .

^ BAILII: McGee v. A.G. & Anor [1973] IESC 2; [1974] IR 284 Archived 18 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine McGee v the Attorney General ^ "TIME Magazine Cover: Eamon de Valera – Mar. 25, 1940" .

Time . 25 March 1940. Archived from the original on 7 August 2009 . Retrieved 20 September 2011 .

^ "EIRE: Prime Minister of Freedom" .

Time . 25 March 1940. Archived from the original on 14 October 2010 . Retrieved 20 September 2011 .

^ "Flann and me and his greatest story never told" , The Irish Times , 12 July 2010 (subscription required) Archived 12 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine Sources [ edit ] Bew, Paul (2007).

Ireland: the politics of enmity, 1789–2006 . Oxford.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Bowman, John (1982).

De Valera and the Ulster Question 1917–73 . Oxford.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Carroll, J. T. (1975).

Ireland in the War Years 1939–1945 . David and Charles.

ISBN 9780844805658 .

Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1922).

"De Valera, Edward" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 30 (12th ed.). London & New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company.

Coogan, Tim Pat (1993).

De Valera: Long Fellow, Long Shadow . London: Hutchinson.

ISBN 9780091750305 .

published as Eamon de Valera: The Man Who Was Ireland (New York, 1993) Dunphy, Richard (1995).

The Making of Fianna Fáil Power in Ireland, 1923–1948 . p. 346.

doi : 10.1017/S0021121400013092 .

S2CID 164091939 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) Dwyer, T. Ryle (2006).

Big Fellow, Long Fellow: A Joint Biography of Collins and De Valera . Gill Books.

ISBN 0717140849 .

excerpt and text search Dwyer, T. Ryle (1982).

De Valera's Finest Hour 1932–59 .

Fanning, Ronan.

Éamon de Valera: A Will to Power (2016) Longford, The Earl of; O'Neill, Thomas P. (1970).

Eamon de Valera . Gill and MacMillan, Dublin.

ISBN 0-7171-0485-0 .

Jordan, Anthony J. (2010).

Eamon de Valera 1882–1975. Irish: Catholic; Visionary . Westport Books.

ISBN 978-0-9524447-9-4 .

Kissane, Bill (2007). "Eamon De Valera and the Survival of Democracy in Inter-War Ireland".

Journal of Contemporary History .

42 (2): 213– 226.

doi : 10.1177/0022009407075554 .

S2CID 159760801 .

Lee, Joseph; O'Tuathaigh, Gearoid (1982).

The Age of de Valera .

Lee, J. J. (1989).

Ireland, 1912–1985: Politics and Society . Cambridge.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) McCartan, Patrick (1932).

With de Valera in America . New York.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) McCullagh, David (2017).

De Valera Volume 1: Rise (1882–1932) .

McCullagh, David (2018).

De Valera Volume 2: Rule (1932–1975) .

McGarry, Fearghal, ed. (2003).

Republicanism in Modern Ireland . Dublin.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Murphy, J. A., ed. (1983).

De Valera and His Times .

O'Carroll, J. P.; Murphy, John A (eds.) (1993).

De Valera and His Times . Cork University Press.

ISBN 0902561448 .

– excerpt and text search Historiography [ edit ] Chapple, Phil (2005). " 'Dev': The Career of Eamon De Valera Phil Chapple Examines a Titanic and Controversial Figure in Modern Irish History".

History Review (53): 28.

Ferriter, Diarmaid (2007).

Judging Dev: A Reassessment of the Life and Legacy of Eamon De Valera . Dublin.

ISBN 978-1-904890-28-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Girvin, Brian. "Beyond Revisionism? Some Recent Contributions to the Study of Modern Ireland." English Historical Review (2009) 124#506 :94–107· DOI: 10.1093/ehr/cen341 Hogan, Gerard. "De Valera, the Constitution and the Historians." Irish Jurist 40 (2005).

McCarthy, Mark.

Ireland's 1916 Rising: Explorations of History-making, Commemoration & Heritage in Modern Times (Routledge, 2016).

Murray, Patrick. "Obsessive historian: Eamon de Valera and the policing of his reputation." Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy. Section C (2001): 37–65.

Regan, John M (2010). "Irish public histories as an historiographical problem".

Irish Historical Studies .

37 (146): 265– 292.

doi : 10.1017/s002112140000225x .

S2CID 159868830 .

Regan, John M (2007). "Michael Collins, General Commanding-in-Chief, as a Historiographical Problem".

History .

92 (307): 318– 346.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-229x.2007.00398.x .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Éamon de Valera .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Éamon de Valera .

Wikisource has the text of a 1922 Encyclopædia Britannica article about " Éamon de Valera ".

1911 Census return of Edward (sic) de Valera and household from the National Archives of Ireland Eamon de Valera's "India and Ireland" in the South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA) Biography at Áras an Uachtaráin website Press Photographs of Eamon de Valera, taken from the Papers of Eamon de Valera held in UCD Archives.

A UCD Digital Library Collection.

De Valera Funeral – 1975 , Movietone, 2 September 1975 Newspaper clippings about Éamon de Valera in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Pamphlets written by Frank Gallagher as speechwriter to Éamon de Valera in the Gallagher Collection at the Library of Trinity College Dublin .

Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by Willie Redmond ( Irish Parliamentary Party ) Member of Parliament for Clare East 1917–1922 Constituency abolished Preceded by John Dillon ( Irish Parliamentary Party ) Member of Parliament for Mayo East 1918–1922 Constituency abolished Parliament of Northern Ireland New constituency Member of Parliament for Down 1921–1929 With: J. M. Andrews James Craig Thomas Lavery Robert McBride Thomas McMullan Harry Mulholland Patrick O'Neill Constituency abolished Preceded by John Henry Collins ( Nationalist Party ) Member of Parliament for South Down 1933–1938 Succeeded by James Brown ( Ulster Unionist Party ) Oireachtas New constituency Teachta Dála for Clare East 1918–1921 Constituency abolished New constituency Teachta Dála for Mayo East 1918–1921 Constituency abolished Political offices Preceded by Cathal Brugha President of Dáil Éireann 1919–1921 Succeeded by Himself as President of the Republic Preceded by Himself as President of Dáil Éireann President of the Irish Republic 1921–1922 Succeeded by Arthur Griffith Preceded by Thomas Johnson Leader of the Opposition 1927–1932 Succeeded by W. T. Cosgrave Preceded by José Matos Pacheco President of the League of Nations Council 1932 Succeeded by Pompeo Aloisi Preceded by W. T. Cosgrave President of the Executive Council 1932–1937 Succeeded by Himself as Taoiseach New office Taoiseach 1937–1948 Succeeded by John A. Costello Preceded by Patrick McGilligan Minister for External Affairs 1932–1948 Succeeded by Seán MacBride Preceded by Aga Khan III President of the League of Nations Assembly 1938 Succeeded by Carl Joachim Hambro Preceded by Richard Mulcahy Leader of the Opposition 1948–1951 Succeeded by John A. Costello Preceded by John A. Costello Taoiseach 1951–1954 Succeeded by John A. Costello Preceded by John A. Costello Leader of the Opposition 1954–1957 Succeeded by John A. Costello Preceded by John A. Costello Taoiseach 1957–1959 Succeeded by Seán Lemass Preceded by Seán T. O'Kelly President of Ireland 1959–1973 Succeeded by Erskine H. Childers Party political offices Preceded by Arthur Griffith President of Sinn Féin 1917–1926 Succeeded by John J. O'Kelly New political party Leader of Fianna Fáil 1926–1959 Succeeded by Seán Lemass Academic offices Preceded by William Walsh Chancellor of the National University of Ireland 1921–1975 Succeeded by T. K. Whitaker Titles in pretence Loss of title His own resignation on 7 January 1922 — TITULAR — President of the Irish Republic 1922–1926 Succeeded by Art O'Connor Éamon de Valera navigational boxes v t e Presidents of Ireland Douglas Hyde Seán T. O'Kelly Éamon de Valera Erskine H. Childers Cearbhall Ó Dálaigh Patrick Hillery Mary Robinson Mary McAleese Michael D. Higgins Category v t e Taoisigh of Ireland Éamon de Valera John A. Costello Seán Lemass Jack Lynch Liam Cosgrave Charles Haughey Garret FitzGerald Albert Reynolds John Bruton Bertie Ahern Brian Cowen Enda Kenny Leo Varadkar Micheál Martin Simon Harris Previous offices under earlier constitutions President of the Executive Council (1922–1937) W. T. Cosgrave Éamon de Valera Chairman of the Provisional Government (1922) Michael Collins W. T. Cosgrave President of Dáil Éireann or President of the Irish Republic (1919–1922) Cathal Brugha Éamon de Valera Arthur Griffith W. T. Cosgrave v t e Leaders of the opposition of Ireland Thomas Johnson Éamon de Valera W. T. Cosgrave Thomas F. O'Higgins Richard Mulcahy John A. Costello James Dillon Liam Cosgrave Jack Lynch Garret FitzGerald Charles Haughey Alan Dukes John Bruton Bertie Ahern Michael Noonan Enda Kenny Micheál Martin Mary Lou McDonald v t e De Valera cabinet (1919–1921) President of Dáil Éireann : Éamon de Valera Ministers Cathal Brugha Michael Collins W. T. Cosgrave Arthur Griffith Count Plunkett Eoin MacNeill Constance Markievicz John J. O'Kelly Ministers not in cabinet Robert Barton Ernest Blythe Seán Etchingham Laurence Ginnell v t e De Valera cabinet (1921–1922) President of the Republic : Éamon de Valera Ministers Robert Barton Cathal Brugha Michael Collins W. T. Cosgrave Arthur Griffith Austin Stack Ministers not in cabinet Ernest Blythe Seán Etchingham Desmond FitzGerald Constance Markievicz Count Plunkett Art O'Connor Kevin O'Higgins John J. O'Kelly J. J. Walsh v t e De Valera cabinet (1932–1933) President of the Executive Council : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Joseph Connolly Thomas Derrig James Geoghegan Seán Lemass Seán MacEntee Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge James Ryan v t e De Valera cabinet (1933–1937) President of the Executive Council : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Joseph Connolly Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Seán MacEntee Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge James Ryan Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1937) President of the Executive Council : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Seán MacEntee Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge James Ryan Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1937–1938) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Seán MacEntee Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge James Ryan Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1938–1943) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Patrick Little Seán MacEntee Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge James Ryan Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1943–1944) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Patrick Little Seán MacEntee Seán Moylan Seán T. O'Kelly James Ryan Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1944–1948) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Patrick Little Seán MacEntee Seán Moylan Seán T. O'Kelly James Ryan Paddy Smith Oscar Traynor v t e De Valera cabinet (1951–1954) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Gerald Boland Erskine H. Childers Thomas Derrig Seán Lemass Seán MacEntee Seán Moylan James Ryan Paddy Smith Oscar Traynor Thomas Walsh v t e De Valera cabinet (1957–1959) Taoiseach : Éamon de Valera Frank Aiken Neil Blaney Kevin Boland Erskine H. Childers Seán Lemass Jack Lynch Seán MacEntee Seán Moylan Mícheál Ó Móráin John Ormonde James Ryan Paddy Smith Oscar Traynor v t e Ministers for education of Ireland John J. O'Kelly Michael Hayes Fionán Lynch Eoin MacNeill John M. O'Sullivan Thomas Derrig Seán T. O'Kelly Éamon de Valera Richard Mulcahy Seán Moylan Jack Lynch Patrick Hillery George Colley Donogh O'Malley Brian Lenihan Snr Pádraig Faulkner Richard Burke Peter Barry John Wilson John Boland Martin O'Donoghue Charles Haughey Gerard Brady Gemma Hussey Patrick Cooney Mary O'Rourke Noel Davern Séamus Brennan Niamh Bhreathnach Michael Smith Micheál Martin Michael Woods Noel Dempsey Mary Hanafin Batt O'Keeffe Mary Coughlan Ruairi Quinn Jan O'Sullivan Richard Bruton Joe McHugh Norma Foley Helen McEntee v t e Ministers for foreign affairs of Ireland George Noble Plunkett Arthur Griffith George Gavan Duffy Michael Hayes Desmond FitzGerald Kevin O'Higgins W. T. Cosgrave Patrick McGilligan Éamon de Valera Seán MacBride Frank Aiken Liam Cosgrave Patrick Hillery Brian Lenihan Snr Garret FitzGerald Michael O'Kennedy John Kelly James Dooge Gerry Collins Peter Barry David Andrews Dick Spring Albert Reynolds Ray Burke Brian Cowen Dermot Ahern Micheál Martin Eamon Gilmore Charles Flanagan Simon Coveney Simon Harris v t e Ministers for health of Ireland Séamus Burke Richard Mulcahy Seán T. O'Kelly P. J. Ruttledge Éamon de Valera Seán MacEntee James Ryan Noël Browne John A. Costello Tom O'Higgins Donogh O'Malley Seán Flanagan Erskine H. Childers Brendan Corish Charles Haughey Michael Woods Eileen Desmond Barry Desmond John Boland Rory O'Hanlon Mary O'Rourke John O'Connell Brendan Howlin Michael Noonan Brian Cowen Micheál Martin Mary Harney Mary Coughlan James Reilly Leo Varadkar Simon Harris Stephen Donnelly Jennifer Carroll MacNeill v t e Teachtaí Dála (TDs) for the Clare constituency This table is transcluded from Clare (Dáil constituency) .

( edit | history ) Dáil Election Deputy (Party) Deputy (Party) Deputy (Party) Deputy (Party) Deputy (Party) 2nd 1921 Éamon de Valera (SF) Brian O'Higgins (SF) Seán Liddy (SF) Patrick Brennan (SF) 4 seats 1921–1923 3rd 1922 Éamon de Valera (AT-SF) Brian O'Higgins (AT-SF) Seán Liddy (PT-SF) Patrick Brennan (PT-SF) 4th 1923 Éamon de Valera (Rep) Brian O'Higgins (Rep) Conor Hogan (FP) Eoin MacNeill (CnaG) Patrick Hogan (Lab) 5th 1927 (Jun) Éamon de Valera (FF) Patrick Houlihan (FF) Thomas Falvey (FP) Patrick Kelly (CnaG) 6th 1927 (Sep) Martin Sexton (FF) 7th 1932 Seán O'Grady (FF) Patrick Burke (CnaG) 8th 1933 Patrick Houlihan (FF) 9th 1937 Thomas Burke (FP) Patrick Burke (FG) 10th 1938 Peter O'Loghlen (FF) 11th 1943 Patrick Hogan (Lab) 12th 1944 Peter O'Loghlen (FF) 1945 by-election Patrick Shanahan (FF) 13th 1948 Patrick Hogan (Lab) 4 seats 1948–1969 14th 1951 Patrick Hillery (FF) William Murphy (FG) 15th 1954 16th 1957 1959 by-election Seán Ó Ceallaigh (FF) 17th 1961 18th 1965 1968 by-election Sylvester Barrett (FF) 19th 1969 Frank Taylor (FG) 3 seats 1969–1981 20th 1973 Brendan Daly (FF) 21st 1977 22nd 1981 Madeleine Taylor (FG) Bill Loughnane (FF) 4 seats since 1981 23rd 1982 (Feb) Donal Carey (FG) 24th 1982 (Nov) Madeleine Taylor-Quinn (FG) 25th 1987 Síle de Valera (FF) 26th 1989 27th 1992 Moosajee Bhamjee (Lab) Tony Killeen (FF) 28th 1997 Brendan Daly (FF) 29th 2002 Pat Breen (FG) James Breen (Ind) 30th 2007 Joe Carey (FG) Timmy Dooley (FF) 31st 2011 Michael McNamara (Lab) 32nd 2016 Michael Harty (Ind) 33rd 2020 Violet-Anne Wynne (SF) Michael McNamara (Ind) Cathal Crowe (FF) 34th 2024 Donna McGettigan (SF) Joe Cooney (FG) Timmy Dooley (FF) v t e Fianna Fáil History History of Fianna Fáil Abstentionism Anglo-Irish Treaty Anti-Treaty Sinn Féin Arms Crisis Beef Tribunal Celtic Tiger Comhairle na dTeachtaí Cumann na Poblachta The Emergency Fianna Fáil TDs (past and present Gang of 22 Independent Fianna Fáil Irish Civil War Irish EEC ascension Irish Recession (2008) The Irish Press Mahon Tribunal Moriarty Tribunal Northern Ireland peace process Progressive Democrats 2016 Irish government formation Leadership Leaders De Valera Lemass Lynch Haughey Reynolds Ahern Cowen Martin Deputy leaders J. Brennan Colley MacSharry Lenihan Snr Wilson Ahern Rourke Cowen Coughlan Hanafin Lenihan Jnr Ó Cuív Calleary Chambers Seanad leaders Ryan Snr Lanigan Fallon Wright Cassidy O'Rourke O'Brien Ardagh Secretaries-General S. Brennan Wall P. Farrell Dorgan Leadership elections 1959 (Lemass) 1966 (Lynch) 1979 (Haughey) 1992 (Reynolds) 1994 (Ahern) 2008 (Cowen) 2011 (Martin) Party structures Cumann Leader of Fianna Fáil Ardfheis Fianna Fáil Front Bench Ógra Fianna Fáil Presidential candidates Presidential candidates (winners in bold) Seán T. O'Kelly ( 1945 ) Éamon de Valera ( 1959 , 1966 ) Erskine H. Childers ( 1973 ) Brian Lenihan Snr ( 1990 ) Mary McAleese ( 1997 ) Unopposed presidential candidates with Fianna Fáil support Douglas Hyde ( 1938 ) Seán T. O'Kelly ( 1952 ) Cearbhall Ó Dálaigh ( 1974 ) Patrick Hillery ( 1976 , 1983 ) Mary McAleese ( 2004 ) Elected representatives Dáil Éireann Catherine Ardagh Tom Brabazon Shay Brennan James Browne Mary Butler Malcolm Byrne Thomas Byrne Michael Cahill Dara Calleary Jack Chambers Peter "Chap" Cleere Niall Collins John Connolly Cathal Crowe Martin Daly Aisling Dempsey Cormac Devlin Albert Dolan Timmy Dooley Seán Fleming Norma Foley Pat "the Cope" Gallagher John Lahart James Lawless Micheál Martin Paul McAuliffe Charlie McConalogue Tony McCormack Séamus McGrath Erin McGreehan John McGuinness Aindrias Moynihan Michael Moynihan Shane Moynihan Jennifer Murnane O'Connor Darragh O'Brien Jim O'Callaghan Naoise Ó Cearúil James O'Connor Willie O'Dea Seán Ó Fearghaíl Ryan O'Meara Christopher O'Sullivan Pádraig O'Sullivan Eamon Scanlon Brendan Smith Niamh Smyth Robert Troy Seanad Éireann Niall Blaney Pat Casey Lorraine Clifford-Lee Alison Comyn Teresa Costello Ollie Crowe Shane Curley Mark Daly Paul Daly Aidan Davitt Mary Fitzpatrick Joe Flaherty Robbie Gallagher Imelda Goldsboro Margaret Murphy O'Mahony Fiona O'Loughlin Anne Rabbitte Dee Ryan Diarmuid Wilson European Parliament Barry Andrews Barry Cowen Billy Kelleher Cynthia Ní Mhurchú Alliances European Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Renew Europe International Liberal International (observer) v t e Sinn Féin History History of Sinn Féin Abstentionism 1918 Sinn Féin election manifesto Anti H-Block Armalite and ballot box strategy Clann na hÉireann Cumann na nGaedheal (1900) Comhairle na dTeachtaí Éire Nua Election results Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Gaelic American German Plot Provisional IRA Sinn Féin MPs Sinn Féin (newspaper) Sinn Féin Printing & Publishing Company Republican News Republican Sinn Féin United Irishman Willie O'Dea affidavit incident Workers' Party 32 County Sovereignty Movement Leadership Leadership Presidents Edward Martyn John Sweetman Arthur Griffith Éamon de Valera John J. O'Kelly Brian O'Higgins Michael O'Flanagan Cathal Ó Murchadha Margaret Buckley Paddy McLogan Tomás Ó Dubhghaill Paddy McLogan Tomás Mac Giolla Ruairí Ó Brádaigh Gerry Adams Mary Lou McDonald Vice presidents John Sweetman Arthur Griffith Bulmer Hobson Thomas Kelly Jennie Wyse Power Michael O'Flanagan P. J. Ruttledge Kathleen Lynn Mary MacSwiney John Madden Margaret Buckley John J. O'Kelly Liam Raul Tom Maguire Seamus Mitchell Padraig de Paor Criostóir O'Neill Michael Traynor Tomás Ó Dubhghaill Tony Magan Rory O'Driscoll Larry Grogan Seán Caughey Joe Clarke Cathal Goulding Dáithí Ó Conaill Máire Drumm Joe Cahill Gerry Adams Phil Flynn John Joe McGirl Pat Doherty Mary Lou McDonald Michelle O'Neill Seanad leaders Pearse Doherty David Cullinane Rose Conway-Walsh Chairpersons Seán MacManus Tom Hartley Mitchel McLaughlin Mary Lou McDonald Declan Kearney General secretaries Joe Cahill Cathleen Knowles Tom Hartley Joe Reilly Lucilita Bhreatnach Mitchel McLaughlin Rita O'Hare Dawn Doyle Directors of publicity Seán Ó Brádaigh Danny Morrison Rita O'Hare Dawn Doyle Rosaleen Doherty Party structures Leader of Sinn Féin Ardfheis Sinn Féin Front Bench Ógra Shinn Féin An Phoblacht Friends of Sinn Féin Presidential candidates Martin McGuinness ( 2011 ) Liadh Ní Riada ( 2018 ) Elected representatives Dáil Éireann Cathy Bennett John Brady Pat Buckley Joanna Byrne Matt Carthy Sorca Clarke Rose Conway-Walsh Réada Cronin Seán Crowe David Cullinane Pa Daly Máire Devine Pearse Doherty Paul Donnelly Dessie Ellis Mairéad Farrell Thomas Gould Ann Graves Johnny Guirke Martin Kenny Claire Kerrane Pádraig Mac Lochlainn Mary Lou McDonald Donna McGettigan Conor D. McGuinness Denise Mitchell Johnny Mythen Natasha Newsome Drennan Shónagh Ní Raghallaigh Eoin Ó Broin Louis O'Hara Donnchadh Ó Laoghaire Ruairí Ó Murchú Louise O'Reilly Darren O'Rourke Aengus Ó Snodaigh Fionntán Ó Súilleabháin Maurice Quinlivan Mark Ward Seanad Éireann Chris Andrews Joanne Collins Maria McCormack Conor Murphy Nicole Ryan Pauline Tully European Parliament Lynn Boylan Kathleen Funchion Northern Ireland Assembly Caoimhe Archibald Danny Baker Nicola Brogan Cathal Boylan Pádraig Delargy Linda Dillon Jemma Dolan Sinéad Ennis Ciara Ferguson Órlaithí Flynn Colm Gildernew Deirdre Hargey Declan Kearney Catherine Kelly Gerry Kelly Liz Kimmins Seán Lynch Alex Maskey Cathy Mason Declan McAleer Fra McCann Philip McGuigan Maolíosa McHugh Carál Ní Chuilín John O'Dowd Máirtín Ó Muilleoir Michelle O'Neill Emma Rogan Pat Sheehan Emma Sheerin House of Commons ( abstentionist ) Órfhlaith Begley Pat Cullen John Finucane Chris Hazzard Dáire Hughes Cathal Mallaghan Paul Maskey Lists List of current Sinn Féin elected representatives Alliances European United Left–Nordic Green Left v t e Presidents of the Assembly of the League of Nations Léon Bourgeois (1920) Paul Hymans (1920–21) Herman Adriaan van Karnebeek (1921–22) Agustín Edwards (1922–23) Cosme de la Torriente y Peraza (1923–24) Giuseppe Motta (1924–25) Raoul Dandurand (1925–26) Afonso Costa (1926) Momčilo Ninčić (1926–27) Alberto Guani (1927–28) Herluf Zahle (1928–29) José Gustavo Guerrero (1929–30) Nicolae Titulescu (1930–32) Paul Hymans (1932–33) Charles Theodore Te Water (1933–34) Richard Johannes Sandler (1934) Francisco Castillo Nájera (1934–35) Edvard Beneš (1935–36) Carlos Saavedra Lamas (1936–37) Tevfik Rüştü Aras (1937) Aga Khan III (1937–38) Éamon de Valera (1938–39) Carl Joachim Hambro (1939–40, 1946) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Ireland Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Éamon_de_Valera&oldid=1305053310 " Categories : Éamon de Valera 1882 births 1975 deaths De Valera family People educated at C.B.S. Charleville People educated at Rockwell College People educated at Blackrock College Alumni of the Royal University of Ireland American prisoners sentenced to death Fellows of the Royal Society (Statute 12) Fianna Fáil TDs Heads of Irish provisional governments 20th-century Irish mathematicians Irish nationalists Irish political party founders Irish prisoners of war Irish prisoners sentenced to death Leaders of Fianna Fáil Leaders of Sinn Féin Members of the 1st Dáil Members of the 2nd Dáil Members of the 3rd Dáil Members of the 4th Dáil Members of the 5th Dáil Members of the 6th Dáil Members of the 7th Dáil Members of the 8th Dáil Members of the 9th Dáil Members of the 10th Dáil Members of the 11th Dáil Members of the 12th Dáil Members of the 13th Dáil Members of the 14th Dáil Members of the 15th Dáil Members of the 16th Dáil Members of the Irish Republican Brotherhood Members of the House of Commons of Northern Ireland 1921–1925 Members of the House of Commons of Northern Ireland 1925–1929 Members of the House of Commons of Northern Ireland 1933–1938 Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for County Clare constituencies (1801–1922) Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for County Mayo constituencies (1801–1922) Ministers for education of Ireland Ministers for foreign affairs of Ireland Politicians from New York City Politicians from County Limerick People of the Easter Rising People of the Irish Civil War (Anti-Treaty side) People of the Irish War of Independence Politicians imprisoned during the Irish revolutionary period Presidents of Ireland Presidents of the Executive Council of the Irish Free State Presidents of the Assembly of the League of Nations Prisoners sentenced to death by the British military Taoisigh The Irish Press people UK MPs 1910–1918 UK MPs 1918–1922 World War II political leaders Members of the House of Commons of Northern Ireland for County Down constituencies Rugby union players from County Limerick Munster Rugby players Chancellors of the National University of Ireland Deaths from pneumonia in the Republic of Ireland Burials at Glasnevin Cemetery Conservatism in Ireland Faculty of Belvedere College Escapees from England and Wales detention American emigrants to Ireland American people of Irish descent 20th-century presidents in Europe Abdication of Edward VIII Hidden categories: Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Irish-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1 Irish-language sources (ga) Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 Use Hiberno-English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Articles with hAudio microformats Pages with Irish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from March 2022 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2021 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: periodical ignored Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles using a navbox created with Template:Constituency Teachtaí Dála navbox This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 19:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Éamon de Valera 70 languages Add topic

