Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 States Parties 2 Executive Directors 3 Secretariat 4 Conference of the Parties Toggle Conference of the Parties subsection 4.1 List of COP [ 5 ] 5 Committee on Science and Technology 6 Group of Experts 7 National, regional and sub-regional programmes 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International treaty on environmental protection United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa Type Multilateral environmental agreement Context Environmentalism , Desertification Drafted 17 June 1994 ( 1994-06-17 ) Signed 14 October 1994 – 13 October 1995 Location Bonn , Germany New York , United States Effective 26 December 1996 ( 1996-12-26 ) Condition Ratification by 50 States Parties 197 All 193 UN Member States Cook Islands European Union Niue Palestine Depositary Secretary-General of the United Nations Languages Arabic Chinese English French Russian Spanish Full text United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification at Wikisource The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa ( UNCCD ) is a Convention to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought through national action programs that incorporate long-term strategies supported by international cooperation and partnership arrangements.

The Convention, the only convention stemming from a direct recommendation of the Rio Conference's Agenda 21 , was adopted in Paris , France , on 17 June 1994 and entered into force in December 1996. It is the only internationally legally binding framework set up to address the problem of desertification. The Convention is based on the principles of participation, partnership and decentralization—the backbone of good governance and sustainable development . It has 197 parties, making it near universal in reach.

To help publicise the Convention, 2006 was declared " International Year of Deserts and Desertification " but debates have ensued regarding how effective the International Year was in practice.

[ 1 ] States Parties [ edit ] Parties to the Convention in green Global desertification vulnerability The UNCCD has been ratified by the European Union and 196 states: all 193 UN member states , the Cook Islands , Niue , and the State of Palestine .

[ 2 ] On 28 March 2013, Canada became the first country to withdraw from the convention. However, three years later, Canada reversed its withdrawal by re-acceding to the convention on 21 December 2016, which resulted in Canada becoming party to the convention again on 21 March 2017.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Holy See ( Vatican City ) is the only state that is not a party to the convention that is eligible to accede to it.

Executive Directors [ edit ] 1993–2007: Hama Arba Diallo 2007–2013: Luc Gnacadja 2013–2019: Monique Barbut 2019–2025: Ibrahim Thiaw [ 4 ] 2025–present: Yasmine Fouad Secretariat [ edit ] The permanent Secretariat of the UNCCD was established during the first Conference of the parties (COP 1) held in Rome in 1997. It has been located in Bonn, Germany, since January 1999, and moved from its first Bonn address in Haus Carstanjen to the new UN Campus in July 2006.

The functions of the secretariat are to make arrangements for sessions of the Conference of the Parties (COP) and its subsidiary bodies established under the Convention, and to provide them with services as required. One key task of the secretariat is to compile and transmit reports submitted to it.

The secretariat also provides assistance to affected developing country parties, particularly those in Africa. This is important when compiling information and reports required under the Convention. UNCCD activities are coordinated with the secretariats of other relevant international bodies and conventions, like those of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).

Conference of the Parties [ edit ] The Conference of the Parties (COP) oversees the implementation of the Convention. It is established by the Convention as the supreme decision-making body, and it comprises all ratifying governments. The first five sessions of the COP were held annually from 1997 to 2001.

Starting 2001 sessions are held on a biennial basis interchanging with the sessions of the Committee for the Review of the Implementation of the Convention (CRIC), whose first session was held in 2002.

List of COP [ 5 ] [ edit ] COP Date City Remark COP 1 29 September to 10 October 1997 Rome (Italy) COP 2 30 November to 11 December 1998 Dakar (Senegal) COP 3 15 to 26 November 1999 Recife (Brazil) COP 4 11 to 22 December 2000 Bonn (Germany) COP 5 1 to 12 October 2001 Geneva (Switzerland) COP 6 25 August to 5 September 2003 Havana (Cuba) COP 7 17 to 28 October 2005 Nairobi (Kenya) COP 8 3 to 14 September 2007 Madrid (Spain) COP 9 21 September to 2 October 2009 Buenos Aires (Argentine) COP 10 10 to 20 October 2011 Changwon (South Korea) COP 11 16 to 27 September 2013 Windhoek (Namibia) COP 12 12 to 23 October 2015 Ankara (Turkey) COP 13 6 to 16 September 2017 Ordos City (China) COP 14 2 to 13 September 2019 New Delhi (India) Adoption of The New Delhi Declaration: Investing in Land and Unlocking Opportunities [ 6 ] COP 15 9 to 20 May 2022 Abidjan (Côte d’Ivoire) COP 16 2 to 13 December 2024 Riyadh (Saudi-Arabia) [ 7 ] Committee on Science and Technology [ edit ] The UN Convention to Combat Desertification has established a Committee on Science and Technology (CST). The CST was established under Article 24 of the Convention as a subsidiary body of the COP, and its mandate and terms of reference were defined and adopted during the first session of the Conference of the Parties in 1997. It is composed of government representatives competent in the fields of expertise relevant to combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought. The committee identifies priorities for research, and recommends ways of strengthening cooperation among researchers. It is multi-disciplinary and open to the participation of all Parties. It meets in conjunction with the ordinary sessions of the COP.

The CST collects, analyses and reviews relevant data. It also promotes cooperation in the field of combating desertification and mitigating the effects of drought through appropriate sub-regional, regional and national institutions, and in particular by its activities in research and development, which contribute to increased knowledge of the processes leading to desertification and drought as well as their impact.

The Bureau of the CST is composed of the Chairperson and the four Vice-Chairpersons. The chairman is elected by the Conference of the Parties at each of its sessions with due regard to ensure geographical distribution and adequate representation of affected Country Parties, particularly those in Africa, who shall not serve for more than two consecutive terms. The Bureau of the CST is responsible for the follow-up of the work of the Committee between sessions of the COP and may benefit from the assistance of ad hoc panels established by the COP.

The CST also contributes to distinguishing causal factors, both natural and human, with a view to combating desertification and achieving improved productivity as well as the sustainable use and management of resources.

Under the authority of the CST, a Group of Experts was established by the COP with a specific work programme, to assist in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the CST. This Group of Experts, working under the authority of the CST, provides advice on the areas of drought and desertification.

Group of Experts [ edit ] The Group of Experts (GoE) plays an important institutional role, providing the CST with information on the current knowledge, the extent and the impact, the possible scenarios and the policy implications on various themes assigned in its work programme. The results of the work performed by the GoE are widely recognized and include dissemination of its results on ongoing activities (benchmarks and indicators, traditional knowledge, early warning systems).

The Group of Experts develops and makes available to all interested people information on appropriate mechanisms for scientific and technological cooperation and articulates research projects, which promote awareness about desertification and drought between countries and stakeholders at the international, regional and national level.

The Group of Experts seeks to build on and use existing work and evidence to produce pertinent synthesis and outputs for the use of the Parties to the Convention and for the broader dissemination to the scientific community. The programme of work and its mandate is pluri-annual in nature, for a maximum of four years.

National, regional and sub-regional programmes [ edit ] National Action Programmes (NAP) are one of the key instruments in the implementation of the Convention. They are strengthened by Action Programmes on Sub-regional (SRAP) and Regional (RAP) level. National Action Programmes are developed in the framework of a participative approach involving the local communities and they spell out the practical steps and measures to be taken to combat desertification in specific ecosystems.

See also [ edit ] Politics portal Environment portal Ecology portal World portal Action for Climate Empowerment Earth Summit Economics of Land Degradation Initiative Hama Arba Diallo International Year of Deserts and Desertification List of international environmental agreements Terrafrica partnership United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) World Day to Combat Desertification and Drought References [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from The World Factbook (2025 ed.).

CIA .

(Archived 2003 edition.) Full text available from UNCCD.int Rechkemmer, Andreas (2004): Postmodern Global Governance. The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification.

Baden-Baden : Nomos Verlag.

^ Stringer, LC (2008) Reviewing the international year of deserts and Desertification 2006: What contribution towards combating global desertification and implementing the united nations convention to combat desertification?, j.jaridenv, 72(11), pp2065-2074.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaridenv.2008.06.010 .

^ a b "United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa" .

United Nations Treaty Collection . United Nations. 10 October 2019 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 .

^ "Canada: Canada Rejoins The United Nations Convention To Combat Desertification" .

Mondaq . 31 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 April 2017 .

^ "Executive Secretary" .

^ "UNCCD COP14: New Delhi, India" .

UNCCD official website . Archived from the original on 10 April 2019 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

^ "The New Delhi Declaration: Investing in Land and Unlocking Opportunities" . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ "Saudi Arabia to host largest-ever UN conference on land and drought" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification .

UNCCD official website 2006: International Year of Deserts and Desertification The Economics of Land Degradation Initiative - Homepage UNESCO Water Portal : UNCCD Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Nations_Convention_to_Combat_Desertification&oldid=1298974018 " Categories : Environmental treaties Desertification Treaties concluded in 1994 Treaties entered into force in 1996 United Nations treaties Water and the environment 1996 in the environment Treaties of the Islamic State of Afghanistan Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Armenia Treaties of Australia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Azerbaijan Treaties of the Bahamas Treaties of Bahrain Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Barbados Treaties of Belarus Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Belize Treaties of Benin Treaties of Bhutan Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina Treaties of Botswana Treaties of Brazil Treaties of Brunei Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Burundi Treaties of Cambodia Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Canada Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of the Central African Republic Treaties of Chad Treaties of Chile Treaties of the People's Republic of China Treaties of Colombia Treaties of the Comoros Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of the Cook Islands Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of North Korea Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Dominica Treaties of the Dominican Republic Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of El Salvador Treaties of Equatorial Guinea Treaties of Eritrea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of Ethiopia Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of the Gambia Treaties of Georgia (country) Treaties of Germany Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Grenada Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Guyana Treaties of Haiti Treaties of Honduras Treaties of Hungary Treaties of Iceland Treaties of India Treaties of Indonesia Treaties of Iran Treaties of Iraq Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Israel Treaties of Italy Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kazakhstan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kiribati Treaties of Kuwait Treaties of Kyrgyzstan Treaties of Laos Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of Lesotho Treaties of Liberia Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of Liechtenstein Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Malawi Treaties of Malaysia Treaties of the Maldives Treaties of Mali Treaties of Malta Treaties of the Marshall Islands Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Mexico Treaties of the Federated States of Micronesia Treaties of Monaco Treaties of Mongolia Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Mozambique Treaties of Myanmar Treaties of Namibia Treaties of Nauru Treaties of Nepal Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Nicaragua Treaties of Niger Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Niue Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of Poland Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Qatar Treaties of South Korea Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Romania Treaties of Russia Treaties of Rwanda Treaties of Samoa Treaties of San Marino Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Sierra Leone Treaties of Singapore Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of the Solomon Islands Treaties of the Transitional National Government of Somalia Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Treaties of South Sudan Treaties of the Republic of the Sudan (1985–2011) Treaties of Suriname Treaties of Eswatini Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tajikistan Treaties of Thailand Treaties of North Macedonia Treaties of Timor-Leste Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Turkey Treaties of Turkmenistan Treaties of Tuvalu Treaties of Uganda Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Uzbekistan Treaties of Vanuatu Treaties of Venezuela Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of Yemen Treaties of Zambia Treaties of Zimbabwe Treaties entered into by the European Union 1994 in France Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Treaties extended to Montserrat Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands Treaties extended to Greenland Treaties of Palestine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the World Factbook Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 21:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 25 languages Add topic

