Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Gardens and collections Toggle Gardens and collections subsection 2.1 Major gardens 2.2 Single-genus groupings 2.3 National Grove of State Trees 2.4 National Bonsai and Penjing Museum 3 Non-garden features 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents United States National Arboretum 11 languages Cebuano Español Esperanto Français עברית Polski Português Русский Simple English اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°54′37″N 76°58′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.91028°N 76.96722°W ﻿ / 38.91028; -76.96722 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States historic place U.S. National Arboretum U.S. National Register of Historic Places The National Capitol Columns originally supported the East Portico of the United States Capitol (1828–1958) Show map of Washington, D.C.

Show map of the District of Columbia Show map of the United States Location 3501 New York Avenue, N.E.

Washington, D.C.

20002 Coordinates 38°54′37″N 76°58′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.91028°N 76.96722°W ﻿ / 38.91028; -76.96722 NRHP reference No.

73002122 Added to NRHP April 11, 1973 The United States National Arboretum is an arboretum in northeast Washington, D.C.

, operated by the United States Department of Agriculture 's Agricultural Research Service . It was established in 1927 by an act of Congress [ 1 ] after a campaign by USDA Chief Botanist Frederick Vernon Coville .

It is 446 acres (1.80 km 2 ) in size and is located 2.2 miles (3.5 km) northeast of the Capitol building, with entrances on New York Avenue, NE and R Street, NE. The campus's gardens, collections, and features are connected by roadways that are 9.5 miles (15.3 km) long in total.

[ 2 ] In addition to the main campus in Washington, D.C., there are research locations at the Henry A. Wallace Beltsville Agricultural Research Center in Beltsville, Maryland and in McMinville, Tennessee .

[ 2 ] The Arboretum functions as a major center of botanical research conducted by the USDA, including applied research on trees, shrubs, turf, and the development of new ornamental plants.

[ 2 ] In addition to a library and a historical collection (archive), the institution also has an extensive herbarium of over 800,000 specimens documenting wild and cultivated plant diversity.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The United States National Arboretum was formally established by an act of Congress on 4 March 1927.

[ 1 ] The act authorized the creation of the arboretum on what was then called Mount Hamilton, but it did not actually appropriate any funding to make that happen.

[ 4 ] That particular area was well-suited for the arboretum because it had varied soils and physiography, and no permanent buildings were then present.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ten months later, President Calvin Coolidge signed a law appropriating $300,000 for the National Arboretum.

[ 7 ] An initial 189 acres (76 ha) were purchased in 1928, with an additional 196 acres (79 ha) being acquired in 1934.

[ 8 ] Additional land was purchased in 1938, 1948, and 1949 that, along with subsequent minor expansions, contributed to the Arboretum's current footprint of 446 acres (180 ha).

[ 8 ] [ 2 ] On April 11, 1973, the U.S. National Arboretum was listed as a Category II Landmark in the National Register of Historic Places for its "importance which contributes significantly to the cultural heritage and visual beauty of the District of Columbia." [ 8 ] The construction of a Chinese garden , the National China Garden has been proposed for the National Arboretum since 2003. A groundbreaking  was held in 2016 but the garden was reportedly cancelled due to counter-intelligence concerns regarding the construction of a large pagoda that could be used for collecting signals intelligence.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Gardens and collections [ edit ] Azalea Collections, U.S. National Arboretum Bonsai persimmon presented to President Ronald Reagan by the King of Morocco in 1983. National Bonsai and Penjing Museum, U.S. National Arboretum Major gardens [ edit ] Asian Collections Japanese Woodland, Asian Valley, China Valley, and Korean Hillside Fern Valley Native Plant Collections Woodland, prairie, and Southeastern Coastal Plain Flowering Tree Collection The Friendship Garden and Arbor House Gotelli Dwarf and Slow Growing Conifer Collection Gotelli and Watnong Collections Introduction Garden National Bonsai & Penjing Museum National Grove of State Trees National Herb Garden Historic roses, Knot Garden, and themed gardens Washington Youth Garden Source: [ 11 ] Single-genus groupings [ edit ] National Herb Garden, U.S. National Arboretum Azalea Collections Glenn Dale Azalea Hillside, Morrison Garden, and Lee Garden Dogwood Collection Holly Collection Magnolia Collection National Maple Collection [ 12 ] National Boxwood Collection [ 13 ] Perennial Collections Source: [ 11 ] National Grove of State Trees [ edit ] The National Grove of State Trees (often just called the Grove) is a display of trees representing the 50 states and the District of Columbia . Fifty-one plots are arrayed over 30 acres (120,000 m 2 ), each plot home to a grouping of a state's official tree species , or in a few cases, another species indigenous to the state but better suited to growing in the local climate .

Bald cypress that might be found in a Louisiana swamp grow just a short walk from pines and birches that grow in New England forests; young redwoods from California grow near cottonwoods that might grow in riverside forests in the otherwise treeless Great Plains States.

Although the mid-Atlantic region has mild weather, which allows the USDA to grow most of the designated species, it cannot successfully grow a few of the state trees such as the cabbage palmetto , which is the state tree of both Florida and South Carolina , or the kukui , which is Hawaii 's state tree. Substitutes have been made for these species, so the arboretum could have a tree that is important in each of the states. Planting was undertaken in 1989 with the National Association of State Foresters , the American Forest Foundation , the USDA Forest Service , and the National Arboretum.

The centerpiece of the collection is the portal adjacent to the M Street parking lot. A wooden entrance arbor is dedicated to the memory of Jeanne Yeutter, wife of former Secretary of Agriculture Clayton Yeutter . Her sponsorship of the project helped the concept of a Grove of State Trees to be realized. The inscription on the arbor reads, "In Celebration of Jeanne Yeutter's Love of Trees". The arbor leads to a large plaza with a flagstone star and a wall adorned with pottery tiles designed and fabricated by Liza Bach, a Tennessee crafter. Each tile is individually cast with the name of each state and a raised image of the foliage of the state tree.

National Bonsai and Penjing Museum [ edit ] The collections of the National Bonsai and Penjing Museum are found throughout the Japanese, Chinese, and North American Pavilions, as well as a conservatory.

[ 11 ] The Mary E. Mrose Exhibit Gallery features season and rotating displays of bonsai as well as a collection of viewing stones .

Among the many bonsai accessions is a Japanese white pine cultivar , Pinus parviflora 'Miyajima', donated in 1975 by Masaru Yamaki to mark the United States' bicentenary . This tree was formerly in Hiroshima, Japan and survived the 1945 atomic bombing of Hiroshima . The tree has been "in training" since 1625.

[ 14 ] A Japanese temple bell hangs at the entrance to the Japanese Pavilion. Cast in bronze in 1798, the bell was donated by the National Bell Festival and installed on 1 January 2024.

[ 15 ] Featuring three panels of classical Japanese inscriptions, the bell stands 27 inches tall and weighs 80 pounds.

[ 16 ] Non-garden features [ edit ] Split Ritual by Beverly Pepper The National Capitol Columns , a set of twenty-two Corinthian columns which were once part of the East Portico of the United States Capitol building from 1828 to 1958, [ 11 ] are located on a hilltop in the Ellipse Meadow. The foundation on which the columns sit is constructed from steps originally at the Capitol. The columns were moved from storage to the Arboretum starting in 1988 and dedicated in 1990.

Ruins of the United Brick Corporation Brick Complex sit along the northwestern border of the Arboretum. They can be easily viewed from the New York Avenue parking lot. The kilns and associated structures, which the USDA acquired in 1976, were added to the National Register of Historical Places in 1978. The site is not accessible to the public.

The U.S. National Arboretum is home to a pair of mated bald eagles named Mr. President and The First Lady. The pair began nesting at the Arboretum in 2014; the first eagles to nest there since 1947.

[ 17 ] An eagle nest cam sponsored by the American Eagle Foundation provides a livestream video feed of the nest during mating season.

A small collection of public artwork, including Split Ritual by American sculptor Beverly Pepper , can be found at the Arboretum. The piece is made of ductile iron and stands at 10 ft (3.0 m) H x 44 in (110 cm) W x 100 in (250 cm) D. It consists of four vertical pieces that resemble large tools. They are placed in a circle on top of a flat, doughnut-shaped foundation. The sculpture was dedicated in 1993.

In 2020, the U.S. National Arboretum re-introduced popular koi (fish) to the reflecting pool near the administration building.

[ 18 ] Gallery [ edit ] Bikeshare located at entrance.

Bonsai Museum.

Kurume azalea bonsai.

Reflecting pool.

Koi feeding.

Admiral Charles Wilkes plaque.

Hyacinth orchid ( Bletilla striata ) Pathway overlooking columns.

Youth garden.

View of the arboretum from the Anacostia River.

See also [ edit ] List of botanical gardens and arboreta in the United States Architecture of Washington, D.C.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "69th Congress, Sess. II, Chap. 505" (PDF) .

Library of Congress . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ a b c d "Who We Are (About the Arboretum)" .

U.S. National Arboretum . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ "The U.S. National Arboretum Herbarium" .

U.S. National Arboretum . Archived from the original on April 21, 2021 . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ a b "Failure to Obtain Arboretum Funds Blow to Southeast: Citizens Hoped Bill Would Authorize Mt. Hamilton Area, Tucker Declares".

The Washington Post . March 7, 1927. p. 7.

^ "Nation to Have Arboretum on Plot Near Washington; Negotations [sic] in Progress for Purchase of Land For Great Garden Project" .

The New York Times . April 7, 1929. p. 15.

^ "A National Arboretum".

The Baltimore Sun . May 12, 1929. p. 16.

^ "Coolidge Signs Bill Covering Deficiencies".

The Washington Post . December 23, 1927. p. 20.

^ a b c National Register of Historic Places Nomination Form . File Unit: National Register of Historic Places and National Historic Landmarks Program Records: Washington, DC, 1/1/1964 - 12/31/2013 . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ O'Keeffe, Kate; Viswanatha, Aruna (July 25, 2022).

"U.S. Warned Jared Kushner About Wendi Deng Murdoch" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on March 13, 2018 . Retrieved November 24, 2022 .

^ Bo Lillis, Katie (July 25, 2022).

"CNN Exclusive: FBI investigation determined Chinese-made Huawei equipment could disrupt US nuclear arsenal communications" .

CNN . Archived from the original on July 23, 2022 . Retrieved November 24, 2022 .

^ a b c d "Gardens & Collections" .

U.S. National Arboretum . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ "National Acer Multisite Collection" .

American Public Gardens Association . Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ "National Boxwood Collection" .

American Public Gardens Association . Archived from the original on March 5, 2021 . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ Siddiqui, Faiz (August 2, 2015).

"This 390-year-old bonsai tree survived an atomic bomb, and no one knew until 2001" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ "Ringing in the New Year, Literally" .

National Bonsai Foundation . January 1, 2024 . Retrieved March 15, 2024 .

^ "1798 Hanshō | National Bell Festival" .

www.bells.org . Retrieved March 15, 2024 .

^ "National Arboretum Eagle Nest Cam" .

American Eagle Foundation . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

^ "Koi Return to the Administration Building Pool!" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States National Arboretum .

Official website Works by United States National Arboretum at Open Library Works by United States National Arboretum at the Biodiversity Heritage Library USNA Grove of State Trees (official site) American Eagle Foundation Friends of the National Arboretum (FONA) National Bonsai Foundation National Capital Area Garden Clubs Washington Youth Garden Geographic data related to United States National Arboretum at OpenStreetMap v t e Landmarks of Washington, D.C.

Memorials Adams African American Civil War American Veterans Disabled for Life John Barry Belmont–Paul Women's Equality National Monument Mary McLeod Bethune Boy Scout James Buchanan John Carroll Christopher Columbus D.C. War Albert Einstein Emancipation Dwight D. Eisenhower John Ericsson David Farragut First Division Thomas Gallaudet James A. Garfield Kahlil Gibran Samuel Gompers Ulysses S. Grant Holocaust Museum Holodomor Genocide Andrew Jackson Japanese American Patriotism During World War II Jefferson Memorial Lyndon Baines Johnson Grove John Paul Jones Marquis de Lafayette Law Enforcement Officers Lincoln Memorial statue Martin Luther King, Jr.

Korean War Veterans George Mason George B. McClellan George Meade Peter Muhlenberg National Statuary Hall Collection Navy – Merchant Marine Nuns of the Battlefield Peace Monument John J. Pershing Second Division Signers of the Declaration of Independence The Extra Mile Three Soldiers Jean de Rochambeau Franklin Delano Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Island Taras Shevchenko Statues of the Liberators Oscar Straus Robert A. Taft Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Titanic United States Navy Victims of Communism Vietnam Veterans Vietnam Women's Washington Monument Daniel Webster World War I World War II Rainbow Pool Other Basilica of the Immaculate Conception Blair House Capitol Reflecting Pool Congressional Cemetery DAR Constitution Hall Exorcist steps First Air Mail Marker Ford's Theatre Petersen House Frederick Douglass National Historic Site Healy Hall Hillwood Estate and Museum Islamic Center Jefferson Pier John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts Library of Congress Jefferson Adams Madison National Arboretum National Capitol Columns National Building Museum National Gallery of Art Lincoln's Cottage at Soldiers' Home Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool National Archives National Cathedral National Mall Octagon House Old Post Office Old Stone House Smithsonian Institution St. John's Episcopal Church The Arts of War and The Arts of Peace Tidal Basin Treasury Building Freedman's Bank Building Tudor Place Union Station United States Capitol Dome Rotunda United States Supreme Court Building Watergate complex White House Willard Hotel Parks and plazas Constitution Gardens Dupont Circle East Potomac Park Farragut Square Freedom Plaza Lafayette Square L'Enfant Plaza Meridian Hill Park National Arboretum Pershing Park President's Park Rock Creek Park The Ellipse Union Square United States Botanic Garden West Potomac Park Boundaries Anacostia River Arlington Memorial Bridge Boundary markers of the original District of Columbia Chesapeake and Ohio Canal Constitution Avenue Francis Scott Key Bridge Pennsylvania Avenue Potomac River Zero Milestone Nearby landmarks Arlington National Cemetery Tomb of the Unknown Soldier John F. Kennedy gravesite Arlington House Marine Corps War Memorial Mount Vernon Netherlands Carillon Pentagon Pentagon Memorial United States Air Force Memorial Women in Military Service for America Memorial Planned Adams Memorial National Desert Storm and Desert Shield Memorial National Liberty Memorial New Commanders Stadium Peace Corps Commemorative Women's Suffrage National Monument Canceled George Washington Memorial Building Gold Star Mothers National Monument Related National Capital Memorial Advisory Commission National Mall and Memorial Parks List of National Historic Landmarks in Washington, D.C.

National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C.

Public art in Washington, D.C.

( American Revolution Statuary , Civil War Monuments , Commemorating African-Americans , Outdoor sculpture ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Geographic BGCI garden Academics CiNii Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_National_Arboretum&oldid=1303993457 " Categories : Arboreta in Washington, D.C.

Botanical gardens in Washington, D.C.

Parks on the National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C.

United States Department of Agriculture facilities United States National Agricultural Library Protected areas established in 1927 1927 establishments in Washington, D.C.

1927 establishments in the United States Arboreta in the United States Agricultural research institutes in the United States Research institutes in Washington, D.C.

Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: periodical ignored Use mdy dates from October 2023 Use American English from October 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Articles with Biodiversity Heritage Library links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 08:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States National Arboretum 11 languages Add topic

