Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notation 2 Baseline solutions 3 Truthful approximation mechanisms 4 References Toggle the table of contents Knapsack auction 1 language Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Auctions Types All-pay Chinese Bidding fee Dollar Amsterdam Anglo-Dutch Barter double Best/not best Brazilian Calcutta Candle Click-box bidding Combinatorial Common value Deferred-acceptance Discriminatory price Double Dutch English Forward French Generalized first-price Generalized second-price Japanese Knapsack Multi-attribute Multiunit No-reserve Rank Reverse Scottish Sealed first-price Simultaneous ascending Single-price Traffic light Uniform price Unique bid Value of revenues Vickrey Vickrey–Clarke–Groves Walrasian Yankee Bidding Shading Calor licitantis Cancellation hunt Jump Rigging Sniping Suicide Tacit collusion Contexts Algorithms Autos Art Charity Children Players Domain names Flowers Loans Scam Slaves Spectrum Stamps Virginity Wine Wives Theory Digital goods Price of anarchy Revenue equivalence Winner's curse Online Ebidding Private electronic market Software v t e A knapsack auction is an auction in which several identical items are sold, and there are several bidders with different valuations interested in different amounts of items. The goal is to choose a subset of the bidders with a total demand, at most, the number of items and, subject to that, a maximum total value. Finding this set of bidders requires solving an instance of the knapsack problem , which explains the term "knapsack auction".

An example application of a knapsack auction is auctioning broadcast time among advertisers. Here, the items are the time units (e.g., seconds). Each advertiser has an advertisement of a different length (different number of seconds) and a different value for an advertisement. The goal is to select a subset of advertisements to serve in a time slot of a specific length to maximize the total value.

Notation [ edit ] There are m identical items and n different bidders. The preferences of each bidder i are given by two numbers: A demand s i - an integer that determines how many items this bidder wants. The bidder needs precisely this number of items and has no use for more or fewer items.

A value v i - a number that determines how much money the bidder expects to gain from receiving exactly s i items.

A feasible outcome of the auction is a subset W of winning bidders , such that their total demand is at most m : ∑ ∑ i ∈ ∈ W s i ≤ ≤ m {\displaystyle \sum _{i\in W}s_{i}\leq m} . The value of a set W of winners is the sum of values of the winners: ∑ ∑ i ∈ ∈ W v i {\displaystyle \sum _{i\in W}v_{i}} . The goal is to find a feasible set of winners with a maximum total value.

In the broadcast time example, if there are 5 minutes allocated for advertisements, then m =300 (the number of seconds), n =the number of potential advertisers, s i =the length of i 's advertisement in seconds, and v i =the money that i expects to gain if his advertisement is broadcast.

Baseline solutions [ edit ] If the demands and values of all bidders are publicly known, then the problem can be solved by any algorithm for the knapsack problem . The problem is NP-hard, but it has efficient constant-factor approximation algorithms as well as an FPTAS . In practice, usually the demands s i are publicly known (e.g., the length of the advertisement of each advertiser must be known), but the valuations v i are the private information of the bidders. Therefore, the auction mechanism should incentivize the bidders to reveal their true valuations.

The VCG auction is a truthful mechanism that can be used to maximize the sum of values while incentivizing agents to reveal their true values. However, it only works if the outcome maximizes the values; it does not work with approximations (if the outcome is only approximately optimal, then VCG is no longer truthful). Finding the optimal outcome cannot be done in polynomial time unless P=NP. This raises the question: are there truthful mechanisms that work in polynomial time and attain an approximately-optimal outcome?

Truthful approximation mechanisms [ edit ] Mu'alem and Nisan gave the first affirmative answer to this question: [ 1 ] they showed that combining two greedy algorithms yields a truthful 2-factor approximation mechanism.

Briest, Krysta and Vocking [ 2 ] improved this result by showing a truthful FPTAS .

Dutting, Gkatzelis and Roughgarden [ 3 ] presented a truthful deferred-acceptance auction that attains an O(log m ) approximation, and proved that no deferred-acceptance auction can achieve a better approximation. This shows a separation between the general class of truthful auctions and the sub-class of deferred-acceptance auctions.

References [ edit ] ^ Mu'alem, Ahuva; Nisan, Noam (2008-11-01).

"Truthful approximation mechanisms for restricted combinatorial auctions" .

Games and Economic Behavior . Special Issue in Honor of Michael B. Maschler.

64 (2): 612– 631.

doi : 10.1016/j.geb.2007.12.009 .

ISSN 0899-8256 .

^ Briest, Patrick; Krysta, Piotr; Vöcking, Berthold (2011-01-01).

"Approximation Techniques for Utilitarian Mechanism Design" .

SIAM Journal on Computing .

40 (6): 1587– 1622.

doi : 10.1137/090772988 .

ISSN 0097-5397 .

^ Dütting, Paul; Gkatzelis, Vasilis; Roughgarden, Tim (2014-06-01).

"The performance of deferred-acceptance auctions" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the fifteenth ACM conference on Economics and computation . EC '14. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

187– 204.

doi : 10.1145/2600057.2602861 .

ISBN 978-1-4503-2565-3 .

S2CID 1950202 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Knapsack_auction&oldid=1296432710 " Categories : Types of auction Mechanism design This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 00:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Knapsack auction 1 language Add topic

