Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Historical information Toggle Historical information subsection 2.1 Location history 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristotle (Ribera) 6 languages Español Français עברית مصرى 日本語 Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aristotle (Ribera painting) ) 1637 painting by Jusepe de Ribera Aristotle Artist Jusepe de Ribera Year 1637 Type Oil painting on canvas Dimensions 120 cm × 99 cm (49 in × 39 in) Location Indianapolis Museum of Art , Indianapolis Aristotle is a 1637 oil painting by Spanish artist Jusepe de Ribera , located in the Indianapolis Museum of Art , which is in Indianapolis , Indiana . It is part of a series of six portraits of ancient philosophers commissioned by the Prince of Liechtenstein in 1636.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Aristotle is here portrayed as a beggar-philosopher, a popular conceit in the seventeenth century. His asceticism is well in keeping with Spanish Catholicism, and is a hallmark of the saints Ribera also painted. He is surrounded by light reminiscent of Caravaggio , with whom Ribera is often associated.

[ 2 ] That, and his direct, naturalistic style (also courtesy of Caravaggio) make this a powerful image of a philosopher and his profound contemplations. Aristotle is painted in a very tactile manner, with deep creases in his worn face and hands. Ribera proudly signed the painting across the papers in Aristotle's hand, appending "español" to his name to assert his nationality.

[ 1 ] Historical information [ edit ] When Karl Eusebius, Prince of Liechtenstein originally commissioned this series in May 1636, the request was for a full dozen paintings. However, only the first six were ever delivered. These were listed in a 1767 inventory as Aristotle, Plato , Crates , Anaxagoras , Protagoras , and Diogenes . The set was sold and scattered in 1957, although briefly reunited by the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1992 for a Ribera exhibition.

[ 3 ] The identification of this particular image has been somewhat problematic over the years. Although the 1767 inventory was clear enough, only Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and Crates are identified by inscriptions on the paintings. The current consensus is that the doctor's robe and scholar's skullcap mean this image must be Aristotle. However, for years, the IMA identified the subject as Archimedes due to the geometric drawings in his hand, although that particular philosopher was not mentioned in the inventory.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Location history [ edit ] From 1637 until 1957, the Princes of Lichtenstein retained possession of the painting. Then it was purchased by Dr. G.H.A. Clowes, who generously lent it to the IMA.

[ 3 ] The IMA officially acquired Aristotle in 2000, courtesy of the Clowes family, and gave it the accession number 2000.345. It hangs in the Clowes Pavilion with many other donations from that family.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Caravaggisti References [ edit ] ^ a b Lee, Ellen Wardwell; Robinson, Anne (2005).

Indianapolis Museum of Art: Highlights of the Collection .

Indianapolis : Indianapolis Museum of Art .

ISBN 0936260777 .

^ a b Day, Holliday T. (1988).

Indianapolis Museum of Art Collections Handbook .

Indianapolis : Indianapolis Museum of Art .

ISBN 0936260203 .

^ a b c Pérez Sánchez, Alfonso E.

; Spinosa, Nicola (1992).

Jusepe de Ribera, 1591-1652 .

New York, New York : Metropolitan Museum of Art .

ISBN 0870996479 .

^ "Aristotle" .

Indianapolis Museum of Art . Retrieved 7 February 2013 .

External links [ edit ] IMA page National Museum of Western Art's Crates LACMA's Philosopher v t e Jusepe de Ribera Paintings Allegories of the Five Senses (early 1600s) Deposition of Christ (early 1600s) Saint Andrew (early 1600s) Saint Peter and Saint Paul (c. 1616) Saint Jerome and the Angel of Judgement (1626) Drunken Silenus (1626) The Martyrdom of Saint Andrew (1628) Democritus (1630) The Martyrdom of Saint Bartholomew (1630–1640) Magdalena Ventura with Her Husband and Son (1631) Ixion (1632) Tityos (1632) The Blind Sculptor (1632) Pietà (1633) The Martyrdom of Saint Bartholomew (1634) Women Gladiators (1636) The Assumption of Mary Magdalene (1636) Apollo and Marsyas (Naples) (1637) Apollo and Marsyas (1637) Aristotle (1637) Isaac and Jacob (1637) Pietà (1637) Jacob's Dream (1639) The Martyrdom of Saint Philip (1639) Saint Peter in Penitence (c. 1630s) Saint Mary of Egypt (1641) The Clubfoot (1642) Baptism of Christ (1643) The Martyrdom of Saint Bartholomew (1644) Saint Januarius Emerges Unscathed from the Furnace (1646) The Holy Family with Saints Anne and Catherine of Alexandria (1648) Adoration of the Shepherds (c. 1650) v t e Indianapolis Museum of Art (Newfields) Significant artworks at the Indianapolis Museum of Art African art Face mask Senufo female ancestor figure Magbo helmet mask for Oro society Palace plaque depicting warrior Guardian figure Healing of Abiku Children American painting and sculpture to 1945 Afternoon Tea Cliff Rock - Appledore Dorothy Hotel Lobby Hurricane Jimson Weed Morning at Grand Manan Preparing for the Matinee Red Kimono on the Roof Reflections Sunlight The Boat Builders The Flight of Europa The Love Song The Rainbow Tidying Up U.S.A.

Untitled (The Birth) Asian art Bowl with two violet spots Cong-shaped vase Covered jar with carp design Fine Wind, Clear Morning Ksitigarbha bodhisattva Ritual wine server Shigaraki ware storage jar Vase with carved peony scrolls Vase with nine peach design Contemporary art Acton Courre Merlan Egyptian Barnyard LOVE painting LOVE (sculpture) The Quintet of the Silent They Waz Nice White Folks While They Lasted (Sez One Gal to Another) Untitled Landfield Untitled Judd Untitled Irwin Decorative arts Angel of the Resurrection Coffee service High chest of drawers Portland Vase Side chair European painting and sculpture to 1945 Aristotle Battle Between Carnival and Lent Breton Women at a Wall Broek in Waterland Charing Cross Bridge Crucifix Crucifixion Enclosed Field with Peasant Entry of Christ into Jerusalem Entry of Christ into Jerusalem House in Provence Landscape near Arles Ma Jolie Madonna and Child with St. John the Baptist and St. Mary Magdalene Man and Woman Peasant with a Wheelbarrow Rebecca and Eliezer at the Well Roman Capriccio: The Pantheon and Other Monuments Saint Luke Self-Portrait Rembrandt Still Life with a Chinese Porcelain Jar Still Life with Profile of Laval The Banks of the Oise near Pontoise The Boy The Channel of Gravelines, Petit Fort Philippe The Country Dance The Crucifixion Cranach The Fifth Plague of Egypt The Flageolet Player on the Cliff The Flight into Egypt The Holy Family with Saint John the Baptist The House of the Deaf Woman and the Belfry at Eragny The Negress The Seamstress The Triumphant Entry of Constantine into Rome The Two Sisters The Valkhof at Nijmegen Triptych of the Annunciation Vorhor, the Green Wave Art of the Americas Haida ceremonial dance rattle Oceanic art Helmet mask (Tatanua) Prints, drawings, and photographs Blasting St. Vincent's Rock, Clifton Boreas and Oreithyia Galinthias Outwits Eileithyia by Announcing the Birth of Heracles Mother (Mutter) Moulin Rouge: La Goulue The Holy Family with the Dragonfly Young Woman in Blue Textile and fashion arts Moroccan wall hanging Chinese Souls #2 Eli Lilly Family Quilt Evening dress Woman's apron Sumbanese woman's ceremonial skirt Outdoor artworks by location Museum grounds Above and Below Five Brushstrokes La Hermana del Hombre Bóveda Memories of Prague Mother and Child Numbers 1-0 Snowplow Stumbling Man Sutphin Fountain Two Figures Two Lines Oblique Down, Variation III Oldfields Copy of Diana of Versailles Diana with Dog Female and Male Herm Fountain Four Seasons Landon-Era Birdbath Mother and Child (Gordine) Nymph and Fawn Sundial, Boy With Spider The Three Graces Pair of Urns 100 Acres Bench Around the Lake Eden II Free Basket Funky Bones Indianapolis Island Park of the Laments Stratum Pier Team Building (Align) Artworks on loan East Gate/West Gate Mega-Gem Portrait of History Sewall Memorial Torches Spaces with Iron Deaccessioned artworks Broken Walrus II Holistic Image VIII Weather Tower Leadership Maxwell L. Anderson Charles L. Venable Colette Pierce Burnette Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristotle_(Ribera)&oldid=1279503691 " Categories : 1637 paintings Paintings in the Indianapolis Museum of Art Cultural depictions of Aristotle Paintings by Jusepe de Ribera Books in art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 23:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristotle (Ribera) 6 languages Add topic

