Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Rash 1.2 Complications 2 Cause 3 Pathophysiology Toggle Pathophysiology subsection 3.1 Entry into host 3.2 Exit from host cell 3.3 Consequences of infection 4 Diagnosis 5 Treatment 6 Prognosis 7 Epidemiology 8 History 9 Popular culture 10 Other names 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Rocky Mountain spotted fever 20 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ Português Română Русский Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bacterial infection spread by ticks Medical condition Rocky Mountain spotted fever Other names Blue disease, [ 1 ] Brazilian spotted fever, Tobia fever, new world spotted fever, tick-borne typhus fever, São Paulo fever [ 2 ] Petechial rash on the arm caused by Rocky Mountain spotted fever Specialty Infectious disease Symptoms Early : Fever , headache [ 3 ] Later : Rash [ 3 ] Complications Hearing loss , loss of limbs [ 3 ] Usual onset 2 to 14 days after infection [ 2 ] Duration 2 weeks [ 2 ] Causes Rickettsia rickettsii spread by ticks [ 4 ] Diagnostic method Based on symptoms [ 5 ] Differential diagnosis Zika fever , dengue , chikungunya , Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis , Pacific Coast tick fever , rickettsialpox [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Treatment Doxycycline [ 8 ] Prognosis 0.5% risk of death [ 6 ] Frequency < 5,000 cases per year (USA) [ 6 ] Rocky Mountain spotted fever ( RMSF ) is a bacterial disease spread by ticks .

[ 9 ] It typically begins with a fever and headache , which is followed a few days later with the development of a rash .

[ 3 ] The rash is generally made up of small spots of bleeding and starts on the wrists and ankles.

[ 10 ] Other symptoms may include muscle pains and vomiting.

[ 3 ] Long-term complications following recovery may include hearing loss or loss of part of an arm or leg.

[ 3 ] The disease is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii , a type of bacterium that is primarily spread to humans by American dog ticks , Rocky Mountain wood ticks , and brown dog ticks .

[ 4 ] Rarely the disease is spread by blood transfusions .

[ 4 ] Diagnosis in the early stages is difficult.

[ 5 ] Several laboratory tests can confirm the diagnosis but treatment should be begun based on symptoms.

[ 5 ] It is within a group known as spotted fever rickettsiosis , together with Rickettsia parkeri rickettsiosis , Pacific Coast tick fever , and rickettsialpox .

[ 6 ] Treatment of RMSF is with the antibiotic doxycycline .

[ 8 ] It works best when started early and is recommended in all age groups, as well as during pregnancy .

[ 8 ] Antibiotics are not recommended for prevention.

[ 8 ] Approximately 0.5% of people who are infected die as a result.

[ 6 ] Before the discovery of tetracycline in the 1940s, more than 10% of those with RMSF died.

[ 6 ] Fewer than 5,000 cases are reported annually in the United States, usually in June and July.

[ 6 ] It has been diagnosed throughout the contiguous United States , Western Canada , and parts of Central and South America .

[ 10 ] [ 2 ] Rocky Mountain spotted fever was first identified in the 1800s in the Rocky Mountains .

[ 10 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Spotted fever can be challenging to diagnose in its early stages, due to the similarity of symptoms with many different diseases.

[ 11 ] People infected with R. rickettsii usually notice symptoms following an incubation period of one to two weeks after a tick bite. The early clinical presentation of Rocky Mountain spotted fever is nonspecific and may resemble a variety of other infectious and noninfectious diseases.

[ citation needed ] Initial symptoms: [ 12 ] Fever Nausea Emesis (vomiting) Severe headache Muscle pain Malaise Later signs and symptoms: [ 13 ] Maculopapular rash Petechial rash Abdominal pain Joint pain Conjunctivitis Forgetfulness The classic triad of findings for this disease is fever, rash, and a history of a tick bite. However, this combination is often not identified when patients initially present for care. The rash has a centripetal , or "inward" pattern of spread, meaning it begins at the distal extremities, like ankles and wrists, and courses towards the trunk.

[ 14 ] Rash [ edit ] The rash first appears two to five days after the onset of fever, and it is often quite subtle. Younger patients usually develop the rash earlier than older patients. Most often, the rash begins as small, flat, pink, non-itchy spots ( macules ) on the wrists, forearms, and ankles. These spots turn pale when pressure is applied and eventually become raised on the skin. The characteristic red, spotted ( petechial ) rash of Rocky Mountain spotted fever is usually not seen until the sixth day or later after the onset of symptoms. This type of rash occurs in only 35-60% of patients with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. The rash involves the palms or soles in as many as 80% of people. However, this distribution may not occur until later on in the course of the disease. As many as 15% of patients may never develop a rash.

[ 15 ] Complications [ edit ] People can develop permanent disabilities including "cognitive deficits, ataxia , hemiparesis , blindness, deafness, or amputation following gangrene ".

[ 7 ] Cause [ edit ] The lifecycle of Dermacentor variabilis and Dermacentor andersoni ticks (family Ixodidae ) American dog tick ( Dermacentor variabilis ) range Rocky Mountain wood tick ( Dermacentor andersoni ) range Ticks are the natural hosts of the disease, serving as both reservoirs and vectors of R. rickettsii . Ticks transmit the bacteria primarily through their bites. Less commonly, infections may occur following exposure to crushed tick tissues, fluids, or tick feces.

[ citation needed ] A female tick can transmit R. rickettsii to her eggs in a process called transovarial transmission . Ticks can also become infected with R. rickettsii while feeding on blood from the host in either the larval or nymphal stage. After the tick develops into the next stage, the R. rickettsii may be transmitted to the second host during the feeding process. Furthermore, male ticks may transfer R. rickettsii to female ticks through body fluids or spermatozoa during the mating process. These types of transmission represent how generations or life stages of infected ticks are maintained.  Once infected, the tick can carry the pathogen for life.

[ citation needed ] Rickettsiae are transmitted through saliva injected while a tick is feeding. Unlike Lyme disease and other tick-borne pathogens that require a prolonged attachment period to establish infection, a person can become infected with R. rickettsii in a feeding time as short as 2 hours.

[ 16 ] In general, about 1-3% of the tick population carries R. rickettsii , even in areas where the majority of human cases are reported. Therefore, the risk of exposure to a tick carrying R. rickettsii is low.

[ citation needed ] The disease is spread by the American dog tick ( Dermacentor variabilis ), Rocky Mountain wood tick ( D. andersoni ), brown dog tick ( Rhipicephalus sanguineus ), and Amblyomma sculptum .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Not all of these are of equal importance, and most are restricted to certain geographic areas.

[ citation needed ] The two major vectors of R. rickettsii in the United States are the American dog tick and the Rocky Mountain wood tick. American dog ticks are widely distributed east of the Rocky Mountains, and they also occur in limited areas along the Pacific Coast. Dogs and medium-sized mammals are the preferred hosts of an adult American dog tick, although it feeds readily on other large mammals, including human beings . This tick is the most commonly identified species responsible for transmitting R. rickettsii to humans. Rocky Mountain wood ticks ( D. andersoni ) are found in the Rocky Mountain states and southwestern Canada . The lifecycle of this tick takes up to three years to complete. Adult ticks feed primarily on large mammals. The larvae and nymphs feed on small rodents.

[ citation needed ] Other tick species are naturally infected with R. rickettsii or serve as experimental vectors in the laboratory. These species are likely to play only a minor role in the ecology of R. rickettsii .

[ citation needed ] Pathophysiology [ edit ] Entry into host [ edit ] Rickettsia rickettsii can be transmitted to human hosts through the bite of an infected tick. As with other bacteria transmitted via ticks, the process generally requires a period of attachment of 4 to 6 hours. However, in some cases, a Rickettsia rickettsii infection was contracted by contact with tick tissues or fluids.

[ 19 ] Then, the bacteria induce their internalization into host cells via a receptor-mediated invasion mechanism.

[ citation needed ] Researchers believe that this mechanism is similar to that of Rickettsia conorii . This species of Rickettsia uses an abundant cell surface protein called OmpB to attach to a host cell membrane protein called Ku70. It has previously been reported that Ku70 migrates to the host cell surface in the presence of "Rickettsia".

[ 20 ] Then, Ku70 is ubiquitinated by c-Cbl, an E3 ubiquitin ligase . This triggers a cascade of signal transduction events resulting in the recruitment of Arp2/3 complex.

CDC42 , protein tyrosine kinase, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, and Src-family kinases then activate Arp2/3. This causes the alteration of local host cytoskeletal actin at the entry site as part of a zipper mechanism.

[ 21 ] Then, the bacteria is phagocytosized by the host cell and enveloped by a phagosome .

[ 20 ] Studies have suggested that rOmpB is involved in this process of adhesion and invasion. Both rOmpA and rOmpB are members of a family of surface cell antigens (Sca) which are autotransporter proteins; they act as ligands for the Omp proteins and are found throughout the rickettsiae .

[ 22 ] Exit from host cell [ edit ] The cytosol of the host cell contains nutrients, adenosine triphosphate , amino acids, and nucleotides, which are used by the bacteria for growth. For this reason, as well as to avoid phagolysosomal fusion and death, rickettsiae must escape from the phagosome . To escape from the phagosome, the bacteria secrete phospholipase D and hemolysin C. This disrupts the phagosomal membrane and allows the bacteria to escape. Following generation time in the cytoplasm of the host cells, the bacteria utilize actin -based motility to move through the cytosol.

[ 20 ] RickA, expressed on the rickettsial surface, activates Arp2/3 and causes actin polymerization. The rickettsiae use the actin to propel themselves throughout the cytosol to the surface of the host cell. This causes the host cell membrane to protrude outward and invaginate the membrane of an adjacent cell.

[ 21 ] The bacteria are then taken up by the neighboring cell in a double membrane vacuole that the bacteria can subsequently lyse, enabling spread from cell to cell without exposure to the extracellular environment.

[ citation needed ] Consequences of infection [ edit ] Rickettsia rickettsii initially infects blood vessel endothelial cells , but eventually migrates to vital organs, such as the brain, skin, and the heart, via the bloodstream. Bacterial replication in host cells causes endothelial cell proliferation and inflammation, resulting in mononuclear cell infiltration into blood vessels and subsequent red blood cell leakage into surrounding tissues. The characteristic rash observed in Rocky Mountain spotted fever is the direct result of this localized replication of Rickettsia in blood vessel endothelial cells.

[ 10 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] This disease can be diagnosed by a doctor with or without the use of lab testing.  Lab tests are not always relied upon because treatment may be necessary before the results are returned.

[ 23 ] Abnormal laboratory findings seen in patients with Rocky Mountain spotted fever may include a low platelet count , low blood sodium concentration , or elevated liver enzyme levels. Serology testing and skin biopsy are considered to be the best methods of diagnosis. Although immunofluorescent antibody assays are considered some of the best serology tests available, most antibodies that fight against R. rickettsii are undetectable on serology tests during the first seven days after infection.

[ 24 ] Differential diagnosis includes dengue , leptospirosis , chikungunya , and Zika fever .

[ 7 ] Treatment [ edit ] Appropriate antibiotic treatment should be started immediately when there is a suspicion of Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

[ 10 ] Treatment should not be delayed for laboratory confirmation of disease, as early initiation of treatment of Rocky Mountain spotted fever is associated with lower mortality.

[ 25 ] Failure to respond to a tetracycline argues against a diagnosis of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Severely ill people may require longer periods before their fever resolves, especially if they have experienced damage to multiple organ systems. Preventive therapy in healthy people who have had recent tick bites is not recommended and may only delay the onset of disease.

[ 26 ] Doxycycline (a tetracycline) is the drug of choice for patients with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. According to the CDC, [ 27 ] "Doctors often avoid prescribing doxycycline to young children because of a warning that tooth staining may occur when used in children less than 8 years old. ..Misperceptions about the use of doxycycline for children prevent kids from getting lifesaving treatment" of rickettsial diseases. "Delay in treatment of rickettsial diseases may lead to severe illness or death. Children are five times more likely than adults to die from RMSF." A 2013 study shows that "short courses of…doxycycline can be used in children without causing tooth staining or weakening of tooth enamel." [ 28 ] The CDC observed that "clearer language on the drug label may help avoid hesitation in prescribing life-saving doxycycline to children." [ 28 ] Treatment typically consists of 100 milligrams every 12 hours, or for children under 45 kg (99 lb) at 4 mg/kg of body weight per day in two divided doses. Treatment should be continued for at least three days after the fever subsides, and until there is unequivocal evidence of clinical improvement. This will be generally for a minimum time of five to ten days.

[ 10 ] Severe or complicated outbreaks may require longer treatment courses.

Chloramphenicol is an alternative drug that can be used to treat Rocky Mountain spotted fever, specifically in pregnancy. However, this drug may be associated with a wide range of side effects, and careful monitoring of blood levels is required.

[ 10 ] Prognosis [ edit ] Rocky Mountain spotted fever can be a very severe illness, and patients often require hospitalization. Because R. rickettsii infects the cells lining blood vessels throughout the body, severe manifestations of this disease may involve the respiratory system , central nervous system , gastrointestinal system , or kidneys . Long-term health problems following acute Rocky Mountain spotted fever infection include partial paralysis of the lower extremities, gangrene requiring amputation of fingers, toes, or arms or legs, hearing loss, loss of bowel or bladder control, movement disorders, and language disorders.

[ 29 ] These complications are most frequent in persons recovering from severe, life-threatening disease, often following lengthy hospitalizations.

[ 30 ] Epidemiology [ edit ] US distribution of spotted fever rickettsiosis, of which RMSF is a type, in 2014 There are between 500 and 2500 cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever reported in the United States per year, [ 31 ] and in only about 20% can the tick be found.

[ citation needed ] Host factors associated with severe or fatal Rocky Mountain spotted fever include advanced age, male sex, African or Caribbean background, long-term excessive alcohol use , and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. Deficiency of G6PD is a genetic condition affecting about 12 percent of the African-American male population. Deficiency in this enzyme is associated with a high proportion of severe cases of Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

[ 32 ] This is a rare clinical complication that is often fatal within five days of the onset of the disease.

[ 33 ] In the early 1940s, outbreaks were described in the Mexican states of Sinaloa , Sonora , Durango , and Coahuila driven by dogs and Rhipicephalus sanguineus sensu lato , the brown dog tick.

[ 7 ] Over the ensuing 100 years, case fatality rates were 30%–80%. In 2015, there was an abrupt rise in Sonora cases, with 80 fatal cases. From 2003 to 2016, cases increased to 1394 with 247 deaths.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Rocky Mountain spotted fever (or "black measles" because of its characteristic rash) was recognized in the early 1800s, and in the last 10 years of the 1800s (1890–1900), it became very common, especially in the Bitterroot Valley of Montana. The disease was originally noted to be concentrated on the west side of the Bitterroot River.

[ 34 ] Though it would be decades before scientists discovered the tick as the carrier of the disease, in as early as 1866, Dr. John B. Buker (establishing a practice in Missoula, MT) noticed a tick embedded in the skin of one of his patients.  His notes were later studied as part of later research.

[ 35 ] In 1901, Dr. A. F. Longeway was appointed to solve "the black measles problem" in Montana. He, in turn, enlisted his friend Dr. Earl Strain to help him. Strain suspected that the illness was from ticks.  In 1906, Howard T. Ricketts , a pathologist recruited from the University of Chicago, was the first to establish the identity of the infectious organism (the organism smaller than a bacterium and larger than a virus) that causes this disease. He and others characterized the basic epidemiological features of the disease, including the role of tick vectors. Their studies found that Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii , named in Ricketts's honor.  Ricketts died of typhus (another rickettsial disease) in Mexico in 1910, shortly after completing his studies on Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

[ citation needed ] Prior to 1922, Doctors McCray and McClintic both died while researching Rocky Mountain spotted fever, as did an aide of Noguchi Hideyo at the Rockefeller Institute.

[ citation needed ] Research began in 1922 in western Montana, in the Bitterroot Valley around Hamilton, Montana , after the Governor's daughter and his son-in-law died of the fever. However, before that, in 1917, Dr. Lumford Fricks introduced herds of sheep into the Bitterroot Valley. He hypothesized that the sheep would eat the tall grasses where ticks lived and bred.

[ 36 ] Past Assistant Surgeon R.R. Spencer of the Hygienic Laboratory of the U.S. Public Health Service was ordered to the region, and he led a research team at an abandoned schoolhouse through about 1924.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Spencer was assisted by R. R. Parker, Bill Gettinger, Henry Cowan, Henry Greenup, Elmer Greenup, Gene Hughes, Salsbury, Kerlee, and others, of whom Gettinger, Cowan and Kerlee died of Rocky Mountain spotted fever.

[ 38 ] Through a series of discoveries, the team found that a previous blood meal was necessary to make the tick deadly to its hosts, as well as other facets of the disease.

[ 38 ] On May 19, 1924, Spencer put a large dose of mashed wood ticks, from lot 2351B, and some weak carbolic acid into his arm by injection. This vaccine worked, and for some years after it was used by people in that region to convert the illness from one with high fatality rate (albeit low incidence) to one that could be either prevented entirely (for many of them) or modified to a non-deadly form (for the rest).

[ 38 ] Today there is no commercially available vaccine for RMSF [ 27 ] because, unlike in the 1920s when Spencer and colleagues developed one, antibiotics are now available to treat the disease, so prevention by vaccination is no longer the sole defense against likely death.

[ citation needed ] Much of the early research was conducted at Rocky Mountain Laboratories , [ 39 ] [ 40 ] a part of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases . The schoolhouse laboratory of 1922–1924, filled with ticks in various phases of the life cycle, is identified in retrospect as a biohazard , although the team did not fully appreciate it at first. The deaths of Gettinger and Cowan, and the near death of the janitor's son, were the results of inadequate biocontainment , but in the 1920s, the elaborate biocontainment systems of today had not been invented.

Popular culture [ edit ] In the 1936 film His Brother's Wife , Robert Taylor plays a doctor who is part of a team frustrated by their inability to find RMSF in ticks collected from plants in the jungle, while infected people die all around them. When they finally test ticks from infected goats, they find their source and save a colleague's life.

Research into this disease in Montana is a sub-plot of the 1937 film Green Light , starring Errol Flynn . Some of the researchers who perished are mentioned by name, and their photographs are shown.

[ citation needed ] Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a big part of the 1947 Republic Pictures movie Driftwood , starring Walter Brennan , James Bell , Dean Jagger , Natalie Wood , and Hobart Cavanaugh .

[ citation needed ] In December 2013, hockey player Shane Doan was diagnosed with Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and returned to play in January 2014.

[ 41 ] Other names [ edit ] Some synonyms for Rocky Mountain spotted fever in other countries include " tick typhus ", "Tobia fever" ( Colombia ), "São Paulo fever" or " febre maculosa " ( Brazil ), and " fiebre manchada " ( Mexico ).

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Pedro-Pons, Agustín (1968).

Patología y Clínica Médicas . Vol. 6 (3rd ed.). Barcelona: Salvat. p. 345.

ISBN 978-84-345-1106-4 .

^ a b c d "Pathogen Safety Data Sheets: Infectious Substances – Rickettsia rickettsii" .

Government of Canada . Public Health Agency of Canada. 7 January 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e f "Signs and Symptoms Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 26 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ a b c "Transmission and Epidemiology Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 26 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ a b c "Clinical and Laboratory Diagnosis Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 26 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g "Epidemiology and Statistics Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 26 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e Álvarez-Hernández Gerardo, Felipe González Roldán Jesús, Saúl Hernández Milan Néstor, Lash R Ryan, Barton Behravesh Casey, Paddock Christopher D (2017). "Rocky Mountain spotted fever in Mexico: past, present, and future".

The Lancet Infectious Diseases .

17 (6): e189 – e196 .

doi : 10.1016/S1473-3099(17)30173-1 .

PMID 28365226 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d "Treatment Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 26 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ "Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (RMSF)" .

CDC . 15 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Koyfman, Alex; Long, Brit; Gottlieb, Michael (2018-07-01).

"The Evaluation and Management of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in the Emergency Department: a Review of the Literature" .

Journal of Emergency Medicine .

55 (1): 42– 50.

doi : 10.1016/j.jemermed.2018.02.043 .

ISSN 0736-4679 .

PMID 29685474 .

S2CID 23489868 .

^ CDC (2019-02-19).

"Signs and symptoms of Rocky Mountain spotted fever | CDC" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved 2021-07-05 .

^ "Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . 19 February 2019.

^ "What are characteristics of the maculopapular rash in Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)?" .

www.medscape.com . Retrieved 2021-07-05 .

^ "Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever" .

NORD (National Organization for Rare Disorders) . Retrieved 2021-07-05 .

^ Biggs, Holly M. (2016).

"Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and Other Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis — United States" .

MMWR. Recommendations and Reports .

65 (2): 1– 44.

doi : 10.15585/mmwr.rr6502a1 .

ISSN 1057-5987 .

PMID 27172113 .

^ Saraiva DG, Soares HS, Soares JF, Labruna MB (2014).

"Feeding period required by Amblyomma aureolatum ticks for transmission of Rickettsia rickettsii to vertebrate hosts" .

Emerg Infect Dis .

20 (9): 1504– 10.

doi : 10.3201/eid2009.140189 .

PMC 4178383 .

PMID 25148391 .

^ Nava, S.; Beati, L.; Labruna, M. B.; Cáceres, A. G.; Mangold, A. J.; Guglielmone, A. A. (2014). "Reassessment of the taxonomic status of Amblyomma cajennense (Fabricius, 1787) with the description of three new species, Amblyomma tonelliae n. sp., Amblyomma interandinum n. sp. and Amblyomma patinoi n. sp., and reinstatement of Amblyomma mixtum Koch, 1844, and Amblyomma sculptum Berlese, 1888 (Ixodida: Ixodidae)".

Ticks and Tick-Borne Diseases .

5 (3): 252– 76.

doi : 10.1016/j.ttbdis.2013.11.004 .

hdl : 11336/31257 .

PMID 24556273 .

^ "Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases" .

Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever . Centers for Disease Control. 2018-10-26.

^ Dantas-Torres, Filipe (2007).

"Rocky Mountain spotted fever" .

The Lancet Infectious Diseases (Submitted manuscript).

7 (11): 724– 732.

doi : 10.1016/s1473-3099(07)70261-x .

hdl : 2452/113243 .

PMC 1607456 .

PMID 698647 .

^ a b c Chan, Yvonne; Cardwell, Marissa; Hermanas, Timothy; Uchiyama, Tsuneo; Martinez, Juan (April 2009).

"Rickettsial Outer-Membrane Protein B (rOmpB) Mediates Bacterial Invasion through Ku70 in an Actin, c-Cbl, Clathrin and Caveolin 2-Dependent Manner" .

Cellular Microbiology .

11 (4): 629– 644.

doi : 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01279.x .

PMC 2773465 .

PMID 19134120 .

^ a b Walker, David (2007).

"Rickettsiae and Rickettsial Infections: The Current State of Knowledge" .

Clinical Infectious Diseases .

45 : S39 – S44 .

doi : 10.1086/518145 .

PMID 17582568 .

^ Noriea, Nicholas; Clark, Tina; Hackstadt, Ted (2015).

"Targeted Knockout of the Rickettsia rickettsii OmpA Surface Antigen Does Not Diminish Virulence in a Mammalian Model System" .

Journal of Molecular Biology .

6 (2): e00323–15.

doi : 10.1128/mBio.00323-15 .

PMC 4453529 .

PMID 25827414 .

^ CDC (2021-03-26).

"Clinical and laboratory diagnosis of RMSF | CDC" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved 2021-10-24 .

^ Woods CR (April 2013). "Rocky Mountain spotted fever in children".

Pediatr Clin North Am .

60 (2): 455– 70.

doi : 10.1016/j.pcl.2012.12.001 .

PMID 23481111 .

^ Pace, EJ; O'Reilly, M (1 May 2020). "Tickborne Diseases: Diagnosis and Management".

American Family Physician .

101 (9): 530– 540.

PMID 32352736 .

^ Gammons M, Salam G (August 2002).

"Tick removal" .

Am Fam Physician .

66 (4): 643– 5.

PMID 12201558 .

^ a b "Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever" . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2018-10-26.

^ a b CDC (2019-02-19).

"Research on doxycycline | CDC" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ Archibald, L. K.; Sexton, D. J. (May 1995). "Long-term sequelae of Rocky Mountain spotted fever".

Clinical Infectious Diseases .

20 (5): 1122– 1125.

doi : 10.1093/clinids/20.5.1122 .

ISSN 1058-4838 .

PMID 7619986 .

^ Biggs, Holly M.; Behravesh, Casey Barton; Bradley, Kristy K.; Dahlgreen, F. Scott; Drexler, Naomi A.; Dumler, J. Stephen; Folk, Scott M.; Kato, Cecilia Y.; Lash, R. Ryan; Levin, Michael L.; Massung, Robert F.; Nadelman, Robert B.; Nicholson, William L.; Paddock, Christopher D.; Pritt, Bobbi S.; et al. (May 13, 2016). Rasmussen, Sonja A.; Kent, Charlotte K.; Casey, Christine G.; Rutledge, Teresa F.; Johnson, David C.; Clark, Kristina B. (eds.).

"Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever and Other Spotted Fever Group Rickettsioses, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis — United States" (PDF) .

MMWR .

65 (2).

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention : 17.

^ "Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever – Statistics and Epidemiology" .

Centers for Disease Control . Retrieved 26 May 2016 .

^ Walker, D. H.; Hawkins, H. K.; Hudson, P. (March 1983). "Fulminant Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Its pathologic characteristics associated with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency".

Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine .

107 (3): 121– 125.

ISSN 0003-9985 .

PMID 6687526 .

^ Chapman, Alice (2006-03-16).

"Diagnosis and Management of Tickborne Rickettsial Diseases: Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis --- United States A Practical Guide for Physicians and Other Health-Care and Public Health Professionals" .

MMWR. Recommendations and Reports .

55 (RR-4). CDC: 1– 27.

PMID 16572105 . Retrieved 2024-06-20 .

^ "History of Rocky Mountain Labs (RML) | NIH: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases" .

www.niaid.nih.gov . Retrieved 2019-01-18 .

^ Bleed, Blister and Purge: A History of Medicine on the American Frontier by Volney Steele, M.D.

ISBN 0-87842-505-5 ^ Steele, Volney, M.D. Bleed, Blister and Purge: A History of Medicine on the American Frontier.  Mountain Press Publishing Company, Missoula, Montana. 2005.

^ Spencer R.R.; Parker R.R. (1930).

Studies on Rocky Mountain spotted fever . Hygienic Laboratory Bulletin. Vol. 154. Washington: U.S. G.P.O.

OCLC 16141346 .

^ a b c d de Kruif, Paul (1932).

"Ch. 4 Spencer: In the Happy Valley" .

Men Against Death . New York: Harcourt, Brace.

OCLC 11210642 .

^ "Rocky Mountain Laboratories Official Site" . Archived from the original on September 30, 2006 . Retrieved 2009-06-24 .

^ "Overview" .

Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever . Centers for Disease Control. 2018-10-26.

^ " 'Yotes Notes: Doctors Give Doan OK to Play" .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : A77.0 ICD - 9-CM : 082.0 MeSH : D012373 DiseasesDB : 31130 External resources MedlinePlus : 000654 eMedicine : emerg/510 med/2043 ped/2709 oph/503 derm/772 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rocky Mountain spotted fever .

Wikispecies has information related to Ixodidae .

Wikispecies has information related to Rickettsia .

"Rocky Mountain spotted fever" . Centers for Disease Control. 2018-10-26.

v t e Pseudomonadota -associated Gram-negative bacterial infections α Rickettsiales Rickettsiaceae / ( Rickettsioses ) Typhus Rickettsia typhi Murine typhus Rickettsia prowazekii Epidemic typhus , Brill–Zinsser disease , Flying squirrel typhus Spotted fever Tick-borne Rickettsia rickettsii Rocky Mountain spotted fever Rickettsia conorii Boutonneuse fever Rickettsia japonica Japanese spotted fever Rickettsia sibirica North Asian tick typhus Rickettsia australis Queensland tick typhus Rickettsia honei Flinders Island spotted fever Rickettsia africae African tick bite fever Rickettsia parkeri American tick bite fever Rickettsia aeschlimannii Rickettsia aeschlimannii infection Mite-borne Rickettsia akari Rickettsialpox Orientia tsutsugamushi Scrub typhus Flea-borne Rickettsia felis Flea-borne spotted fever Anaplasmataceae Ehrlichiosis : Anaplasma phagocytophilum Human granulocytic anaplasmosis , Anaplasmosis Ehrlichia chaffeensis Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis Ehrlichia ewingii Ehrlichiosis ewingii infection Hyphomicrobiales Brucellaceae Brucella abortus Brucellosis Bartonellaceae Bartonellosis : Bartonella henselae Cat-scratch disease Bartonella quintana Trench fever Either B. henselae or B. quintana Bacillary angiomatosis Bartonella bacilliformis Carrion's disease , Verruga peruana β Neisseriales M+ Neisseria meningitidis/meningococcus Meningococcal disease , Waterhouse–Friderichsen syndrome , Meningococcal septicaemia M− Neisseria gonorrhoeae/gonococcus Gonorrhea ungrouped: Eikenella corrodens / Kingella kingae HACEK Chromobacterium violaceum Chromobacteriosis infection Burkholderiales Burkholderia pseudomallei Melioidosis Burkholderia mallei Glanders Burkholderia cepacia complex Bordetella pertussis / Bordetella parapertussis Pertussis γ Enterobacteriales ( OX− ) Lac+ Klebsiella pneumoniae Rhinoscleroma , Pneumonia Klebsiella granulomatis Granuloma inguinale Klebsiella oxytoca Escherichia coli : Enterotoxigenic Enteroinvasive Enterohemorrhagic O157:H7 O104:H4 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome Enterobacter aerogenes / Enterobacter cloacae Slow/weak Serratia marcescens Serratia infection Citrobacter koseri / Citrobacter freundii Lac− H2S+ Salmonella enterica Typhoid fever , Paratyphoid fever , Salmonellosis H2S− Shigella dysenteriae / sonnei / flexneri / boydii Shigellosis , Bacillary dysentery Proteus mirabilis / Proteus vulgaris Yersinia pestis Plague / Bubonic plague Yersinia enterocolitica Yersiniosis Yersinia pseudotuberculosis Far East scarlet-like fever Pasteurellales Haemophilus : H. influenzae Haemophilus meningitis Brazilian purpuric fever H. ducreyi Chancroid H. parainfluenzae HACEK Pasteurella multocida Pasteurellosis Actinobacillus Actinobacillosis Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans HACEK Legionellales Legionella pneumophila / Legionella longbeachae Legionnaires' disease Coxiella burnetii Q fever Thiotrichales Francisella tularensis Tularemia Vibrionaceae Vibrio cholerae Cholera Vibrio vulnificus Vibrio parahaemolyticus Vibrio alginolyticus Plesiomonas shigelloides Pseudomonadales Pseudomonas aeruginosa Pseudomonas infection Moraxella catarrhalis Acinetobacter baumannii Xanthomonadaceae Stenotrophomonas maltophilia Cardiobacteriaceae Cardiobacterium hominis HACEK Aeromonadales Aeromonas hydrophila / Aeromonas veronii Aeromonas infection ε Campylobacterales Campylobacter jejuni Campylobacteriosis , Guillain–Barré syndrome Helicobacter pylori Peptic ulcer , MALT lymphoma , Gastric cancer Helicobacter cinaedi Helicobacter cellulitis v t e Tick-borne diseases and infestations Diseases Bacterial infections Rickettsiales Anaplasmosis Boutonneuse fever Ehrlichiosis ( Human granulocytic , Human monocytotropic , Human E. ewingii infection ) Scrub typhus Spotted fever rickettsiosis Pacific Coast tick fever American tick bite fever rickettsialpox Rocky Mountain spotted fever ) Spirochaete Baggio–Yoshinari syndrome Lyme disease Relapsing fever borreliosis Thiotrichales Tularemia Viral infections Bhanja virus Bourbon virus Colorado tick fever Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever Heartland bandavirus Kemerovo tickborne viral fever Kyasanur Forest disease Omsk hemorrhagic fever Powassan encephalitis Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome Tete orthobunyavirus Tick-borne encephalitis Protozoan infections Babesiosis Other diseases Tick paralysis Alpha-gal allergy Southern tick-associated rash illness Infestations Tick infestation Species and bites Amblyomma Amblyomma americanum Amblyomma cajennense Amblyomma triguttatum Dermacentor Dermacentor andersoni Dermacentor variabilis Ixodes Ixodes cornuatus Ixodes holocyclus Ixodes pacificus Ixodes ricinus Ixodes scapularis Ornithodoros Ornithodoros gurneyi Ornithodoros hermsi Ornithodoros moubata Other Rhipicephalus sanguineus v t e Bacterial skin disease Gram +ve Bacillota Staphylococcus Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome Impetigo Toxic shock syndrome Streptococcus Impetigo Cutaneous group B streptococcal infection Streptococcal intertrigo Cutaneous Streptococcus iniae infection Erysipelas / Chronic recurrent erysipelas Scarlet fever Corynebacterium Erythrasma Clostridium Gas gangrene Dermatitis gangrenosa Others Listeriosis Erysipeloid of Rosenbach Mycoplasma Actinomycetota Mycobacterium- related Aquarium granuloma Borderline lepromatous leprosy Borderline leprosy Borderline tuberculoid leprosy Buruli ulcer Erythema induratum Histoid leprosy Lepromatous leprosy Leprosy Lichen scrofulosorum Lupus vulgaris Miliary tuberculosis Mycobacterium avium–intracellulare complex infection Mycobacterium haemophilum infection Mycobacterium kansasii infection Papulonecrotic tuberculid Primary inoculation tuberculosis Rapid growing mycobacterium infection Scrofuloderma Tuberculosis cutis orificialis Tuberculosis verrucosa cutis Tuberculous cellulitis Tuberculous gumma Tuberculoid leprosy Others Cutaneous actinomycosis Nocardiosis Cutaneous diphtheria infection Arcanobacterium haemolyticum infection Group JK corynebacterium sepsis Gram -ve Pseudomonadota Alpha Endemic typhus Epidemic typhus Scrub typhus North Asian tick typhus Queensland tick typhus Flying squirrel typhus Trench fever Bacillary angiomatosis African tick bite fever American tick bite fever Rickettsia aeschlimannii infection Rickettsialpox Rocky Mountain spotted fever Human granulocytotropic anaplasmosis Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis Flea-borne spotted fever Japanese spotted fever Mediterranean spotted fever Flinders Island spotted fever Verruga peruana Brill–Zinsser disease Brucellosis Cat-scratch disease Oroya fever Ehrlichiosis ewingii infection Beta Gonococcemia / Gonorrhea / Primary gonococcal dermatitis Melioidosis Cutaneous Pasteurella hemolytica infection Meningococcemia Glanders Chromobacteriosis infection Gamma Pasteurellosis Tularemia Vibrio vulnificus Rhinoscleroma Haemophilus influenzae cellulitis Pseudomonal pyoderma / Pseudomonas hot-foot syndrome / Hot tub folliculitis / Ecthyma gangrenosum / Green nail syndrome Q fever Salmonellosis Shigellosis Plague Granuloma inguinale Chancroid Aeromonas infection Campylobacterota Helicobacter cellulitis Other Syphilid Syphilis Chancre Yaws Pinta Bejel Chlamydia infection Leptospirosis Rat-bite fever Lyme disease Lymphogranuloma venereum Gram-negative folliculitis Gram-negative toe web infection Unspecified pathogen Abscess Periapical abscess Boil/furuncle Hospital furunculosis Carbuncle Cellulitis Paronychia / Pyogenic paronychia Perianal cellulitis Acute lymphadenitis Pilonidal cyst Pyoderma Folliculitis Superficial pustular folliculitis Sycosis vulgaris Pimple Ecthyma Pitted keratolysis Trichomycosis axillaris Necrotizing fasciitis Gangrene Chronic undermining burrowing ulcer Fournier gangrene Elephantiasis nostras Blistering distal dactylitis Botryomycosis Malakoplakia Pyomyositis Blastomycosis-like pyoderma Bullous impetigo Chronic lymphangitis Recurrent toxin-mediated perineal erythema Tick-borne lymphadenopathy Tropical ulcer Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rocky_Mountain_spotted_fever&oldid=1301195076 " Categories : Rickettsioses Bacterium-related cutaneous conditions Zoonoses Tick-borne diseases Rocky Mountains Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2011 Commons link is on Wikidata Wikipedia medicine articles ready to translate This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 15:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rocky Mountain spotted fever 20 languages Add topic

