Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Snow groomer 2 Snow grooming equipment 3 Snow farming 4 Snow runway construction 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Snow grooming 3 languages Deutsch עברית Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Snow trail compaction A snow groomer for alpine slopes with plow, a surface finishing attachment for ski slopes, and a cable winch for grooming steep slopes A snow groomer for cross-country trails with snow plow and attachments for the skate and classical lanes.

A groomed alpine skiing piste or trail A groomed cross-country trail, showing corduroy for skate-skiing and classic tracks (left) Snow grooming is the process of manipulating snow for recreational uses with a tractor , snowmobile , piste caterpillar, truck or snowcat towing specialized equipment. The process is used to maintain ski hills, cross-country ski trails and snowmobile trails by grooming (moving, flattening, rototilling , or compacting) the snow on them.

[ 1 ] A variation of the technique is used to construct snow runways in Antarctica.

A snow groomer is usually employed to pack snow and improve skiing and snowboarding and snowmobile trail conditions. The resulting pattern on the snow is known as corduroy , [ 2 ] and is widely regarded as a good surface on which to ski or ride. Snow groomers can also move accumulated snow made by snow machines as part of a process, called "snow farming".

Snow groomer [ edit ] Main article: Snowcat A snow groomer (informally called a "piste basher" in the United Kingdom) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] is a tracked vehicle equipped in front with a shovel (or dozer blade) and behind with a cutter (or roller).

[ 5 ] It is usually driven by diesel engines. When the machine drives over a snowfield, it pushes snow ahead of it and, at the same time, smooths out any surface unevenness.

Snow groomers built for ski slopes employ front mounted, hydraulically operated blades, powered rotary tillers and specialized shaping equipment for not only maintaining ski slopes , but also for building half pipes , terrain parks and snow tube parks.

Cross-country skiing trails are also groomed in similar fashion, often with a wide "corduroy" area that allows skate-skiing plus classic ski tracks, imprinted with specialized ski guides.

[ 6 ] Manufacturers include Kässbohrer Geländefahrzeug (Germany), Prinoth (Italy), [ 7 ] Tucker Sno-Cat (US), the Ohara Corporation (Japan), [ 8 ] Zaugg (Switzerland), [ 9 ] Favero Snow Tech (Italy) [ 10 ] and Aztec/CM Dupon (France).

Snow groomers can handle very steep gradients due to their low centre of gravity and large contact area, but they can also be assisted by winches . Using cable lengths of up to 1,200 metres and a tractive force of up to 4.8 tonnes, winches can support the machines on steep slopes.

[ 11 ] Snow groomers warn skiers and snowboarders with visual or acoustic signals. Groomers are mostly sent out during the night time after the close of the ski area so as not to interfere with daily and night skiing .

[ 12 ] Due to their mobility and low ground pressure (typically 0.040 to 0.060 kg/cm 2 (about 4 to 6 kN/m 2 ) snow groomers are sometimes used elsewhere, e.g. for agricultural purposes, moving bulk goods, working on peat bogs or at biogas sites.

[ 13 ] Snow grooming equipment [ edit ] Snow grooming equipment towed by a smaller vehicle like a Side-by-Side UTV or snowmobile can be used for maintaining narrow paths, laying Nordic cross-country ski trails, or fatbike trails. These compact snow groomers make corduroy trails where a large snow groomer cannot access.

[ 14 ] Snow farming [ edit ] Snow farming is the use of obstacles, equipment and knowledge about management of snow in order to strategically manipulate snow coverage. Often this is done for the purpose of skiing or even preventing snow drift in certain areas like roads. The most popular obstacle is the snow fence , which is used to create drifts and collect more snow in a given area than would otherwise naturally occur. The snow can be moved to other areas and groomed with the use of a snow groomer. Sometimes the snow fence is readily movable in order to maximize the collection of blown snow, despite wind direction changes.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In Mora, Minnesota, the annual Vasaloppet USA cross-country ski race would be in jeopardy without the use of snow farming to compensate for the lack of natural snow in recent years.

[ 17 ] Snow runway construction [ edit ] Snow grooming is used in construction and maintenance of airstrips to support research stations in Antarctica . U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory (CRREL) researchers described the engineering parameters necessary to make improvements to natural snow for use in landing fields.

[ 18 ] One level of improvement is used to support aircraft with skis.

[ 19 ] In 2016, CRREL researchers perfected field preparation practices that allow for use of heavy military transport and other wheeled aircraft on snow runways in Antarctica. Proof-of-concept tests employed a C-17 . Wheeled aircraft capability exists at the US McMurdo Station and ski landings are routine at the Australian Davis Station .

[ 20 ] References [ edit ] ^ USSA Cross-Country Technical Handbook (PDF) . U.S. Ski and Snowboard Association. 2004. pp.

2– 337.

^ Lockwood, Auguste, Corduroy for Groomed Trails , retrieved 2020-10-04 ^ "Piste basher" .

Cambridge English Dictionary . 2019 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Martin, Iain (2018-10-02).

"Meet the world's first wheelchair-bound piste basher driver fulfilling his childhood dream" .

The Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 2019-08-19 .

^ Mason, Kenneth (1980) Investigation No. 731-TA-36 International Trade Commission USITC Pub 1117 1980 Appendix p2 ^ Older, Jules (1998).

Cross-Country Skiing for Everyone . Stackpole Books. p.

87 .

ISBN 9780811727082 .

snow grooming.

^ The History of Cats Ski Area Management 2015 ^ Snow Vehicles Ohara Corp ^ Zaugg track-based snow clearing systems Global Railway Review 2016 ^ History Favero Snow Tech ^ Neue Windentechnologie für steilste Hänge (Sherpa-Winde, Prinoth) ISR Internationale Seilbahn-Rundschau 22 April 2011, retrieved 5 September 2014 ^ Snowmakers, snowmaking prevail when Mother Nature is uncooperative Archived 2007-10-08 at the Wayback Machine - Pocahontas Times - Mountain Times , Vol. 6 No. 2
February 2007 ^ Pistenraupen zum Bewegen von Hackgut TEST Pistenraupe Prinoth LH 500, Anwender: Thermo Wipptal AG, (photos dated 15 June 2011), retrieved 5 September 2014 ^ "Types of Snow Groomers" . snowgroomers.net. 28 November 2022 . Retrieved 2022-12-06 .

^ Agrawala, Shardul (2007), Climate Change in the European Alps Adapting Winter Tourism and Natural Hazards Management: Adapting Winter Tourism and Natural Hazards Management , Environment & Sustainable Development, Paris: OECD Publishing, p. 136, ISBN 9789264031692 ^ Nelson, Janet (February 1973), "Groom Boom" , Ski Magazine , p. 47 , retrieved 2017-05-09 ^ "In Northern Minnesota, 'Snow Farmers' Make Sure A Ski-Racing Tradition Endures" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2019-02-11 .

^ Vinson, Ted S.; Rooney, James W.; Haas, Wilbur H. (1996-01-01).

Roads and Airfields in Cold Regions: A State of the Practice Report . ASCE Publications. pp.

91– 94.

ISBN 978-0-7844-7412-9 .

^ This week at Davis: 18 January 2019 Australian Antarctic Division . Retrieved 23 January 2023.

^ Caruso, Aimee (18 December 2016).

"CRREL Engineers Build Runway in Antarctica" .

The Valley News . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Snow groomer at Wikimedia Commons v t e Skiing and snowboarding History of skiing Glossary of skiing and snowboarding terms Nordic skiing Competitive Cross-country skiing Paralympic Ski jumping Ski flying Nordic combined Endurance Ski marathon Ski orienteering Ski touring Recreational Cross-country skiing Backcountry skiing Roller skiing Skijoring Alpine skiing Olympic disciplines Slalom Giant slalom Super-G Downhill Combined Other disciplines Extreme skiing Glade skiing Heliskiing Para-alpine skiing Speed skiing Other skiing Biathlon Indoor skiing Night skiing Ski archery Para biathlon Ski mountaineering Telemark skiing Freestyle skiing Aerial skiing Big air Freeriding Freeskiing Half-pipe skiing Mogul Ski ballet Ski cross Slopestyle Snowboarding Alpine Backcountry Big air Freeriding Freestyle Half-pipe Para snowboard Slopestyle Snowboard cross Snowboard racing Technique / learning Carved turn Jump turn Parallel turn Pivot turn Snowplough Stem christie Ski school Ski simulator Skate skiing Equipment Bindings Boots Helmet Monoski Poles Skins Skis List of ski brands Snowboard Suit Wax Resort amenities Dry ski slope Half-pipe Superpipe Piste Ski area Ski tunnel Snow grooming Snowmaking Trail Ski lifts Aerial tramway Chairlift detachable Funicular Funifor Funitel Gondola lift bicable tricable Hybrid lift Surface lift Category:Skiing Category:Snowboarding Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snow_grooming&oldid=1242517570 " Categories : Skiing equipment Snow sports Snow removal Snowmobiles Tracked vehicles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 27 August 2024, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Snow grooming 3 languages Add topic

