Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Mozarabic literature 3 Mozarabic architecture Toggle Mozarabic architecture subsection 3.1 Mozarabic in al-Andalus 3.2 Mozarabic in the Kingdom of León 3.3 Repopulation churches difficult to classify or transitional 4 Mozarabic painting 5 Mozarabic sculpture 6 Mozarabic or repoblación 7 Gallery 8 Further reading 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Mozarabic art and architecture 14 languages Català Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Italiano עברית ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic style on the Iberian Peninsula Mozarabic arches in the Church of Santiago de Peñalba ( El Bierzo , Spain) Mozarabic art is an early medieval artistic style that is part of the pre-Romanesque style and emerged in al-Andalus and in the kingdom of León . It's named after the Mozarabs (from musta'rab meaning "Arabized"), the Christians of al-Andalus. It was developed by the Hispanic Christians who lived in Arab-Muslim territory and in the expansion territories of the León crown, in the period from the Arab-Islamic Conquest of the Iberian Peninsula (711) to the end of the 11th century. During this period, disciplines such as painting, goldsmithing and architecture with marked Caliphate influences were cultivated in a context of medieval coexistence - Christian, Hebrew and Muslim - in which the territories were constantly changing in size and status. Other names for this artistic style are Leonese art or repopulation art .

Description [ edit ] Mozarabic art is a diverse and hybrid artistic expression that flourished primarily in al-Andalus and in the Kingdom of León during the 9th and 10th centuries. It is characterized by a fusion of influences, especially Andalusian, and displays a classical continuity, either in the Visigothic tradition of the north or with the refined Caliphate of Córdoba , rooted in Byzantine origins.

[ 1 ] In the Leonese plateau, between the rivers Duero, Esla, Cea, and Pisuerga, various constructions emerged, ranging from modest single-nave churches with rectangular apses, typical of the early repopulation, to complex monastic complexes like San Cebrián de Mazote , Santa María de Wamba , Santiago de Peñalba , and San Miguel de Escalada , among others.

Cross of Peñalba , a piece of 10th century Mozarabic goldsmith's work The Leonese elites were the main proponents of this art, from the monarchy to civil and ecclesiastical figures within the royal environment, such as Bishop Genadio of Astorga or the Galician noble Rudesind of Celanova . Despite being Christians from the north, they were influenced by Andalusian tastes, as seen in the case of King Alfonso III , who even sent his son to the court of the Banu Qasi in Zaragoza.

[ 2 ] Mozarabic art blends two traditions, a Christian northern one and a Muslim southern one, which, despite their differences, shared a Mediterranean classical root. In the people's perception at that time, there were no conceptual distinctions between them; they considered both as part of a common tradition. This art stands out for its great formal variety, being a promiscuous and original style in the context of European pre-Romanesque art . The constructions showcased a unique blend of styles, prolific in experimenting with vaulted structures, domes, capitals, reliefs, and the "Roman" mural painting technique with Andalusian influence.

[ 3 ] In territories under Muslim rule, Mozarabic communities maintained some of the Visigothic temples for their religious rituals, rarely constructing new ones due to limited authorizations for new church buildings. The shifting of the Christian-Muslim frontier to the river Duero basin led to the construction of new temples, concentrating all available artistic capacity to meet repopulation needs. As life conditions in Muslim Andalusia became less bearable and the Christian kingdoms in the northern peninsula expanded, some Mozarabs chose to migrate to the offered territories. Their Hispano-Gothic culture overlapped with Muslim elements, contributing innovative elements to the recent Christian kingdoms in all aspects.

While there is an exceptional subgroup of temples, grouped as part of the distinctive art of the Kingdom of León or fusion art , these Mozarabic temples were likely the work of Muladis or Muslims converted to Christianity who migrated from Al-Andalus. Examples include Santiago de Peñalba and San Miguel de Escalada , temples with Cordoban influences and considered two of the great artistic achievements in the frontier society of the Kingdom of León during the 10th century.

[ 1 ] Mozarabic literature [ edit ] Beatus of Facundus: Judgment of Babylon The principal exponent is religious literature: Mozarabic missals, antiphoneries and prayerbooks, created in the scriptorium of the monasteries. Examples of quality and originality of the miniatures and illuminated manuscripts are the Commentarium in Apocalypsin ( Commentary on the Apocalypse ) from Beatus of Liébana , Beatus of Facundus or Beatus of Tábara. Or antiphonaries like the Mozarabic Antiphonary of the Cathedral of León ( Antifonario mozárabe de la Catedral de León ).

Toledo and Córdoba were the most important Mozarabic centers. From Córdoba was the abbot Speraindeo , who wrote an Apologetic against Muhammad . And very important for the history of philosophy studies is the Apologetic of the abbot Sansón (864).

Mozarabic architecture [ edit ] Caliphate-style mural paintings in Santiago de Peñalba Monastery of San Miguel de Escalada Mozarabic architecture is a blend of elements that defy easy classification, often showcasing influences from Paleochristian , Visigothic , or Asturian origins, while at other times, the Muslim imprint takes precedence. The primary characteristics defining Mozarabic architecture include: A great command of the technique in construction, employing principally ashlar by length and width Absence or sobriety of exterior decoration.

Diversity in the floor plans, certainly the majority stand out by the small proportions and discontinuous spaces covered by cupolas (groined, segmented, ribbed of horseshoe transept, etc.).

Use of the horseshoe arch , a very tight arch with the slope being two-thirds of the radius.

Use of the alfiz .

Use of the column as support, crowned by a Corinthian capital decorated with very stylized vegetal elements.

The eaves extend outwards and rest on top of corbels of lobes.

Mozarabic in al-Andalus [ edit ] Within the territory conquered by al-Andalus, there is a scarcity of evidence of temples built by Mozarabs. The most notable example is the rock-cut churches of Bobastro , located in Ardales, Málaga province. This unique enclave, carved into the rock, was part of a defensive and religious complex during the rebellion led by Omar ibn Hafsún , a leader who converted to Christianity and challenged the Emirate of Córdoba in the 9th century. Bobastro, in addition to its liturgical function, symbolized resistance against Islamic power, leaving an architectural and historical legacy that reflects the tensions and cultural influences of the time.

[ 4 ] Therefore, only two examples of Mozarabic architecture have survived in Muslim territory: The Church of Bobastro : rock temple located in the place known as Mesas de Villaverde , in Ardales ( Málaga ).

The Church of Santa María de Melque : located in proximity to La Puebla de Montalbán ( Toledo ).

Mozarabic in the Kingdom of León [ edit ] Vegetable figures of Arab influence in San Miguel de Escalada Mozarabic art in the Kingdom of León is characterized by being the best preserved and most sophisticated of this period, reflecting cultural and stylistic contributions from the Caliphate of Córdoba . These influences are evident in the perfectly executed horseshoe arches with alfiz , the elaborate spatial articulations, the preference for columns as supporting elements, and the interior wall paintings in the Andalusian style.

[ 5 ] - San Miguel de Escalada (León) - Santiago de Peñalba (León) - Santo Tomás de las Ollas (León) - San Cebrián de Mazote (Valladolid) - San Millán de Suso (La Rioja) - Santa María de Wamba (Valladolid) - San Salvador de Tabara (Zamora) - Chapel of San Miguel de Celanova (Orense) - Santa María de Lebeña (Cantabria) - Hermitage of San Román de Moroso (Cantabria) Repopulation churches difficult to classify or transitional [ edit ] Pictorial interior of San Baudelio de Berlanga These churches and hermitages exhibit hybrid characteristics, combining Mozarabic elements in temples of Visigothic origin and, in many cases, with later additions during the Romanesque period. A standout example is the hermitage of San Baudelio de Berlanga in Soria , the most enigmatic of this group, notable for its unique structure with a central column supporting a palm-shaped vault and its mural paintings.

- San Baudelio de Berlanga (Soria) - Sant Quirze de Pedret (Barcelona) - Santa Maria de Marquet (Barcelona) - Church of Sant Cristòfol (Barcelona) - Sant Julià de Boada (Girona) - Santa Maria de Matadars (Barcelona) Mozarabic painting [ edit ] Codex Biblicus Legionensis Mozarabic painting stands out for its contribution to the religious illuminated manuscripts , with the Beatus manuscripts being among its most significant achievements. Characteristics of Mozarabic painting include vibrant and striking colors, especially intense yellow, figures with a sometimes primitive and childlike style, calligraphic elements, fantastical animals, ornamental letters formed with human figures, and architectural motifs of horseshoe arches and whimsical interlacing. This style evolved from an initial Byzantine-Merovingian influence to an Islamic-Carolingian character, incorporating elements from the Carolingian school and Islamic arabesques.

Prominent examples of Mozarabic painting include the Morgan Beatus , Tábara Beatus , Valcavado Beatus , and Gerona Beatus . Additionally, the León Bible of 920 and the León Bible of 960 are notable, with the latter considered one of the best-documented Mozarabic Bibles.

Mozarabic sculpture [ edit ] Stone block from San Cebrián de Mazote (10th century) Mozarabic art sculpture is characterized by its flat nature, typically carved in bevel, following techniques used in earlier periods. Common themes are often of a vegetal and geometric nature, with few examples of figurative representations. This artistic expression is mainly found in capitals , with notable works of high quality such as those in San Miguel de Escalada or Santiago de Peñalba .

A distinctive feature of this era is the decoration of stone or wooden corbels supporting the roof overhang in various constructions. These corbels display decorative motifs, usually composed of geometric drawings inscribed in lobes, contributing to the unique stylistic identity of Mozarabic sculpture.

However, surviving sculpture from this period is scarce, with a notable exception being a rare bas-relief in San Cebrián de Mazote. Additionally, sculptural elements from San Millán de la Cogolla, such as ivories including the arms of a cross and a portable altar, have been found, highlighting the influence of Cordoban Caliphal art.

Mozarabic or repoblación [ edit ] Following the publication of Francisco Javier Simonet's work on the Mozarabs of Spain in 1897 and Manuel Gómez-Moreno 's monograph on Mozarabic Churches in 1919, churches constructed in Christian territories from the late 9th to early 11th centuries were attributed the Mozarabic character. The term "Mozarabic" was employed to describe the architecture and related art. Despite gaining widespread acceptance, modern historiography has raised questions about the term "Mozarabic," suggesting alternatives such as " repopulation art " or "Leonese art." This has led to academic controversies regarding the most appropriate designation for this period. Despite these debates, the term "Mozarabic art" continues to be the most commonly used in academia and cultural discourse.

Gallery [ edit ] San Baudelio de Berlanga, Soria .

Santa María de Lebeña, Cantabria .

San Juan de la Peña, Aragón León Antiphonary Folio (11th century, León Cathedral) Mozarabic arches of Santiago de Peñalba ( León ) Inside of San Millán de Suso ( La Rioja ) Santa María de Lebeña ( Cantabria ) Painting: combat elephant , from San Baudelio de Berlanga ( Soria ) Entry of Christ into Jerusalem , from San Baudelio de Berlanga ( Soria ), now in Indianapolis Art from the Escorial Beatus Leonese kingdom's interpretation of the Solomon's coronation from the 12th-century bible of San Isidoro de León, made in 1162.

Further reading [ edit ] The Art of medieval Spain, A.D. 500-1200 . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1993.

ISBN 0870996851 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b Castillo, Alejandro Villa del (2017-11-27).

"Talleres escultóricos itinerantes en el Altomedievo hispano: el llamado 'Grupo Mozárabe Leonés' " .

Arqueología y Territorio Medieval (in Spanish).

24 : 151– 184.

doi : 10.17561/aytm.v24i0.5 .

ISSN 2386-5423 .

^ Regueras Grande, Fernando (2018).

"Promotores, clasicismo y estilo en el arte mozárabe leonés" .

Brigecio: Revista de estudios de Benavente y sus tierras (28): 27– 45.

ISSN 1697-5804 .

^ Caballero Chica, Javier (2017-12-13).

"Santiago de Peñalba y los influjos Hispano-Musulmanes" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "LAS IGLESIAS DE BOBASTRO" .

Turismo Prerrománico (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 2024-12-27 .

^ Castillo, Alejandro Villa del (2017-11-27).

"Talleres escultóricos itinerantes en el Altomedievo hispano: el llamado 'Grupo Mozárabe Leonés' " .

Arqueología y Territorio Medieval (in Spanish).

24 : 151– 184.

doi : 10.17561/aytm.v24i0.5 .

ISSN 2386-5423 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mozarabic art .

v t e Architecture of Spain Styles Megalithic Iberian Celtic Celtiberian Roman Visigothic Asturian Andalusi Mozarabic Repoblación Mudéjar First Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Catalan Gothic Isabelline Valencian Gothic Cisneros Plateresque Renaissance Purism Herrerian Baroque Churrigueresque Neoclassical Rococo Modernisme Valencian Art Nouveau Noucentisme Neo-Mudéjar Buildings and structures Roman sites Alcázars Alcazabas Cantabrian defensive towers Castles Castros Cathedrals Hórreos Lighthouses Llotjes Monasteries Royal sites Windmills Airports Indoor arenas Museums Stadiums Tallest buildings and structures Destroyed heritage Other Architects Andalusian patio Andalusian White Towns Aragonese Mudéjar Catalan vault Gaudí buildings Spanish Colonial architecture Alhóndiga Alqueria Artesonado Azulejo Baserri Cabaña pasiega Casa montañesa Casona montañesa Corral de comedias Cortijo Finca Estipite Hacienda Masia Mirador Palloza Pazo Real Spanish garden Yeseria Category v t e Portuguese architecture Styles Romanesque Gothic Manueline Renaissance Plain Baroque Rococo Pombaline Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Summer architecture Soft Portuguese style Structures Airports Bridges Castles Cathedrals Football stadiums Hospitals Reservoirs and dams Tallest buildings and structures Elements Azulejo Gilding Lioz Pavement Colonial Portuguese Colonial architecture Sino-Portuguese architecture Sobrado Seven Wonders of Portuguese Origin in the World Others Architects Monuments Housing IGESPAR Seven Wonders of Portugal Category Portuguese Renaissance v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mozarabic_art_and_architecture&oldid=1302757954 " Categories : Spanish art Portuguese art Mozarabic architecture Culture of al-Andalus Mozarabic art and architecture Christianity in Spain Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 09:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mozarabic art and architecture 14 languages Add topic

