Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works in the collection 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Little Astronomy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collection of minor Ancient Greek astronomical works Little Astronomy ( Greek : Μικρὸς Ἀστρονομούμενος Mikrós Astronomoúmenos ) is a collection of minor works in Ancient Greek mathematics and astronomy dating from the 4th to 2nd century BCE that were probably used as an astronomical curriculum starting around the 2nd century CE. In the astronomy of the medieval Islamic world , with a few additions, the collection became known as the Middle Books ( Arabic : كتاب المتوسطات Kitāb al-mutawassiṭāt ), mathematical preparation for Claudius Ptolemy 's Almagest , intended for students who had already studied Euclid's Elements .

[ 1 ] Works in the collection [ edit ] The works contained in the collection are: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Spherics by Theodosius of Bithynia : On spherical geometry , in the style of the Elements .

On the Moving Sphere by Autolycus of Pitane : On the movements of points and arcs on a sphere as it rotates on its axis.

Optics by Euclid : On various effects involving propagation of light, including shadows, parallax, and perspective.

Phaenomena by Euclid:  A treatise in 18 propositions, each dealing with important arcs on the celestial sphere .

On Habitations by Theodosius: Description of the appearance of the sky as seen from different places on earth.

On Days and Nights by Theodosius: A treatise in 31 propositions on the lengths of days and nights at different times of the year.

On the Sizes and Distances by Aristarchus of Samos : On the size of the Sun and Moon in the sky.

On Risings and Settings by Autolycus: On the relationship between the rising and setting of stars throughout the year.

On Ascensions by Hypsicles : A treatise on arithmetic progressions used to calculate approximate times for the signs of the Zodiac to rise above the horizon.

In Arabic translation as the Middle Books , additional works, also originally written in Ancient Greek, were often included: [ 1 ] Spherics by Menelaus of Alexandria : A treatise on the geometry of spherical triangles, which only survives in Arabic translation Data by Euclid Various works by or attributed to Archimedes: On the Sphere and Cylinder , On the Measurement of the Circle , Book of Lemmas Although these works are all generally found together in numerous medieval Byzantine and Arabic manuscripts, it is unclear whether this specific set of works was originally intentionally compiled together as a collection.

[ 1 ] All of the works are elementary treatises that would have been useful in a classroom setting, which increased their chance of survival through continuous use by students, and may have resulted in several of them being gathered together multiple different times independently.

[ 1 ] The earliest known author to mention the existence of a discrete "Little Astronomy" collection by name is Pappus of Alexandria , in the 4th century CE, who devotes book VI of his Collection to a commentary on selected works by Theodosius, Menelaus, Aristarchus, Euclid, and Autolycus.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] The oldest manuscript in which all of the extant Greek works are preserved together is Codex Vaticanus Graecus 204, which dates from the 9th or 10th century CE.

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Evans 1998 .

^ Roughan 2023 .

^ a b Little 2025 , p. 4.

References [ edit ] Evans, James (1998).

The History & Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford University Press. "The Little Astronomy ", pp. 89–91.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 .

Little, John B. (2025).

Book VI of the Mathematical Collection of Pappus of Alexandria: Comprising solutions of difficulties in the "Little Astronomy" . Holy Cross Bookshelf.

Roughan, Christine (2023).

The Little Astronomy and Middle Books between the 2nd and 13th Centuries CE: Transmissions of Astronomical Curricula (PhD thesis). New York University.

Further reading [ edit ] Turner, AW (1936).

"Greek Astronomers During the Fourth Century B. C." Popular Astronomy .

44 : 180– 187.

Bibcode : 1936PA.....44..180T .

Turner, AW (1936).

"Greek Astronomers During the Third Century B. C." Popular Astronomy .

44 : 313– 319.

Bibcode : 1936PA.....44..313T .

Turner, AW (1937).

"Greek Astronomers During the Second and First Centuries B. C." Popular Astronomy .

45 : 81– 85.

Ragep, F. Jamil.

"Astronomy" .

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Brill.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_22652 .

External links [ edit ] Codex Vaticanus Graecus 204 at the Digital Vatican Library MS Or 45 ( Alternate viewer ) at the Columbia University Rare Books and Manuscripts Library MS Or 306 at Columbia ( Alternate viewer ) Ptolemaeus Arabus et Latinus , a project dedicated to the edition and study of the Arabic and Latin versions of Ptolemy’s astronomical and astrological texts and related material.

v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Little_Astronomy&oldid=1297180580 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomical works Ancient Greek mathematical works Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 16:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Little Astronomy Add languages Add topic

