Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General Toggle General subsection 1.1 Language 1.2 Education 1.3 Religion 2 In the LGBTQ+ community 3 Criticism of the binary Toggle Criticism of the binary subsection 3.1 Stereotypes 3.2 Cisnormativity 4 Discrimination Toggle Discrimination subsection 4.1 Healthcare 5 In media 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Gender binary 36 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu मराठी Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Classification of sex and gender into two opposite forms "Binarism" redirects here. For other uses, see Binary (disambiguation) .

This article is about gender from a sociological perspective. For further information, see Sex and gender distinction . For the discrimination based on gender, see Anti-gender movement .

The gender binary in everyday life Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e The gender binary (also known as gender binarism ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is the classification of gender into two distinct forms of masculine and feminine , whether by social system , cultural belief , or both simultaneously.

[ A ] Most cultures use a gender binary, having two genders ( boys / men and girls / women ).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In this binary model, gender and sexuality may be assumed by default to align with one's sex assigned at birth . This may include certain expectations of how one dresses themselves, one's behavior, sexual orientation , names or pronouns, which restroom one uses, and other qualities. For example, when a male is born, gender binarism may assume that the male will be masculine in appearance, have masculine character traits and behaviors, as well as having a heterosexual attraction to females.

[ 7 ] These expectations may reinforce negative attitudes , biases , and discrimination towards people who display expressions of gender variance or nonconformity or those whose gender identity is incongruent with their birth sex.

[ 8 ] Discrimination against transgender or gender nonconforming people can take various forms, from physical or sexual assault, homicide, limited access to public spaces, in healthcare and more. The gender binary has been critiqued by scholars of intersectionality , some of whom have suggested that it is a structure that maintains patriarchal and white supremacist norms as part of an interlocking hierarchical system of gender and race.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] General The term gender binary describes the system in which a society allocates its members into one of two sets of gender roles and gender identities , which assign attributes based on their biological sex (chromosomal and genitalia).

[ 12 ] In the case of intersex people, the gender binary system is limited. Those who are intersex have rare genetic differences which can give them the sex organs of both sexes or otherwise non-normative genitalia and may have difficulties fitting into the gender binary system.

[ 13 ] Scholars who study the gender binary from an intersectional feminist and critical race theory perspective [ 14 ] argue that during the process of European colonization in North and South America, a binary system of gender was enforced as a means of maintaining patriarchal norms and upholding European nationalism .

[ 15 ] The binary system has also been critiqued as scholars claim that biological sex and gender differ from one another; with sex relating to biological and chromosomal differences between males, females, and intersex people, while gender instead is a result of sociocultural socialization.

[ 16 ] Traditional gender roles are influenced and preserved by the media, religion, mainstream education, political systems, cultural systems, and social systems.

[ 17 ] Language In English, some nouns (e.g., boy), honorific titles (e.g., Miss), occupational titles (e.g., actress), and personal pronouns (e.g., she, his) are gendered, and they fall into a male/female binary.

[ 18 ] Personal pronouns in the English language are typically associated with either men ( he/him ) or women ( she/her ), which excludes people who do not identify as a man or a woman.

[ 19 ] However, gender-neutral pronouns , such as singular they pronouns (they/them) are sometimes used by nonbinary and gender nonconforming individuals as well as in situations where the gender is unknown.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] A 2019 study found that "close to 1 in 5 Americans personally know someone who uses gender-neutral pronouns such as 'they' instead of 'he' or " 'she ' ".

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In addition, people may use neopronouns in place of other personal pronouns.

[ 20 ] Examples of neopronouns include xe / xem , ze /zim, and sie / hir .

[ 20 ] According to Hyde and colleagues, children raised within English-speaking (and other gendered-language) environments come to view gender as a binary category.

[ 23 ] They state that for children who learn English as their primary language in the United States, adults' use of the gender binary to explicitly sort individuals (i.e. "boys" and "girls" bathrooms and sports teams), and not just the presence of gender markers, causes gender biases.

[ 23 ] Those biases can appear in information processing, and can affect attitudes and behavior directed at those both inside and outside of the gender binary language system.

[ 24 ] An example of this would be the use of gendered language in job descriptions and advertisements: those who are excluded by the language used may not apply for the position, leading to a segregated field of work.

[ 24 ] For example, women could be systemically excluded from a workplace or career that exclusively uses the pronouns "he" to advertise new job openings.

[ 24 ] The exclusive use of "she" and "he" (binary pronouns) can also systemically exclude those who do not fit within the gender binary and may prefer gender neutral language.

[ 24 ] Language is constantly in flux, particularly language concerning the gender binary. For example, in Sweden a proposal was published in a national newspaper to expand the personal pronouns of hon (she) and han (he) to also include hen .

[ 25 ] The article was met with a variety of reactions. Many argued in support that hen could operate as a pronoun for nonbinary individuals who preferred it, and would make language more gender fair and be able to avoid binary labels imposed on things like workplace advertisements.

[ 25 ] Others had the opinion that the use of hen would be inconsequential in the advance of gender equality in Sweden, and would be confusing for children.

[ 25 ] The inclusion of hen challenges preconceived notions of what gender and language can mean together, and proposes new possibilities of how gender is defined outside of a binary system.

[ 25 ] Along with using the gender binary to categorize human bodies, cultures that obey the binary may also use it to label things, places, and ideas. For example, in American culture, people identify playing sports as a masculine activity and shopping as a feminine activity; blue is a color for boys while pink is for girls; care work is a feminine profession while management is associated with masculinity, etc.

Some languages gender their words into masculine and feminine forms, such as French or Spanish.

[ 26 ] Education The gender binary is introduced unconsciously at a young age, often within familial and school settings. For example, those considered to be girls are expected to be emotional, affectionate, talk excessively, complain more than average, and be picky about their surroundings and appearances, while boys are expected to be cruel, dominant, and act as a leader in group settings.

[ 27 ] These characteristic while stereotypes, can be encouraged and influenced through objects like toys (e.g. baby dolls introducing maternal and domestic labor) but also in schools. Girls are often expected to excel in English classes, while boys are expected to succeed in P.E. and STEM courses.

[ 27 ] Early childhood stereotypes like boys being better at math than girls have been linked to the disproportionately small number of women pursuing math related careers, and a general disengagement from math related courses in education.

[ 28 ] There has been an increase in publishing children books targeted at girls to encourage more participation in STEM fields and to dismantle gendered stereotypes taught to children by popular media.

[ 28 ] Religion Major religions often teach a gender binary and act as authorities for gender roles.

[ citation needed ] Many Christians teach that the gender binary is both good and normal, pointing to the gender binary evident in the creation story of the Book of Genesis in the Bible , where it is declared that, "God created man in His own image; in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Carol S. Wimmer suggests that the Genesis creation narrative implies a linguistic gender binary of "form, essence, or purpose of role" but not of "sexuality, sexual function, or sexual activity".

[ 31 ] In the LGBTQ+ community Gender binarism may create institutionalized structures of power, and individuals who identify outside traditional gender binaries may experience discrimination and harassment . Many LGBTQ+ people, notably youth activist groups, advocate against gender binarism. Many individuals within the LGBTQ+ community report an internal hierarchy of power status. Some who do not identify within a binary system experience being at the bottom of the hierarchy. Different variables such as race, ethnicity, age, gender, and more can lower or raise one's perceived power.

[ 32 ] There are many individuals and several subcultures that can be considered exceptions to the gender binary or specific transgender identities worldwide. In addition to individuals whose bodies are naturally intersex , there are also specific ceremonial and social roles that are seen as third gender . The hijra of South Asia and some Two-Spirit Indigenous Peoples of North America are often cited as examples. Feminist philosopher María Lugones argues that Western colonizers imposed their dualistic ideas of gender on indigenous peoples, replacing pre-existing indigenous concepts.

[ 33 ] In the contemporary West , non-binary or genderqueer people do not adhere to the gender binary by refusing terms like "male" and "female", as they do not identify as either. Transgender people have a unique place in relation to the gender binary. In some cases, attempting to conform to societal expectations for their gender, transgender individuals may opt for surgery, hormones, or both.

[ 34 ] Ball culture is an example of how the LGBT community interprets and rejects the gender binary.

Paris is Burning , a film directed by Jennie Livingston , depicts New York's ballroom scene in the late 1980s.

[ 35 ] To compete in the balls, men, women, and everyone in between create costumes and walk in their respective categories: Butch Queen , Transmale Realness, and Femme Queen to name a few.

[ 35 ] During the balls, the gender binary is thrown out the window, and the people competing are allowed to express themselves however they interpret the category.

[ 35 ] Within the scenes of people competing in various categories there is a narrative that describes life outside the gender binary in New York. Since the film came out, there has been a decline in the ballroom scene due to the rise of media and the appropriation of the drag culture.

[ 36 ] Criticism of the binary Gender neutral restroom sign Some scholars have contested the existence of a clear gender binary.

Judith Lorber explains the problem of failing to question dividing people into these two groups "even though they often find more significant within-group differences than between-group differences." [ 37 ] Lorber argues that this corroborates the fact that the gender binary is arbitrary and leads to false expectations of both men and women. Instead, there is growing support for the possibility of utilizing additional categories that compare people without "prior assumptions about who is like whom".

[ 37 ] This idea of a gender as a binary is thought to be an oppressive means of reflecting differential power dynamics.

[ 38 ] Stereotypes Gendered stereotypes maintain the gender binary and the systems of power within it.

[ 39 ] People outside of the gender binary also experience harmful stereotypes, and are both affected by cisgender stereotypes and biases regarding being transgender or gender nonconforming. For example, the labels "mentally ill" and "confused" are stereotypes uniquely assigned to transgender individuals by cisgender people.

[ 40 ] Interesting enough, transgender children themselves appear to endorse less gender stereotypes at a young age and are tolerant of larger levels of gender nonconformity.

[ 27 ] Often, stereotypes applied by cisgender individuals to transgender and gender nonconforming people are a combination of stereotypes surrounding biological sex and broader stereotypes about transgender identities. These result in conflicting and false images that directly and violently harm trans people; a study in conducted in 2021 found that cis individuals would stereotype a trans-man as "aggressive like cis-men, weak like cis-women, and mentally ill like trans-women." [ 40 ] Transphobic stereotypes like these contribute to violence against trans and gender nonconforming communities, where transgender individuals are physically assaulted or killed, misgendered, denied access to spaces that affirm their identity, and are legally blocked from changing their identifies on government and other official documents.

[ 40 ] Discrimination and assault rates are even higher for trans and gender nonconforming people of color than their white counterparts. In 2017, a study found that it was 2.7 times more likely for BIPOC trans and gender nonconforming individuals to be sexually or physically assaulted and intimidated than white transgender and gender nonconforming people.

[ 39 ] Cisnormativity Cisnormativity is a product of the gender binary that assumes people are cisgender, meaning that their gender identity matches their sex assigned at birth.

[ 21 ] Both binary and nonbinary transgender individuals are excluded from this ideology.

[ 21 ] This leads to individuals outside the gender binary experiencing disparities in health and violence at individual, interpersonal, and institutional levels due to their non-normative status.

[ 41 ] Discrimination The gender binary, and especially unwavering belief in the binary, creates a hierarchal system in which those who are gender nonconforming, transgender, non-binary and so forth may be pathologized, and be viewed as abnormal and disrupting the "status quo" and may be discriminated and harmed as a result.

[ 16 ] Healthcare Gender binarism poses limitations on the adequacy of medical care provided to gender-nonconforming patients. There is a large gap in medical literature on non-binary populations who have unique healthcare needs.

[ 42 ] A lack of cultural competency about nonbinary gender identities among providers contributes to nonbinary transgender individuals facing greater health disparities than both binary transgender and cisgender individuals.

[ 43 ] In media There are many public figures that have opposed the gender binary by wearing clothing not typically associated with their perceived gender or their gender identity, such as Prince , David Bowie , Kurt Cobain , Jaden Smith , Ruby Rose , Rain Dove , Billy Porter , and Harry Styles .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Public figures that identify as of non-binary gender include Sam Smith , Indya Moore , Brigette Lundy-Paine , King Princess , Jonathan Van Ness , Bex Taylor-Klaus , Amandla Stenberg , Demi Lovato , and more .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] A popular figure in the music industry, Harry Styles' appearance on the cover of American Vogue in 2020 was popular for his rejection of gendered clothing norms.

[ 50 ] Styles rejected the implicit separation of feminine and masculine by wearing both a dress, a clothing item associated with women, as well as a blazer, which is associated with men for the Vogue cover.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] His embrace of both clothing associated with women and men is a rejection of the gender binary.

[ 51 ] See also LGBTQ portal Androgyny – Having both male and female characteristics Anti-gender movement – International movement opposed to the concept of gender identity Butch and femme – Masculine and feminine identities in lesbians Dyad – Group of two people Effeminacy – Feminine qualities in boys or men Endosex – Opposite of intersex Complementarianism – Theological view on gender roles Gender dysphoria – Mental distress due to gender incongruence Gender essentialism – Attribution of intrinsic qualities to women and men Gender in Bugis society Gender polarization – Socioligical concept by Sandra Bem Gender policing – Enforcement of normative gender expressions Postgenderism – Social, political and cultural movement advocating for the elimination of gender in humans Sexual inversion – Outdated term referring to homosexuality Notes ^ In this context the word "binary" often functions as a noun , unlike several other uses of the word , where it is an adjective .

References ^ Marjorie Garber (25 November 1997).

Vested Interests: Cross-dressing and Cultural Anxiety . Psychology Press. pp. 2, 10, 14– 16, 47.

ISBN 978-0-415-91951-7 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 .

^ Claudia Card (1994).

Adventures in Lesbian Philosophy . Indiana University Press. p. the 127 .

ISBN 978-0-253-20899-6 .

^ Rosenblum, Darren (2000). " 'Trapped' in Sing-Sing: Transgendered Prisoners Caught in the Gender Binarism".

Michigan Journal of Gender & Law .

6 .

SSRN 897562 .

^ Kevin L. Nadal, The SAGE Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender (2017, ISBN 978-1-4833-8427-6 ), page 401: "Most cultures currently construct their societies based on the understanding of gender binary—the two gender categorizations (male and female). Such societies divide their population based on biological sex assigned to individuals at birth to begin the process of gender socialization." ^ Sigelman, Carol K.; Rider, Elizabeth A. (14 March 2017).

Life-Span Human Development . Cengage Learning. p. 385.

ISBN 978-1-337-51606-8 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

^ Maddux, James E.; Winstead, Barbara A. (11 July 2019).

Psychopathology: Foundations for a Contemporary Understanding . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-64787-1 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

^ Keating, Anne.

"glbtq >> literature >> Gender" .

www.glbtq.com . glbtq: An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Culture. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 2 April 2015 .

^ Hill, Darryl B.; Willoughby, Brian L. B. (October 2015). "The Development and Validation of the Genderism and Transphobia Scale".

Sex Roles .

53 ( 7– 8): 531– 544.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-005-7140-x .

ISSN 0360-0025 .

S2CID 143438444 .

^ Scaptura, Maria N.; Hayes., Brittany E. (2023). "The Intersection of Race, Gender, and Extremist Violence.". In Dawson, Myrna; Vega, Saide Mobayed (eds.).

The Routledge International Handbook on Femicide and Feminicide .

^ Belkhir, Jean Ait; Barnett, Bernice McNair (March 2017).

"Race, Gender and Class Intersectionality" .

Race, Gender & Class .

8 (3): 157– 174.

ISSN 1082-8354 .

JSTOR 41674988 .

^ Crenshaw, Kimberlé (1 March 2017).

"On Intersectionality: Essential Writings" .

Faculty Books .

^ Lorber, Judith; Moore, Lisa Jean (2007).

Gendered bodies : feminist perspectives . Los Angeles, Calif.: Roxbury Pub. Co. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-933220-41-3 .

OCLC 64453299 .

^ Fausto-Sterling, Anne (2000). "The Five Sexes, Revisited".

The Sciences .

40 (4). New York Academy of Sciences: 18– 23.

doi : 10.1002/j.2326-1951.2000.tb03504.x .

PMID 12569934 .

^ Carbado, Devon W.; Crenshaw, Kimberlé Williams; Mays, Vickie M.; Tomlinson, Barbara (2013).

"INTERSECTIONALITY" .

Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race .

10 (2): 303– 312.

doi : 10.1017/s1742058x13000349 .

ISSN 1742-058X .

PMC 4181947 .

PMID 25285150 .

^ Narayan, Yasmeen (2 October 2018).

"Intersectionality, nationalisms, biocoloniality" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

42 (8): 1225– 1244.

doi : 10.1080/01419870.2018.1518536 .

ISSN 0141-9870 .

S2CID 149928000 .

^ a b Darling, Marsha J.Tyson. "Living on the Margins Beyond Gender Binaries: What Are the Challenges to Securing Rights." Public Integrity , vol. 23, no. 6, Nov. 2021, pp. 573–94.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.1080/10999922.2020.1825180 ^ Johnson, Joy; Repta, Robin (2002).

"Sex and Gender: Beyond the Binaries" (PDF) .

Designing and Conducting Gender, Sex, & Health Research : 17– 39 . Retrieved 2 April 2015 .

^ Gustafsson Sendén, Marie; Bäck, Emma A.; Lindqvist, Anna (2015).

"Introducing a gender-neutral pronoun in a natural gender language: the influence of time on attitudes and behavior" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

6 : 893.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00893 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 4486751 .

PMID 26191016 .

^ a b Lab, Purdue Writing.

"Gendered Pronouns & Singular "They" // Purdue Writing Lab" .

Purdue Writing Lab . Retrieved 2 May 2022 .

^ a b c "Gender-Neutral Pronouns 101: Everything You've Always Wanted to Know" .

them . 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2022 .

^ a b c Worthen, Meredith G. F. (1 September 2021).

"Why Can't You Just Pick One? The Stigmatization of Non-binary/Genderqueer People by Cis and Trans Men and Women: An Empirical Test of Norm-Centered Stigma Theory" .

Sex Roles .

85 (5): 343– 356.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-020-01216-z .

ISSN 1573-2762 .

S2CID 233903735 .

^ "Should your email say if you're he, she or they?" .

BBC News . 19 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2022 .

^ a b Hyde, Janet Shibley; Bigler, Rebecca S.; Joel, Daphna; Tate, Charlotte Chucky; van Anders, Sari M. (February 2019).

"The future of sex and gender in psychology: Five challenges to the gender binary" .

American Psychologist .

74 (2): 171– 193.

doi : 10.1037/amp0000307 .

ISSN 1935-990X .

PMID 30024214 .

^ a b c d Keener, Emily, and Kourtney Kotvas. "Beyond He and She: Does the Singular Use of 'They, Them, Their' Function Generically as Inclusive Pronouns for Cisgender Men and Women?" Gender Issues , vol. 40, no. 1, Mar. 2023, pp. 23–43.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.1007/s12147-022-09297-8 .

^ a b c d Vergoossen, Hellen P. ..1988.

Breaking the Binary: Attitudes towards and Cognitive Effects of Gender-Neutral Pronouns . Jan. 2021.

EBSCOhost , search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=edsswe&AN=edsswe.oai.DiVA.org.su.195457&site=eds-live&scope=site.

^ Wade, Lisa; Ferree, Myra Marx (2018).

Gender: Ideas, Interactions, Institutions, Second Edition . pp.

11– 12.

ISBN 978-0-393-67428-6 .

^ a b c deMayo, Benjamin, et al. "Endorsement of Gender Stereotypes in Gender Diverse and Cisgender Adolescents and Their Parents." PLoS ONE , vol. 17, no. 6, June 2022, pp. 1–16.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0269784 ^ a b Block, Katharina, et al. "Exposure to Stereotype-Relevant Stories Shapes Children's Implicit Gender Stereotypes." PLoS ONE , vol. 17, no. 8, Aug. 2022, pp. 1–18.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0271396 .

^ Schwarzwalder, Rob (31 May 2016).

"Sexual Madness and the Image of God" .

Ethics & Religious Liberty Commission . Retrieved 17 December 2019 .

^ Yuan, Christopher (14 December 2019).

"He Made Them Male and Female: Sex, Gender, and the Image of God" .

Desiring God . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Wimmer, Carol S. (10 June 2021).

"Male and Female in Genesis 1" .

Carol S. Wimmer . Retrieved 1 April 2024 .

^ Farmer, Laura Boyd; Byrd, Rebekah (2015). "Genderism in the LGBTQQIA Community: An Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis".

Journal of LGBT Issues in Counseling .

9 (4): 288– 310.

doi : 10.1080/15538605.2015.1103679 .

S2CID 146423757 .

^ Lugones, María (12 December 2017). "Heterosexualism and the Colonial / Modern Gender System".

Hypatia .

22 (1): 186– 209.

JSTOR 4640051 .

^ Cromwell, Jason (1999).

Transmen and FTMs: Identities, Bodies, Genders, and Sexualities . Chicago, Illinois: University of Illinois. p. 511.

ISBN 978-0-252-06825-6 .

^ a b c Livingston, Jennie; Xtravaganza, Angie; Corey, Dorian; Dupree, Paris; LaBeija, Pepper; Ninja, Willi.

Paris Is Burning .

OCLC 1269377435 .

^ Green, Jesse (18 April 1993).

"Paris Has Burned" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 21 April 2022 .

^ a b Lorber, Judith. "Believing is Seeing: Biology as Ideology." In The Gendered Society Reader, edited by Michael S. Kimmel, Amy Aronson, and Amy Kaler, 11-18. Toronto, ON: Oxford University Press, 2011.

^ Boydston, Jeanne (November 2008). "Gender as a Question of Historical Analysis".

Gender & History .

20 (3): 558– 583.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0424.2008.00537.x .

ISSN 0953-5233 .

S2CID 145684407 .

^ a b Jacques, Sarah A., et al. "Perceptions of Nonbinary Identifying Individuals: Through the Lens of Gender and Race." Psi Chi Journal of Psychological Research , vol. 27, no. 1, Spring 2022, pp. 46–58.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.24839/2325-7342.JN27.1.46 .

^ a b c Howansky, Kristina, et al. "(Trans)Gender Stereotypes and the Self: Content and Consequences of Gender Identity Stereotypes." Self & Identity , vol. 20, no. 4, June 2021, pp. 478–95.

EBSCOhost , doi : 10.1080/15298868.2019.1617191 .

^ LeMaster, Benny (2017).

"Unlearning the Violence of the Normative" .

QED: A Journal in GLBTQ Worldmaking .

4 (2): 123– 130.

doi : 10.14321/qed.4.2.0123 .

ISSN 2327-1574 .

JSTOR 10.14321/qed.4.2.0123 .

S2CID 149243928 .

^ Edmiston, E. Kale; Donald, Cameron A.; Sattler, Alice Rose; Peebles, J. Klint; Ehrenfeld, Jesse M.; Eckstrand, Kristen Laurel (2016).

"Opportunities and Gaps in Primary Care Preventative Health Services for Transgender Patients: A Systemic Review" .

Transgender Health .

1 (1): 216– 230.

doi : 10.1089/trgh.2016.0019 .

ISSN 2380-193X .

PMC 5367473 .

PMID 28861536 .

^ Hana, Tommy; Butler, Kat; Young, L Trevor; Zamora, Gerardo; Lam, June Sing Hong (1 April 2021).

"Transgender health in medical education" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the World Health Organization .

99 (4): 296– 303.

doi : 10.2471/BLT.19.249086 .

ISSN 0042-9686 .

PMC 8085635 .

PMID 33953447 .

^ Weikle, Brandie (9 January 2022).

"Gender-fluid dressing could lead to renaissance in fashion, says advocate" .

CBC News . Retrieved 28 April 2022 .

^ "Jaden Smith Opens Up About Being A Gender Neutral Style Icon To 'GQ' & It's Truly Inspiring" .

Bustle . Retrieved 29 April 2022 .

^ Geffen, Sasha (2020).

Glitter Up the Dark : How Pop Music Broke the Binary . University of Texas Press. pp.

190– 199.

ISBN 978-1-4773-1878-2 .

^ Ahlgrim, Callie.

"14 celebrities who don't identify as either male or female" .

Insider . Retrieved 1 May 2022 .

^ "King Princess Is a Genderqueer Pop Icon for the Next Generation of Queer Youth" .

them . 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 1 May 2022 .

^ "King Princess and Mj Rodriguez on the self-actualizing power of inventing a new persona" .

Document Journal . 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2022 .

^ a b Mowat, Chris (July 2021).

"Forum Introduction: Addressing Gender, Gendering Dress" .

Gender & History .

33 (2): 289– 295.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0424.12539 .

ISSN 0953-5233 .

S2CID 236366247 .

^ a b Brown, Nina Luangrath-.

"Harry Styles: Breaking The Gender Binary" .

The Roar . Retrieved 29 April 2022 .

Further reading binaohan, b.

decolonizing trans/gender 101.

biyuti publishing, 2014.

ISBN 978-0-9937935-1-6 GenderQueer: Voices from Beyond the Sexual Binary (Alyson), ( Joan Nestle , Clair Howell Co-Editors) 2002 ISBN 978-1-55583-730-3 "Pregnant males and pseudopenises: complex sex in the animal kingdom" .

Ars Technica . 9 September 2012.

v t e Gender and sexual identities Gender identities Genders Man Woman Male Female Androgyne Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Femboy Gender bender Gender fluidity Gender neutrality Gender variance Masculine of center Non-binary / genderqueer Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transsexual Third genders and sexes Androgynos Apwint Bakla Binabinaaine Bugis genders Bissu Calabai Calalai Chibados Enaree Eunuch Galli Fa'afafine Fakafifine Femminiello Güevedoce Hijra Kathoey Köçek Koekchuch Lhamana Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Nádleehi Nullo Palopa Sipiniq Sworn virgin Travesti Tumtum Two-spirit Vakasalewalewa Winkte X-gender Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Alternative labels Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Down-low Fictosexual Gay Gay men Gray asexual Demisexual Aegosexual Heteroflexible Khanith Lesbian women Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polysexual Queer Questioning Same gender loving Takatāpui Social aspects Sociosexuality Antisexuality Asociality Homosociality Heterosociality Other Achillean Allosexuality Analloeroticism Androphilia and gynephilia Aromanticism Attraction to transgender people Kinsey scale Monosexuality Plurisexuality Postgenderism Romantic orientation Sapphism See also Aphobia Acephobia Arophobia Anti-gender movement Discrimination against non-binary people Discrimination against transgender men Discrimination against transgender women Gender assignment Gender modality Gender roles Gender self-identification Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people Mental health of LGBTQ people Queer heterosexuality Right to personal identity Sex as a biological variable Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Split attraction model Suicide among LGBTQ people Transgender archaeology Transgender inequality Transmisogyny Transphobia v t e Outline of human sexuality Physiology and biology Clitoral erection Erogenous zones Insemination Intersex Libido Nocturnal emission Orgasm Female and male ejaculation Pelvic thrust Penile erection Pre-ejaculate Pregnancy Sexual arousal Sexual response cycle Sexual stimulation Vaginal lubrication Health and education Birth control Condom Male contraceptive Masters and Johnson Obesity and sexuality Reproductive medicine Andrology Gynaecology Urology Safe sex Sex education Sex therapy ( PLISSIT model ) Sexology Sexual dysfunction Erectile dysfunction Hypersexuality Hyposexuality Sexual medicine Sexual surrogate Sexually transmitted infection Identity and diversity Gender binary Gender identity Men who have sex with men Sexual identity Sexual orientation Women who have sex with women Law Age of consent Criminal transmission of HIV Child sexual abuse Incest Indecent exposure Obscenity Sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Rape Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual misconduct Sexual slavery Sexual violence Revenge pornography History Blue Movie Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist sex wars Golden Age of Porn History of erotic depictions Sexual revolution Relationships and society Anarchism and love/sex Coital imperative Extramarital sex Family planning Flirting Free love Marriage Modesty Orgasm imperative Orgasm gap Polyamory Premarital sex Promiscuity Romance Sex-positive movement Sexual abstinence Sexual addiction Sexual attraction Sexual capital Sexual ethics Sexual objectification Sexual repression Sexual slang Split attraction model By country Ancient Rome China India Japan Philippines South Korea United States Sexual activities Conventional sex Anal sex Bareback BDSM Child sex Creampie Edging Erotic sexual denial Facial Fetishism Fisting Foot fetishism Footjob Forced orgasm Frot Gang bang Group sex Mammary intercourse Manual sex Anal fingering Fingering Handjob Masturbation Mechanics of sex Nipple stimulation Non-penetrative sex Oral sex 69 Anilingus Cunnilingus Fellatio Irrumatio Paraphilia Pompoir Quickie Sexercise Sex in space Sex positions Sexual fantasy Sexual fetishism Sexual intercourse Foreplay Sexual penetration Sumata Swinging Tribadism Urethral intercourse Urolagnia Virtual sex Cybersex Erotic talk Wet T-shirt contest Sex industry Adult video games Erotica Pornography Film actor Prostitution Sacred Survival sex Red-light district Sex museum Sex shop Sex tourism Child Female Sex worker Sex toy Doll Strip club Webcam model Religion and sexuality Buddhism and Hinduism Tantric sex Christianity and sexual orientation Christian demonology Clerical celibacy Buddhist monasticism Catholic Church Hindu monasticism Jain monasticism Daoism Islam Judaism LGBTQ people LGBTQ-affirming religions Mormonism Sacred prostitution Ancient Greece Thelema Sex magic Human sexuality portal v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gender_binary&oldid=1303669681 " Categories : Dichotomies Gender identity Feminist terminology Feminist theory Queer theory Transgender topics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from August 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 10:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gender binary 36 languages Add topic

