Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Types 3 Zones of glaciers 4 Glacier equilibrium line and ELA 5 Movement Toggle Movement subsection 5.1 Rate of movement 6 Glacial Terminology 7 Glacial deposits Toggle Glacial deposits subsection 7.1 Stratified 7.2 Unstratified 8 See also 9 Notes 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Glaciology 74 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of ice and natural phenomena involving ice This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series of Geophysics Computational Exploration History Outline Electricity Ionosphere Polar wind Thunderstorms Lightning Fluid dynamics Atmospheric science Magnetohydrodynamics Oceanography Turbulence Geodynamics Climate Earth's mantle Exoplanetology Geochemistry Glaciology Planetary science Plate tectonics Tectonics Volcanism Gravity Geodesy Geoid Physical geodesy Magnetism Earth's magnetic field Geomagnetic reversal Magnetosphere Paleomagnetism Solar wind Waves Seismology Spectroscopy Vibration Geophysicists Aki Alfven Anderson Benioff Bowie Dziewonski Forbes Eotvos Gilbert Gutenberg Heiskanen Hotine von Humboldt Jeffreys Kanamori Love Matthews McKenzie Mercalli Molodenskii Munk Press Richter Turcotte Van Allen Vanicek Vening Meinesz Wegener Wilson v t e Lateral moraine on a glacier joining the Gorner Glacier , Zermatt , Swiss Alps . The moraine is the high bank of debris in the top left hand quarter of the image.

Glaciologist Erin Pettit in Antarctica, 2016 Glaciology (from Latin glacies ' frost, ice ' and Ancient Greek λόγος ( logos ) ' subject matter ' ; lit.

' study of ice ' ) is the scientific study of glaciers , or, more generally, ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

Glaciology is an interdisciplinary Earth science that integrates geophysics , geology , physical geography , geomorphology , climatology , meteorology , hydrology , biology , and ecology . The impact of glaciers on people includes the fields of human geography and anthropology . The discoveries of water ice on the Moon , Mars , Europa and Pluto add an extraterrestrial component to the field, which is referred to as "astroglaciology".

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] A glacier is a persistent body of dense ice (a form of rock [ 2 ] ) formed from snow falling and accumulating over a long period of time; glaciers move very slowly, either descending from high mountains, as in valley glaciers, or moving outward from centers of accumulation, as in continental glaciers .

Areas of study within glaciology include glacial history and the reconstruction of past glaciation. A glaciologist is a person who studies glaciers. A glacial geologist studies glacial deposits and glacial erosive features on the landscape. Glaciology and glacial geology are key areas of polar research.

Types [ edit ] A Bylot Island glacier, Sirmilik National Park , Nunavut . This mountain glacier is one of many coming down from the interior ice cap on top of the Byam Martin Mountains .

Glaciers can be identified by their geometry and the relationship to the surrounding topography. There are two general categories of glaciation which glaciologists distinguish: alpine glaciation , accumulations or "rivers of ice" confined to valleys; and continental glaciation , unrestricted accumulations which once covered much of the northern continents.

Alpine – ice flows down the valleys of mountainous areas and forms a tongue of ice moving towards the plains below. Alpine glaciers tend to make topography more rugged by adding and improving the scale of existing features. Various features include large ravines called cirques and arêtes , which are ridges where the rims of two cirques meet.

Continental – an ice sheet found today, only in high latitudes ( Greenland / Antarctica ), thousands of square kilometers in area and thousands of meters thick. These tend to smooth out the landscapes.

Zones of glaciers [ edit ] Accumulation zone – where the formation of ice is faster than its removal.

Ablation (or wastage) zone – when the sum of melting, calving , and evaporation (sublimation) is greater than the amount of snow added each year.

Glacier equilibrium line and ELA [ edit ] The glacier equilibrium line is the line separating the glacial accumulation area above from the ablation area below. 
The equilibrium line altitude (ELA) and its change over the years is a key indicator of the health of a glacier. A long term monitoring of the ELA may be used as indication to climate change .

Movement [ edit ] Khurdopin glacier and Shimshal River, Gilgit-Baltistan , northern Pakistan 2017. Several glaciers flow into the Shimshal Valley, and are prone to blocking the river.  Khurdopin glacier surged in 2016–17, creating a sizable lake.

[ 3 ] Glaciers of Shimsal Valley from space, May 13, 2017. Khurdopin glacier has dammed the Shimshal River, forming a glacial lake . The river has started to carve a path through the toe of the glacier. By early August 2017, the lake had completely drained.

When a glacier is experiencing an accumulation input by precipitation (snow or refreezing rain) that exceeds the output by ablation, the glacier shows a positive glacier mass balance and will advance. Conversely, if the loss of volume (from evaporation, sublimation, melting, and calving) exceeds the accumulation, the glacier shows a negative glacier mass balance and the glacier will melt back. During times in which the volume input to the glacier by precipitation is equivalent to the ice volume lost from calving, evaporation, and melting, the glacier has a steady-state condition.

Some glaciers show periods where the glacier is advancing at an extreme rate, that is typically 100 times faster than what is considered normal, it is referred to as a surging glacier . Surge periods may occur at an interval of 10 to 15 years, e.g. on Svalbard . This is caused mainly due to a long lasting accumulation period on subpolar glaciers frozen to the ground in the accumulation area. When the stress due to the additional volume in the accumulation area increases, the pressure melting point of the ice at its base may be reached, the basal glacier ice will melt, and the glacier will surge on a film of meltwater.

Rate of movement [ edit ] The movement of glaciers is usually slow. Its velocity varies from a few centimeters to a few meters per day. The rate of movement depends upon the factors listed below: Temperature of the ice. A polar glacier shows cold ice with temperatures well below the freezing point from its surface to its base. It is frozen to its bed. A temperate glacier is at a melting point temperature throughout the year, from its surface to its base. This allows the glacier to slide on a thin layer of meltwater. Most glaciers in alpine regions are temperate glaciers.

Gradient of the slope.

Thickness of the glacier [ 4 ] Subglacial water dynamics Glacial Terminology [ edit ] Ablation Wastage of the glacier through sublimation, ice melting and iceberg calving .

Ablation zone Area of a glacier in which the annual loss of ice through ablation exceeds the annual gain from precipitation .

Arête An acute ridge of rock where two cirques meet.

Bergschrund Crevasse formed near the head of a glacier, where the mass of ice has rotated, sheared and torn itself apart in the manner of a geological fault.

Cirque , Corrie or cwm Bowl shaped depression excavated by the source of a glacier.

Creep Adjustment to stress at a molecular level.

Flow Movement (of ice) in a constant direction.

Fracture Brittle failure (breaking of ice) under the stress raised when movement is too rapid to be accommodated by creep. It happens, for example, as the central part of a glacier moves faster than the edges.

Glacial landform Collective name for the morphologic structures in/on/under/around a glacier.

Moraine Accumulated debris that has been carried by a glacier and deposited at its sides (lateral moraine) or at its foot ( terminal moraine ).

Névé Area at the top of a glacier (often a cirque) where snow accumulates and feeds the glacier.

Nunatak / Rognon / Glacial Island Visible peak of a mountain otherwise covered by a glacier.

Horn Spire of rock, also known as a pyramidal peak, formed by the headward erosion of three or more cirques around a single mountain. It is an extreme case of an arête.

Plucking /Quarrying Where the adhesion of the ice to the rock is stronger than the cohesion of the rock, part of the rock leaves with the flowing ice.

Tarn A post-glacial lake in a cirque.

Tunnel valley The tunnel that is formed by hydraulic erosion of ice and rock below an ice sheet margin. The tunnel valley is what remains of it in the underlying rock when the ice sheet has melted.

Glacial deposits [ edit ] A kettle pond in Hossa , Suomussalmi municipality, Finland Source: [ 4 ] Stratified [ edit ] Outwash sand/gravel From front of glaciers, found on a plain.

Kettles When a lock of stagnant ice leaves a depression or pit.

Eskers Steep sided ridges of gravel/sand, possibly caused by streams running under stagnant ice.

Kames Stratified drift builds up low, steep hills.

Varves Alternating thin sedimentary beds (coarse and fine) of a proglacial lake . Summer conditions deposit more and coarser material and those of the winter, less and finer.

Unstratified [ edit ] Drowned drumlin in Clew Bay , Ireland Till -unsorted (Glacial flour to boulders) deposited by receding/advancing glaciers, forming moraines, and drumlins.

Moraines (Terminal) material deposited at the end; (ground) material deposited as glacier melts; (lateral) material deposited along the sides.

Drumlins Smooth elongated hills composed of till.

Ribbed moraines Large subglacial elongated hills transverse to former ice flow.

See also [ edit ] Continental Glaciation Ice cap International Glaciological Society International Association of Cryospheric Sciences Irish Sea Glacier List of glaciers Cryosphere Notes [ edit ] ^ Williams, Richard S. (1987).

"Summary Remarks" .

Annals of Glaciology .

9 : 254– 255.

Bibcode : 1987AnGla...9..254W .

doi : 10.3189/S0260305500000987 .

^ "Is glacier ice a type of rock?" .

United States Geological Survey . 26 April 2019 . Retrieved 2025-02-06 .

^ Khurdopin glacier & Shimshal River, Pakistan ^ a b Mahapatra, G.B. (1994).

Text book of Physical Geology . Nazia printers, Delhi. p. 269.

ISBN 81-239-0110-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Benn, Douglas I. and David J. A. Evans.

Glaciers and Glaciation .

London ; Arnold , 1998.

ISBN 0-340-58431-9 Greve, Ralf and Heinz Blatter.

Dynamics of Ice Sheets and Glaciers .

Berlin etc.; Springer , 2009.

ISBN 978-3-642-03414-5 Hambrey, Michael and Jürg Alean.

Glaciers . 2nd ed.

Cambridge and New York ; Cambridge University Press , 2004.

ISBN 0-521-82808-2 Hooke, Roger LeB.

Principles of Glacier Mechanics . 2nd ed. Cambridge and New York; Cambridge University Press, 2005.

ISBN 0-521-54416-5 Paterson, W. Stanley B.

The Physics of Glaciers . 3rd ed.

Oxford etc.; Pergamon Press , 1994.

ISBN 0-08-037944-3 van der Veen, Cornelis J.

Fundamentals of Glacier Dynamics .

Rotterdam ; A. A. Balkema, 1999.

ISBN 90-5410-471-6 van der Veen, Cornelis J.

Fundamentals of Glacier Dynamics . 2nd ed.

Boca Raton, FL ; CRC Press , 2013.

ISBN 14-398-3566-7 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Glaciology .

This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) International Glaciological Society (IGS) International Association of Cryospheric Sciences (IACS) Snow, Ice, and Permafrost Group, University of Alaska Fairbanks Arctic and Alpine Research Group, University of Alberta Glaciers online World Data Centre for Glaciology, Cambridge, UK National Snow and Ice Data Center, Boulder, Colorado Global Land Ice Measurements from Space (GLIMS) Glacial structures – photo atlas North Cascade Glacier Climate Project Centre for Glaciology, University of Wales Caltech Glaciology Group Glaciology Group, University of Copenhagen Institute of Low Temperature Science, Sapporo National Institute of Polar Research, Tokyo Glaciology Group, University of Washington Archived 2009-01-16 at the Wayback Machine Glaciology Laboratory, Universidad de Chile-Centro de Estudios Científicos, Valdivia Russian Geographical Society (Moscow Centre) – Glaciology Commission Institute of Meteorology and Geophysics, Univ. of Innsbruck, Austria.

Articles related to Glaciology v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology v t e Glaciers Types Aufeis Cirque Glacieret Ice cap Ice field Ice sheet Ice shelf Ice stream Ledoyom Outlet glacier Piedmont glacier Rock glacier Valley glacier Anatomy Ablation zone Accumulation zone Bergschrund Blue ice Crevasse Dirt cone Firn Glacier cave Glacier head Ice divide Glacier tongue Icefall Lateral moraine Medial moraine Moraine Moulin Penitente Randkluft Sérac Terminus Processes Ablation Accumulation Basal sliding Calving Creep Motion Outburst flood Overdeepening Periglaciation Plucking Retreat Starvation Surge Measurements Ice core Mass balance Volcanic relations Jökulhlaup Subglacial eruption Subglacial volcano Tuya Landforms Erosional Arête Cirque Cirque stairway Crag and tail Finger lake Fjord Glacial horn Glacial lake Glacial striae Hanging valley Nunatak P-form Ribbon lake Roche moutonnée Suncup Tarn Trough lake Trough valley Tunnel valley U-valley Valley step Zungenbecken Depositional Drumlin Erratic block Moraine Moraine-dammed lake Pulju moraine Rogen moraine Sevetti moraine Terminal moraine Till plain Veiki moraine Glaciofluvial Alpentor Diluvium Esker Giant current ripples Kame Kame delta Kettle hole Outwash fan Sandur Urstromtal Related Glaciers on Mars Glaciology Category List Template:Periglacial environment v t e Physical geography Atmospheric science / Meteorology Biogeography / Phytogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Soil science / Pedology / Edaphology Geobiology Geology Geomorphology Geostatistics Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Landscape ecology Quaternary science Category Portal Commons Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jbdvl
Cached time: 20250814215034
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.531 seconds
Real time usage: 0.738 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2725/1000000
Revision size: 14160/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129348/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 31877/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82922/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14798272/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  600.159      1 -total
 18.24%  109.483      1 Template:Etymology
 15.29%   91.783      1 Template:Reflist
 13.72%   82.327      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.68%   82.120      2 Template:Wikt-lang
 13.15%   78.891      1 Template:Short_description
 11.67%   70.047      1 Template:Geophysics
 11.21%   67.299      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.19%   67.142      5 Template:Navbox
 11.03%   66.187      1 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:231504:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215034 and revision id 1299704948. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glaciology&oldid=1299704948 " Categories : Glaciology Glaciers Water ice Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia external links cleanup from October 2020 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 23:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glaciology 74 languages Add topic

