Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differences from criminal procedure 2 Types 3 By country 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Civil procedure 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rules and standards used in civil lawsuits Not to be confused with Civil code .

For other uses, see Civil law (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Civil procedure is the body of law that sets out the rules and regulations along with some standards that courts follow when adjudicating civil lawsuits (as opposed to procedures in criminal law matters). These rules govern how a lawsuit or case may be commenced; what kind of service of process (if any) is required; the types of pleadings or statements of case, motions or applications, and orders allowed in civil cases; the timing and manner of depositions and discovery or disclosure; the conduct of trials ; the process for judgment; the process for post-trial procedures; various available remedies ; and how the courts and clerks must function.

Differences from criminal procedure [ edit ] In most cases, criminal prosecutions are pursued by the state in order to punish offenders, although some systems, such as in English and French law, allow citizens to bring a private prosecution . Conversely, civil actions are initiated by private individuals , companies or organizations, for their own benefit. Government agencies may also be a party to civil actions. Civil and criminal cases are usually heard in different courts.

In jurisdictions based on English common-law systems, the party bringing a criminal charge (in most cases, the state) is called the "prosecution", but the party bringing most forms of civil action is the " plaintiff "  or " claimant ". In both kinds of action the other party is known as the "defendant". A criminal case against a person called Ms. Sanchez would be described as "The People v. (= "versus", "against" or "and") Sanchez", "The State (or Commonwealth) v. Sanchez" or "[The name of the State] v. Sanchez"  in the United States and "R. ( Rex , Latin for " King " but spoken as "The Crown") v. Sanchez" in England and Wales, amongst other Commonwealth realms . But a civil action between Ms. Sanchez and a Mr. Smith would be "Sanchez v. Smith" if it were started by Sanchez, and "Smith v. Sanchez" if it were started by Mr. Smith (though the order of parties' names can change if the case is appealed).

Most countries make a clear distinction between civil and criminal procedure. For example, a criminal court may force a convicted defendant to pay a fine as punishment for their crime, and the legal costs of both the prosecution and defence. But the victim of the crime generally pursues their claim for compensation in a civil, not a criminal, action.

[ 1 ] In France and England, however, a victim of a crime may incidentally be awarded compensation by a criminal court judge .

Evidence from a criminal trial is generally admissible as evidence in a civil action about the same matter. For example, the victim of a road accident does not directly benefit if the driver who injured them is found guilty of the crime of careless driving. The victim still has to prove his case in a civil action, unless the doctrine of collateral estoppel applies, as it does in most American jurisdictions.

[ 1 ] The victim may be able to prove their civil case even when the driver is found not guilty in the criminal trial, because the standard to determine guilt is higher than the standard to determine fault. However, if a driver is found by a civil jury not to have been negligent, a prosecutor may be estopped from charging them criminally.

If the plaintiff has shown that the defendant is liable, the main remedy in a civil court is the amount of money, or "damages", which the defendant should pay to the plaintiff.

[ 1 ] Alternative civil remedies include restitution or transfer of property, or an injunction to restrain or order certain actions.

The standards of proof are higher in a criminal case than in a civil one, since the state does not wish to risk punishing an innocent person. In English law the prosecution must prove the guilt of a criminal " beyond reasonable doubt "; but the plaintiff in a civil action is required to prove his case "on the balance of probabilities".

[ 1 ] Thus, in a criminal case a crime cannot be proven if the person or persons judging it doubt the guilt of the suspect and have a reason (not just a feeling or intuition) for this doubt. But in a civil case, the court will weigh all the evidence and decide what is most probable.

Types [ edit ] Civil procedure is traditionally divided into inquisitorial and adversarial .

[ 2 ] By country [ edit ] Australia Brazil Canada England and Wales Germany India Italy Netherlands Romania Scotland South Africa United States Bhutan See also [ edit ] Affirmative defense Case citation Civil Justice Fairness Act Criminal procedure Jurisdiction Laches Objection Prejudice (law) Statute of limitations Summary judgment Time constraints Trial de novo References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Powell, Richard (1993).

Law today . Harlow: Longman. p. 34.

ISBN 978-0-582-05635-0 .

OCLC 30075861 .

^ Storme, Marcel; et al. (18 September 2012). Maleshin, Dmitry (ed.).

Civil Procedure in Cross-Cultural Dialogue: Eurasia Context . IAPL World Conference on Civil Procedure.

ssrn.com . Moscow: International Association of Procedural Law.

SSRN 2280682 . UC Irvine School of Law Research Paper No. 2013-119, University of Cambridge Faculty of Law Research Paper No. 25/2013 . Retrieved 10 May 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Colin Plicker & Guy Seidman, eds.

The dynamism of civil procedure: global trends and developments . Cham: Springer, 2016.

Margaret Y. K. Woo & Cornelis Hendrik van Rhee, eds.

Comparative civil procedure . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2025.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Civil Procedure ".

Civil Procedure Rules applying to England and Wales "Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" . Cornell Law School – via Legal Information Institute.

Rhode Island Civil Court Rules of Procedure - Optimized by a Constable from the law library at the 6th District Court of Rhode Island v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Japan Czech Republic Spain Other NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civil_procedure&oldid=1288636855 " Categories : Civil procedure Legal procedure Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2013 All articles with style issues Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2011 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 22:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civil procedure 30 languages Add topic

