Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Professorship 3 Psychedelic experiments and experiences Toggle Psychedelic experiments and experiences subsection 3.1 Mexico and Harvard research (1957–1963) 3.1.1 Introduction to psychedelic mushrooms 3.1.2 Concord Prison Experiment 3.1.3 Dissension over studies 3.1.4 Firing by Harvard 3.2 Millbrook and psychedelic counterculture (1963–1967) 3.3 Post-Millbrook 4 Legal troubles 5 Post-prison Toggle Post-prison subsection 5.1 Personal life 5.2 Career 5.3 Political activism 5.4 Drug use 5.5 Cultural influence 6 Death 7 Personal life 8 Influence 9 In popular culture Toggle In popular culture subsection 9.1 On screen 9.2 In music 9.3 In comic books 10 Works 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Citations 13.2 Works cited 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Timothy Leary 47 languages العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist (1920–1996) This article is about the 1960s counterculture figure. For the baseball player, see Tim Leary .

Timothy Leary Leary in 1970 Born Timothy Francis Leary ( 1920-10-22 ) October 22, 1920 Springfield, Massachusetts , US Died May 31, 1996 (1996-05-31) (aged 75) Beverly Hills, California , US Education College of the Holy Cross United States Military Academy University of Alabama ( BA ) Washington State University ( MS ) University of California, Berkeley (PhD) Occupations Psychologist activist author Known for Eight-circuit model of consciousness Reality tunnel " Question authority " " Set and setting " " Turn on, tune in, drop out " Spouses Marianne Busch ​ ​ ( m.

1945; died 1955) ​ Mary Della Cioppa ​ ​ ( m.

1956; div.

1957) ​ Nena von Schlebrügge ​ ​ ( m.

1964; div.

1965) ​ Rosemary Woodruff ​ ​ ( m.

1967; div.

1976) ​ Barbara Chase ​ ​ ( m.

1978; div.

1992) ​ [ A ] Partner Joanna Harcourt-Smith (1972–1977) Children 3 Scientific career Fields Clinical psychology Psychotherapy Psychedelic therapy Institutions University of California, Berkeley Kaiser Oakland Medical Center Harvard University Thesis The Social Dimensions of Personality: Group Process and Structure (1950) Doctoral advisor Hubert Stanley Coffey Part of a series on Psychedelia Arts Psychedelic art Algorithmic art Cyberdelic Diffraction Fractal art Liquid light show LSD art Paisley Phosphene Psychedelic music Acid house Acid jazz Acid rock Acid techno Acid trance Chillwave Cloud rap Hypnagogic pop Madchester Neo-psychedelia Palm Desert Scene Peyote song P-Funk Psychedelic folk Psychedelic funk Psychedelic pop Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic trance Space rock Stoner rock Trip hop Psychedelic film Acid Western Hippie exploitation films Stoner film Psychedelic literature Culture Counterculture Entheogen Smart shop Trip sitter Psychedelic microdosing Drugs 25I-NBOMe 2C-B Ayahuasca Cannabis DMT Ibogaine Ketamine LSD Mescaline Peyote Psilocybin mushrooms San Pedro cactus List of psychedelic drugs List of psilocybin mushrooms Psychoactive cactus Trip killer Experience Bad trip Ecology Ego death Therapy Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder History Acid Tests Albert Hofmann Alexander Shulgin Counterculture of the 1960s History of LSD Owsley Stanley Psychedelic era Summer of Love Timothy Leary William Leonard Pickard Law Drug liberalization Drug policy of the Netherlands Drug policy of Oregon Drug policy of Portugal Drug policy reform Legality of cannabis Legal status of psilocybin mushrooms Neurolaw Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Related topics Addiction Cannabis Cognitive liberty Drug checking Harm reduction Hippie MDMA Neuroenhancement Neuroethics Philosophy of psychedelics Psychonautics Prohibition of drugs Rave Recreational drug use Regulation of therapeutic goods Self-experimentation Surrealism v t e Timothy Francis Leary (October 22, 1920 – May 31, 1996) was an American psychologist and author known for his strong advocacy of psychedelic drugs .

[ 2 ] Evaluations of Leary are polarized, ranging from "bold oracle" to "publicity hound". According to poet Allen Ginsberg , he was "a hero of American consciousness", while writer Tom Robbins called him a "brave neuronaut ".

[ 3 ] President Richard Nixon disagreed, calling Leary "the most dangerous man in America".

[ 4 ] During the 1960s and 1970s, at the height of the counterculture movement , Leary was arrested 36 times.

[ 5 ] As a clinical psychologist at Harvard University , Leary founded the Harvard Psilocybin Project after a revealing experience with magic mushrooms he had in Mexico in 1960. For two years, he tested psilocybin 's therapeutic effects, in the Concord Prison Experiment and the Marsh Chapel Experiment . He also experimented with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), which was also legal in the US at the time. Other Harvard faculty questioned his research's scientific legitimacy and ethics because he took psychedelics himself along with his subjects and allegedly pressured students to join in.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Harvard fired Leary and his colleague Richard Alpert (later known as Ram Dass ) in May 1963.

[ 9 ] Many people learned of psychedelics after the Harvard scandal.

[ 10 ] Leary continued to publicly promote psychedelic drugs and became a well-known figure of the counterculture of the 1960s ; he popularized catchphrases that promoted his philosophy, such as " turn on, tune in, drop out ", " set and setting ", and " think for yourself and question authority ".

Leary believed that LSD showed potential for therapeutic use in psychiatry . He developed an eight-circuit model of consciousness in his 1977 book Exo-Psychology and gave lectures, occasionally calling himself a "performing philosopher".

[ 11 ] He also developed a philosophy of mind expansion and personal truth through LSD.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] He also wrote and spoke frequently about transhumanism , human space migration , intelligence increase, and life extension (SMI²LE).

[ 14 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Leary was born in Springfield, Massachusetts , an only child [ 4 ] in an Irish Catholic household. His father, Timothy "Tote" Leary, was a dentist who left his wife Abigail Ferris when Timothy was 14.

[ 15 ] He graduated from Classical High School in Springfield.

[ 16 ] Leary attended the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, Massachusetts , from 1938 to 1940. He received a Jesuit education there, and was required to learn Latin, rhetoric, and Greek.

[ 17 ] Under pressure from his father, he left to become a cadet in the United States Military Academy . In his first months at West Point, he received numerous demerits for rule infractions and then got into serious trouble for failing to report rule breaking by cadets he supervised. He was also accused of going on a drinking binge and failing to admit it, and was asked by the Honor Committee to resign. He refused and was shunned by fellow cadets. He was acquitted by a court-martial, but the silencing continued, as well as the onslaught of demerits for small rule infractions. In his second year, his mother appealed to a family friend, United States Senator David I. Walsh , head of the Senate Naval Affairs Committee, who investigated personally. The Honor Committee quietly revised its position and announced that it would abide by the court-martial verdict. Leary then resigned and was honorably discharged by the Army.

[ 18 ] About 50 years later he said that it was "the only fair trial I've had in a court of law".

[ 19 ] To his family's chagrin, Leary transferred to the University of Alabama in late 1941 because it admitted him expeditiously. He enrolled in the university's ROTC program, maintained top grades, and began to cultivate academic interests in psychology (under the aegis of the Middlebury and Harvard-educated Donald Ramsdell) and biology . Leary was expelled a year later for spending a night in the female dormitory and lost his student deferment in the midst of World War II .

Leary was drafted into the United States Army and received basic training at Fort Eustis in 1943. He remained in the non-commissioned officer track while enrolled in the psychology subsection of the Army Specialized Training Program , including three months of study at Georgetown University and six months at Ohio State University .

[ 20 ] With limited need for officers late in the war, Leary was briefly assigned as a private first class to the Pacific War -bound 2d Combat Cargo Group (which he later characterized as "a suicide command ... whose main mission, as far as I could see, was to eliminate the entire civilian branch of American aviation from post-war rivalry") at Syracuse Army Air Base in Mattydale, New York .

[ 21 ] After a fateful reunion with Ramsdell (who was assigned to Deshon General Hospital in Butler, Pennsylvania , as chief psychologist) in Buffalo, New York , he was promoted to corporal and reassigned to his mentor's command as a staff psychometrician .

[ 20 ] He remained in Deshon's deaf rehabilitation clinic for the remainder of the war.

While stationed in Butler, Leary courted Marianne Busch; they married in April 1945. Leary was discharged at the rank of sergeant in January 1946, having earned such standard decorations as the Good Conduct Medal , the American Defense Service Medal , the American Campaign Medal , and the World War II Victory Medal .

[ 22 ] As the war concluded, Leary was reinstated at UA and received credit for his Ohio State psychology coursework. He completed his degree via correspondence courses and graduated in August 1945. After receiving his undergraduate degree, Leary pursued an academic career. In 1946, he received a M.S.

in psychology at the Washington State College in Pullman , where he studied under educational psychologist Lee Cronbach . His M.S. thesis was on clinical applications of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale .

[ 23 ] In 1947, Marianne gave birth to their first child, Susan. Their son, Jack, arrived two years later. In 1950, Leary received a PhD in clinical psychology from the University of California, Berkeley .

[ 24 ] In the postwar era, Leary was galvanized by the objectivity of modern physics ; [ 25 ] his doctoral dissertation ( The Social Dimensions of Personality: Group Process and Structure ) [ 26 ] approached group therapy as a "psychlotron" [ 27 ] from which behavioral characteristics could be derived and quantified in a manner analogous to the periodic table , foreshadowing his later development of the interpersonal circumplex .

Professorship [ edit ] Leary stayed on in the Bay Area as an assistant clinical professor of medical psychology at the University of California, San Francisco ; concurrently, he co-founded Kaiser Hospital's psychology department in Oakland, California , and maintained a private consultancy.

[ 28 ] [ B ] In 1952, the Leary family spent a year in Spain, living on a research grant. According to Berkeley colleague Marv Freedman, "Something had been stirred in him in terms of breaking out of being another cog in society." [ 29 ] Leary's marriage was strained by infidelity and mutual alcohol abuse . Marianne eventually died by suicide in 1955, leaving him to raise their son and daughter alone.

[ 4 ] He described himself during this period as "an anonymous institutional employee who drove to work each morning in a long line of commuter cars and drove home each night and drank martinis ... like several million middle-class, liberal, intellectual robots".

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] From 1954 [ B ] or 1955 to 1958, Leary directed psychiatric research at the Kaiser Family Foundation .

[ 32 ] In 1957, he published The Interpersonal Diagnosis of Personality , which the Annual Review of Psychology called the "most important book on psychotherapy of the year".

[ 33 ] In 1958, the National Institute of Mental Health terminated Leary's research grant after he failed to meet with a NIMH investigator. Leary and his children relocated to Europe, where he attempted to write his next book while subsisting on small grants and insurance policies.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] His stay in Florence was unproductive and indigent, prompting a return to academia.

In late 1959, Leary started as a lecturer in clinical psychology at Harvard University at the behest of Frank Barron (a colleague from Berkeley) and David McClelland . Leary and his children lived in Newton, Massachusetts . In addition to teaching, Leary was affiliated with the Harvard Center for Research in Personality under McClelland. He oversaw the Harvard Psilocybin Project and conducted experiments in conjunction with assistant professor Richard Alpert . In 1963, Leary was terminated for failing to attend scheduled class lectures, though he maintained that he had met his teaching obligations.

[ 36 ] The decision to dismiss him may have been influenced by his promotion of psychedelic drug use among Harvard students and faculty. The drugs were legal at the time.

[ 37 ] Leary's work in academic psychology expanded on the research of Harry Stack Sullivan and Karen Horney , which sought to better understand interpersonal processes to help diagnose disorders . Leary's dissertation developed the interpersonal circumplex model, later published in The Interpersonal Diagnosis of Personality .

[ 38 ] The book demonstrated how psychologists could use Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) scores to predict how respondents might react to various interpersonal situations. Leary's research was an important harbinger of transactional analysis , directly prefiguring the popular work of Eric Berne .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Psychedelic experiments and experiences [ edit ] Mexico and Harvard research (1957–1963) [ edit ] Introduction to psychedelic mushrooms [ edit ] Leary at the State University of New York at Buffalo during a lecture tour in 1969 On May 13, 1957, Life magazine published " Seeking the Magic Mushroom ", an article by R. Gordon Wasson about the use of psilocybin mushrooms in religious rites of the indigenous Mazatec people of Mexico.

[ 41 ] Anthony Russo, a colleague of Leary's, had experimented with psychedelic Psilocybe mexicana mushrooms on a trip to Mexico and told Leary about it. In August 1960, [ 42 ] Leary traveled to Cuernavaca , Mexico, with Russo and consumed psilocybin mushrooms for the first time, an experience that drastically altered the course of his life.

[ 43 ] In 1965, Leary said that he had "learned more about ... [his] brain and its possibilities ... [and] more about psychology in the five hours after taking these mushrooms than ... in the preceding 15 years of studying and doing research".

[ 43 ] Back at Harvard, Leary and his associates (notably Alpert) began a research program known as the Harvard Psilocybin Project . The goal was to analyze psilocybin's effects on human subjects (first prisoners, and later Andover Newton Theological Seminary students) from a synthesized version of the drug, one of two active compounds found in a wide variety of hallucinogenic mushrooms, including Psilocybe mexicana . Psilocybin was produced in a process developed by Albert Hofmann of Sandoz Pharmaceuticals , who was famous for synthesizing LSD.

[ 44 ] Beat poet Allen Ginsberg heard about the Harvard research project and asked to join. Leary was inspired by Ginsberg's enthusiasm, and the two shared an optimism that psychedelics could help people discover a higher level of consciousness. They began introducing psychedelics to intellectuals and artists including Jack Kerouac , Maynard Ferguson , Charles Mingus and Charles Olson .

[ 45 ] Concord Prison Experiment [ edit ] Leary argued that psychedelic substances —in proper doses, a stable setting, and under the guidance of psychologists—could benefit behavior in ways not easily obtained by regular therapy. He experimented in treating alcoholism and reforming criminals, and many of his subjects said they had profound mystical and spiritual experiences that permanently improved their lives.

[ 46 ] The Concord Prison Experiment evaluated the use of psilocybin and psychotherapy in the rehabilitation of released prisoners. Thirty-six prisoners were reported to have repented and sworn off criminality after Leary and his associates guided them through the psychedelic experience. The overall recidivism rate for American prisoners was 60%, whereas the rate for those in Leary's project reportedly dropped to 20%. The experimenters concluded that long-term reduction in criminal recidivism could be effected with a combination of psilocybin-assisted group psychotherapy (inside the prison) along with a comprehensive post-release follow-up support program modeled on Alcoholics Anonymous .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Dissension over studies [ edit ] Timothy Leary, family, and band at the State University of New York at Buffalo during his 1969 lecture tour The Concord conclusions were contested in a follow-up study on the basis of time differences monitoring the study group vs. the control group and differences between subjects re-incarcerated for parole violations and those imprisoned for new crimes. The researchers concluded that statistically only a slight improvement could be attributed to psilocybin, in contrast to the significant improvement reported by Leary and his colleagues.

[ 49 ] Rick Doblin suggested that Leary had fallen prey to the halo effect , skewing the results and clinical conclusions. Doblin further accused Leary of lacking "a higher standard" or "highest ethical standards in order to regain the trust of regulators".

Ralph Metzner rebuked Doblin for these assertions: "In my opinion, the existing accepted standards of honesty and truthfulness are perfectly adequate. We have those standards, not to curry favor with regulators, but because it is the agreement within the scientific community that observations should be reported accurately and completely. There is no proof in any of this re-analysis that Leary unethically manipulated his data." [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Leary and Alpert founded the International Federation for Internal Freedom (IFIF) in 1962 in Cambridge, Massachusetts , to carry out studies in the religious use of psychedelic drugs.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] This was run by Lisa Bieberman (now known as Licia Kuenning), a friend of Leary.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The Harvard Crimson called her a "disciple" who ran a Psychedelic Information Center out of her home and published a national LSD newspaper.

[ 56 ] That publication was actually Leary and Alpert's journal Psychedelic Review and Bieberman (a graduate of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard, who had volunteered for Leary as a student) was its circulation manager.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Leary's and Alpert's research attracted so much attention that many who wanted to participate in the experiments had to be turned away. To satisfy the curiosity of those who were turned away, a black market for psychedelics sprang up near the Harvard campus.

[ 8 ] Firing by Harvard [ edit ] Other professors in the Harvard Center for Research in Personality raised concerns about the experiments' legitimacy and safety.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 59 ] Leary and Alpert taught a class that was required for graduation and colleagues felt they were abusing their power by pressuring graduate students to take hallucinogens in the experiments. Leary and Alpert also went against policy by giving psychedelics to undergraduate students and did not select participants through random sampling . It was also ethically questionable that the researchers sometimes took hallucinogens along with the subjects they were studying. These concerns were printed in The Harvard Crimson , leading the university to halt the experiments. The Massachusetts Department of Public Health launched an investigation that was later dropped but the university eventually fired Leary and Alpert.

According to Andrew Weil , Leary (who held an untenured teaching appointment) was fired for missing his scheduled lectures, while Alpert (a tenure-track assistant professor) was dismissed for allegedly giving an undergraduate psilocybin in an off-campus apartment.

[ 8 ] [ 60 ] Harvard President Nathan Pusey released a statement on May 27, 1963, reporting that Leary had left campus without authorization and "failed to keep his classroom appointments". His salary was terminated on April 30, 1963.

[ 36 ] Millbrook and psychedelic counterculture (1963–1967) [ edit ] Leary's psychedelic experimentation attracted the attention of three heirs to the Mellon fortune, siblings Peggy, Billy, and Tommy Hitchcock. In 1963, they gave Leary and his associates access to a sprawling 64-room mansion on an estate in Millbrook, New York , where they continued their psychedelic sessions. Peggy directed the International Federation for Internal Freedom (IFIF)'s New York branch, and Billy rented the estate to IFIF.

[ 61 ] Peggy persuaded her brothers to let Leary rent a room at the mansion.

[ 62 ] Leary and Alpert set up a communal group with former Psilocybin Project members at the Hitchcock Estate (commonly known as "Millbrook"). One of the IFIF's founding board members, Paul Lee , a Harvard theologian, a participant at Marsh Chapel and a member of the Leary circle, said of the group's formation: There was a big discussion about whether to go underground with it and make it a kind of secret initiation issue, or go public. But Leary was an Irish revolutionary and he wanted to shout it from the rooftops. So it went that way. It simply became a tsunami.

[ 63 ] The IFIF was reconstituted as the Castalia Foundation after the intellectual colony in Hermann Hesse 's 1943 novel The Glass Bead Game .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] The Castalia group's journal was the Psychedelic Review .

[ 65 ] The core group at Millbrook wanted to cultivate the divinity within each person and regularly joined LSD sessions facilitated by Leary.

[ 65 ] The Castalia Foundation also hosted non-drug weekend retreats for meditation, yoga , and group therapy.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Leary later wrote: We saw ourselves as anthropologists from the 21st century inhabiting a time module set somewhere in the dark ages of the 1960s. On this space colony we were attempting to create a new paganism and a new dedication to life as art.

[ 68 ] Lucy Sante of The New York Times later described the Millbrook estate as: the headquarters of Leary and gang for the better part of five years, a period filled with endless parties, epiphanies and breakdowns, emotional dramas of all sizes, and numerous raids and arrests, many of them on flimsy charges concocted by the local assistant district attorney, G. Gordon Liddy .

[ 69 ] Others contest the characterization of Millbrook as a party house. In The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test , Tom Wolfe portrays Leary as using psychedelics only for research, not recreation. When Ken Kesey 's Merry Pranksters visited the estate, they received a frosty reception.

[ 70 ] Leary had the flu and did not play host.

[ 71 ] After a private meeting with Kesey and Ken Babbs in his room, he promised to remain an ally in the years ahead.

[ 72 ] In 1964, Leary, Alpert, and Ralph Metzner coauthored The Psychedelic Experience , based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead . In it, they wrote: A psychedelic experience is a journey to new realms of consciousness. The scope and content of the experience is limitless, but its characteristic features are the transcendence of verbal concepts, of spacetime dimensions, and of the ego or identity. Such experiences of enlarged consciousness can occur in a variety of ways: sensory deprivation, yoga exercises, disciplined meditation, religious or aesthetic ecstasies, or spontaneously. Most recently they have become available to anyone through the ingestion of psychedelic drugs such as LSD, psilocybin , mescaline , DMT , etc. Of course, the drug does not produce the transcendent experience. It merely acts as a chemical key—it opens the mind, frees the nervous system of its ordinary patterns and structures.

[ 73 ] Leary in 1969 Leary married model Birgitte Caroline "Nena" von Schlebrügge in 1964 at Millbrook. Both Nena and her brother Bjorn were friends of the Hitchcocks.

D. A. Pennebaker , also a Hitchcock friend, and cinematographer Nicholas Proferes documented the event in the short film You're Nobody Till Somebody Loves You .

[ 74 ] Charles Mingus played piano. The marriage lasted a year before von Schlebrügge divorced Leary in 1965. She married Indo-Tibetan Buddhist scholar and ex-monk Robert Thurman in 1967 and gave birth to Ganden Thurman that same year. Actress Uma Thurman , her second child, was born in 1970.

Leary met Rosemary Woodruff in 1965 at a New York City art exhibit, and invited her to Millbrook.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] After moving in, she co-edited the manuscript for Leary's 1966 book Psychedelic Prayers: And Other Meditations with Ralph Metzner and Michael Horowitz .

[ 78 ] The poems in the book were inspired by the Tao Te Ching , and meant to be used as an aid to LSD trips.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Woodruff helped Leary prepare weekend multimedia workshops simulating the psychedelic experience, which were presented around the East Coast.

[ 78 ] In September 1966, Leary said in a Playboy magazine interview that LSD could cure homosexuality. According to him, a lesbian became heterosexual after using the drug.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Like most of the psychiatric field, he later decided that homosexuality was not an illness.

[ C ] By 1966, use of psychedelics by America's youth had reached such proportions that serious concern about the drugs and their effect on American culture was expressed in the national press and halls of government. In response to this concern, Senator Thomas Dodd convened Senate subcommittee hearings to try to better understand the drug-use phenomenon, eventually with the intention of "stamping out" such usage by criminalizing it. Leary was one of several expert witnesses called to testify at these hearings. In his testimony, Leary said, "the challenge of the psychedelic chemicals is not just how to control them, but how to use them." [ 82 ] He implored the subcommittee not to criminalize psychedelic drug use, which he felt would only serve to exponentially increase its usage among America's youth while removing the safeguards that controlled "set and setting" provided. When subcommittee member Ted Kennedy asked Leary whether LSD usage was "extremely dangerous", Leary replied, "Sir, the motorcar is dangerous if used improperly...Human stupidity and ignorance is the only danger human beings face in this world." [ 83 ] To conclude his testimony, Leary suggested that legislation be enacted that would require LSD users to be adults who were competently trained and licensed, so that such individuals could use LSD "for serious purposes, such as spiritual growth, pursuit of knowledge, or their own personal development." [ 84 ] He argued that without such licensing, the US would face "another era of prohibition." [ 85 ] Leary's testimony proved ineffective; on October 6, 1966, just months after the subcommittee hearings, LSD was banned in California, and by October 1968, it was banned nationwide by the Staggers-Dodd Bill.

[ 86 ] In 1966, Folkways Records recorded Leary reading from his book The Psychedelic Experience , and released the album The Psychedelic Experience: Readings from the Book "The Psychedelic Experience. A Manual Based on the Tibetan...".

[ 87 ] On September 19, 1966, Leary reorganized the IFIF/Castalia Foundation under the name the League for Spiritual Discovery , a religion with LSD as its holy sacrament , in part as an unsuccessful attempt to maintain legal status for the use of LSD and other psychedelics for the religion's adherents, based on a "freedom of religion" argument.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Leary incorporated the League for Spiritual Discovery as a religious organization in New York State , and its dogma was based on Leary's mantra: "drop out, turn on, tune in".

[ 66 ] ( The Brotherhood of Eternal Love later considered Leary its spiritual leader, but it did not develop out of the IFIF.) Nicholas Sand , the clandestine chemist for the Brotherhood of Eternal Love, followed Leary to Millbrook and joined the League for Spiritual Discovery. Sand was designated the "alchemist" of the new religion.

[ 88 ] At the end of 1966, Nina Graboi , a friend and colleague of Leary's who had spent time with him at Millbrook, became the director of the Center for the League of Spiritual Discovery in Greenwich Village .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] The Center opened in March 1967.

[ 91 ] Leary and Alpert gave free weekly talks there; other guest speakers included Ralph Metzner and Allen Ginsberg.

[ 89 ] [ 92 ] Leary's papers at the New York Public Library include complete records of the IFIF, the Castalia Foundation, and the League for Spiritual Discovery.

[ 93 ] In late 1966 and early 1967, Leary toured college campuses presenting a multimedia performance called "The Death of the Mind", attempting an artistic replication of the LSD experience.

[ 64 ] [ 94 ] He said that the League for Spiritual Discovery was limited to 360 members and was already at its membership limit, but encouraged others to form their own psychedelic religions. He published a pamphlet in 1967 called Start Your Own Religion to encourage people to do so.

[ 64 ] Leary in 1989 Leary was invited to attend the January 14, 1967 Human Be-In by Michael Bowen , the primary organizer of the event, [ 95 ] a gathering of 30,000 hippies in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park . In speaking to the group, Leary coined the famous phrase " Turn on, tune in, drop out ". In a 1988 interview with Neil Strauss , he said the slogan was "given to him" by Marshall McLuhan when the two had lunch in New York City, adding, "Marshall was very much interested in ideas and marketing, and he started singing something like, 'Psychedelics hit the spot / Five hundred micrograms, that's a lot,' to the tune of [the well-known Pepsi 1950s singing commercial]. Then he started going, 'Tune in, turn on, and drop out.'" [ 96 ] Though the more popular "turn on, tune in, drop out" became synonymous with Leary, his actual definition with the League for Spiritual Discovery was: " Drop Out —detach yourself from the external social drama which is as dehydrated and ersatz as TV.

Turn On —find a sacrament which returns you to the temple of God, your own body. Go out of your mind. Get high.

Tune In —be reborn. Drop back in to express it. Start a new sequence of behavior that reflects your vision." [ 66 ] Repeated FBI raids ended the Millbrook era. Leary told author and Prankster Paul Krassner of a 1966 raid by Liddy, "He was a government agent entering our bedroom at midnight. We had every right to shoot him. But I've never owned a weapon in my life. I have never had and never will have a gun around." [ 97 ] In November 1967, Leary engaged in a televised debate on drug use with MIT professor Jerry Lettvin .

[ 98 ] Post-Millbrook [ edit ] At the end of 1967, Leary moved to Laguna Beach, California , and made many friends in Hollywood. "When he married his third wife, Rosemary Woodruff, in 1967, the event was directed by Ted Markland of Bonanza . All the guests were on acid." [ 4 ] In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Leary formulated what became his eight-circuit model of consciousness in collaboration with writer Brian Barritt . The essay "The Seven Tongues of God" claimed that human brains have seven circuits producing seven levels of consciousness. This later became seven circuits in Leary's 1973 monograph Neurologic , which he wrote while he was in prison. The eight-circuit idea was not exhaustively formulated until the publication of Exo-Psychology by Leary and Robert Anton Wilson 's Cosmic Trigger in 1977. Wilson contributed to the model after befriending Leary in the early 1970s, and used it as a framework for further exposition in his book Prometheus Rising , among other works.

[ D ] Leary believed that the first four of these circuits ("the Larval Circuits" or "Terrestrial Circuits") are naturally accessed by most people at transition points in life such as puberty. The second four circuits ("the Stellar Circuits" or "Extra-Terrestrial Circuits"), Leary wrote, were "evolutionary offshoots" of the first four that would be triggered at transition points as humans evolve further. These circuits, according to Leary, would equip humans to live in space and expand consciousness for further scientific and social progress. Leary suggested that some people might trigger these circuits sooner through meditation, yoga, or psychedelic drugs specific to each circuit. He suggested that the feelings of floating and uninhibited motion sometimes experienced with marijuana demonstrated the purpose of the higher four circuits. The function of the fifth circuit was to accustom humans to life at a zero gravity environment.

[ 99 ] Leary did not specify the location of the eight circuits in any brain structures, neural organization, or chemical pathways.

[ 100 ] He wrote that a higher intelligence "located in interstellar nuclear-gravitational-quantum structures" gave humans the eight circuits. A "U.F.O. message" was encoded in human DNA.

[ 101 ] Many researchers believed that Leary provided little scientific evidence for his claims. Even before he began working on psychedelics, he was known as a theoretician rather than a data collector. His most ambitious pre-psychedelic work was Interpersonal Diagnosis Of Personality . The reviewer for The British Medical Journal , H. J. Eysenck, wrote that Leary created a confusing and overly broad rubric for testing psychiatric conditions. "Perhaps the worst failing of the book is the omission of any kind of proof for the validity and reliability of the diagnostic system," Eysenck wrote. "It is simply not enough to say" that the accuracy of the system "can be checked by the reader" in clinical practice.

[ 102 ] In 1965, Leary co-edited The Psychedelic Reader . Penn State psychology researcher Jerome E. Singer reviewed the book and singled out Leary as the worst offender in a work containing "melanges of hucksterism". In place of scientific data about the effects of LSD, Leary used metaphors about "galaxies spinning" faster than the speed of light and a cerebral cortex "turned on to a much higher voltage".

[ 103 ] Legal troubles [ edit ] BNDD agents Howard Safir and Don Strange arrest Leary in 1972.

Leary's first run-in with the law came on December 23, 1965, when he was arrested for marijuana possession.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] On December 20, 1965, Leary took his two children, Jack and Susan, and his girlfriend Rosemary Woodruff to Mexico for an month-long vacation to rest and write an autobiography. Two days later they had crossed into Nuevo Laredo , Mexico, in the late afternoon and discovered that they would have to wait until morning for the appropriate visa for an extended stay. They decided to cross back into Texas to spend the night, and were on the US–Mexico bridge when Rosemary remembered that she had a small amount of marijuana in her possession. It was impossible to throw it out on the bridge, so Susan put it in her clothes. On their return from Mexico to the United States, a US Customs Service woman officer searched Susan and found a silver snuffbox with marijuana.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] After taking responsibility for the controlled substance, Leary was convicted of possession under the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 on March 11, 1966, sentenced to 30 years in prison, fined $30,000, and ordered to undergo psychiatric treatment. He appealed the case on the basis that the Marihuana Tax Act was unconstitutional, as it required a degree of self-incrimination in blatant violation of the Fifth Amendment .

On December 26, 1968, Leary was arrested again in Laguna Beach, California , this time for the possession of two marijuana "roaches". Leary alleged that they were planted by the arresting officer, but was convicted of the crime. On May 19, 1969, the Supreme Court concurred with Leary in Leary v. United States , declared the Marihuana Tax Act unconstitutional, and overturned his 1966 conviction.

[ E ] On that same day, Leary announced his candidacy for governor of California against the Republican incumbent, Ronald Reagan . His campaign slogan was "Come together, join the party." On June 1, 1969, Leary joined John Lennon and Yoko Ono at their Montreal bed-in , and Lennon subsequently wrote Leary a campaign song called " Come Together ".

[ 109 ] On January 21, 1970, Leary received a ten-year sentence for his 1968 offense, with a further ten added later while in custody for a prior arrest in 1965, for a total of 20 years to be served consecutively. On his arrival in prison, he was given psychological tests used to assign inmates to appropriate work details. Having designed some of these tests himself (including the "Leary Interpersonal Behavior Inventory"), Leary answered them in such a way that he seemed to be a very conforming, conventional person with a great interest in forestry and gardening.

[ 110 ] As a result, he was assigned to work as a gardener in a lower-security prison from which he escaped in September 1970, saying that his nonviolent escape was a humorous prank and leaving a challenging note for the authorities to find after he was gone.

[ 111 ] For a fee of $25,000, paid by The Brotherhood of Eternal Love , the Weathermen smuggled Leary out of prison in a pickup truck driven by Clayton Van Lydegraf .

[ 112 ] The truck met Leary after he had escaped over the prison wall by climbing along a telephone wire. The Weathermen then helped both Leary and Rosemary out of the US (and eventually into Algeria).

[ 113 ] He sought the patronage of Eldridge Cleaver for $10,000 and the remnants of the Black Panther Party 's "government in exile" in Algeria, but after a short stay with them said that Cleaver had attempted to hold him and his wife hostage.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Cleaver had put Leary and his wife under "house arrest" due to exasperation with their socialite lifestyle.

[ 115 ] In 1971, the couple fled to Switzerland, where they were sheltered and effectively imprisoned by a high-living arms dealer, Michel Hauchard, who claimed he had an "obligation as a gentleman to protect philosophers"; Hauchard intended to broker a surreptitious film deal, and forced Leary to assign his future earnings (which Leary eventually won back).

[ 69 ] [ 116 ] In 1972, Nixon's attorney general, John Mitchell , persuaded the Swiss government to imprison Leary, which it did for a month, but refused to extradite him to the US [ 116 ] Leary and Rosemary separated later that year; she traveled widely, then moved back to the US, where she lived as a fugitive until the 1990s.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Shortly after his separation from Rosemary in 1972, Leary became involved with Swiss-born British socialite Joanna Harcourt-Smith , a stepdaughter of financier Árpád Plesch and ex-girlfriend of Hauchard.

[ 116 ] The couple married in a hotel under the influence of cocaine and LSD [ citation needed ] two weeks after they were introduced, and Harcourt-Smith used his surname until their breakup in 1977. They traveled to Vienna , then Beirut , and finally ended up in Kabul , Afghanistan, in 1972; according to Lucy Sante , "Afghanistan had no extradition treaty with the United States, but this stricture did not apply to American airliners." [ 69 ] American authorities used that interpretation of the law to interdict Leary. "Before Leary could deplane, he was arrested by an agent of the federal Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs ." [ 69 ] Leary asserted a different story on appeal before the California Court of Appeal for the Second District , namely: [ 118 ] He testified further that he had a valid passport in Kabul and that it was confiscated while he was in a line at the American Embassy in Kabul a few days prior to the day when he boarded the airplane; after his passport was confiscated, he was taken to "Central Police Headquarters"; he did not attempt to contact the American Embassy; the Kabul police held him in custody and took him to a "police hotel". The cousin of the King of Afghanistan came to see him and told him that it was a national holiday, that the King and the officials were out of Kabul, and that he (the cousin) would get a lawyer and see that Leary "had a hearing". On the morning the airplane left Kabul, officials of Afghanistan told him he was to leave Afghanistan. Leary replied he would not leave without a hearing and until he got his passport back; they said the Americans had his passport, and he was taken to the airplane.

Leary's bail was set at $5 million.

[ 116 ] [ 119 ] The judge at his remand hearing said, "If he is allowed to travel freely, he will speak publicly and spread his ideas".

[ 120 ] Facing 95 years in prison, Leary hired criminal defense attorney Bruce Margolin . Leary mostly directed his own defense strategy, which proved unsuccessful: the jury convicted him after deliberating for less than two hours.

[ 116 ] Leary received five years for his prison escape, added to his original 10-year sentence.

[ 116 ] In 1973, he was sent to Folsom Prison in California, and put in solitary confinement.

[ 116 ] [ 121 ] While in Folsom, he was placed in a cell next to Charles Manson 's. They could not see each other, but they could talk together. In their discussions, Manson found it difficult to understand why Leary had given people LSD without trying to control them. At one point, Manson said to Leary, "They took you off the streets so that I could continue with your work." [ 122 ] Leary became an FBI informant to shorten his prison sentence and entered the witness protection program upon his release in 1976.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] He claimed that he feigned cooperation with the FBI investigation of Weathermen by providing information that they already had or that was of little consequence. The FBI gave him the code name "Charlie Thrush".

[ 125 ] In a 1974 news conference, Allen Ginsberg, Ram Dass, and Leary's 25-year-old son Jack denounced Leary, calling him a "cop informant", "liar", and "paranoid schizophrenic".

[ 126 ] No prosecutions stemmed from his FBI reporting. In 1999, a letter from 22 "Friends of Timothy Leary" sought to soften impressions of the FBI episode. It was signed by authors such as Douglas Rushkoff , Ken Kesey , and Robert Anton Wilson .

Susan Sarandon , Genesis P-Orridge and Leary's goddaughter Winona Ryder also signed.

[ 115 ] [ 127 ] The letter said that Leary had smuggled a message to the Weather Underground informing it "that he was considering making a deal with the FBI" and he then "waited for their approval". The reported reply was, "We understand." [ 127 ] [ 128 ] The letter writers did not provide confirmation that the Weather Underground okayed his cooperation with the FBI.

While in prison, Leary was sued by the parents of Vernon Powell Cox, who had jumped from a third-story window of a Berkeley apartment while under the influence of LSD. Cox had taken the drug after attending a lecture by Leary promoting LSD use. Leary was unable to be present due to his incarceration, and unable to arrange for legal representation; a default judgment was entered against him in the amount of $100,000.

[ 129 ] Post-prison [ edit ] On April 21, 1976, Governor Jerry Brown released Leary from prison. After briefly relocating to Santa Fe, New Mexico , with Harcourt-Smith under the auspices of the United States Federal Witness Protection Program , the couple separated in early 1977.

Personal life [ edit ] Leary then moved to the Laurel Canyon neighborhood of Los Angeles, where he resided for the rest of his life. In 1978, he married filmmaker Barbara Blum, also known as Barbara Chase, sister of actress Tanya Roberts . He adopted Blum's young son and raised him as his own. He also took on several godchildren, including Winona Ryder (the daughter of his archivist Michael Horowitz ) and technologist Joi Ito .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] In January 1989, Leary's daughter Susan, then 41, was arrested in Los Angeles for non-fatally shooting her boyfriend in the head as he slept in December 1988.

[ 133 ] She was ruled mentally unfit to stand trial for attempted murder on two occasions.

[ 134 ] After years of mental instability, she died by suicide in jail in September 1990.

[ 135 ] [ 4 ] Although he considered her the "great love of his life", Leary and Barbara divorced in 1992; according to friend and collaborator John Perry Barlow , "Tim basically gave me permission to be her lover. He couldn't be for her what she needed sexually, so it made more sense for him to anoint someone to do that for him." [ 136 ] Thereafter, he ensconced himself in a diverse circle of prominent figures, including Johnny Depp , Susan Sarandon , Dan Aykroyd , [ 115 ] author Douglas Rushkoff, and Spin magazine publisher Bob Guccione, Jr .

[ 137 ] Despite declining health, he maintained a regular schedule of public appearances through 1994.

[ F ] Reflecting a modicum of political rehabilitation after several failed attempts to adapt Flashbacks as a film or television miniseries, he was the subject of a symposium of the American Psychological Association that year.

[ 138 ] Career [ edit ] Unable to secure a conventional academic, research, or clinical appointment due to his reputation, he continued to publish books through the independent press while maintaining an upper middle class lifestyle by making paid appearances at colleges and nightclubs as a self-described "stand-up philosopher".

[ 139 ] Leary developed a partnership with former Millbrook-era foe G. Gordon Liddy , the Watergate burglar and conservative radio talk-show host. They toured the lecture circuit in 1982 as ex-cons debating a range of issues, including gay rights , abortion, welfare and the environment. Leary generally espoused left-wing views and Liddy generally espoused right-wing perspectives. The tour generated massive publicity and considerable funds for both. The 1983 documentary Return Engagement chronicled the tour and the release of Flashbacks , Leary's long-germinating memoir; biographer Robert Greenfield has since asserted that much of what Leary "reported as fact in Flashbacks is pure fantasy".

[ 140 ] Leary's extensive touring on the lecture circuit continued to ensure his family a comfortable lifestyle in the mid-1980s. He associated with a variety of cultural figures, including longtime interlocutors Robert Anton Wilson and Allen Ginsberg; science fiction writers William Gibson and Norman Spinrad ; and rock musicians David Byrne and John Frusciante .

[ citation needed ] In addition, he appeared in Johnny Depp 's and Gibby Haynes 's 1994 film Stuff , which chronicled Frusciante's squalid living conditions at that time.

[ 141 ] Political activism [ edit ] On September 25, 1988, Leary held a fundraiser for Libertarian Party presidential candidate Ron Paul .

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] Journalist Debra Saunders attended and wrote about her experience.

[ 145 ] Drug use [ edit ] Leary continued to take a wide array of drugs (ranging from serotonergic psychedelics to the nascent empathogen MDMA and alcohol and heroin) [ 146 ] in private, but consciously eschewed proselytizing substances in media appearances amid the escalation of the war on drugs during the presidency of Ronald Reagan . Instead, he served as a prominent advocate for space colonization and life extension . He expounded on the eight-circuit model of consciousness in books such as Info-Psychology: A Re-Vision of Exo-Psychology .

[ 116 ] He invented the acronym " SMI²LE " as a succinct summary of his pre-transhumanist agenda: SM ( space migration ) + I² ( intelligence increase ) + LE (l ife extension ).

[ 147 ] Allen Ginsberg , Timothy Leary, and John C. Lilly in 1991 Cultural influence [ edit ] Leary's space colonization plan evolved over the years. Initially, 5,000 of Earth's most virile and intelligent individuals would be launched on a vessel (Starseed 1) equipped with luxurious amenities. This idea was inspired by musician Paul Kantner 's 1970 concept album Blows Against The Empire , which was derived from Robert A. Heinlein 's Lazarus Long series. While incarcerated in Folsom State Prison during the winter of 1975–76, he became enamored of Princeton University physicist Gerard K. O'Neill 's plans to construct giant Eden -like High Orbital Mini-Earths , as documented in the Robert Anton Wilson lecture H.O.M.E.s on LaGrange , using raw materials from the Moon, orbital rock, and obsolete satellites.

[ G ] In the 1980s, Leary became fascinated by computers, the internet, and virtual reality. He proclaimed that "the PC is the LSD of the 1990s" and enjoined historically technophobic bohemians to "turn on, boot up, jack in." [ 148 ] [ 149 ] He became a promoter of virtual reality systems, [ 150 ] and sometimes demonstrated a prototype of the Mattel Power Glove as part of his lectures (as in From Psychedelics to Cybernetics ). He befriended a number of notable people in the field, such as Jaron Lanier [ 151 ] and Brenda Laurel , a pioneer in virtual environments and human–computer interaction. During the evanescent heyday of the cyberdelic subculture, he served as a consultant to Billy Idol in the production of the 1993 album Cyberpunk .

[ 152 ] From 1989 on, Leary began to reestablish his connection to unconventional religious movements with an interest in altered states of consciousness. In 1989, he appeared with Robert Anton Wilson in a dialog called The Inner Frontier for the Association for Consciousness Exploration , a Cleveland-based group that had been responsible for his first Cleveland appearance in 1979. After that, he appeared at the Starwood Festival , a major Neo-Pagan event run by ACE in 1992 and 1993.

[ 153 ] His planned 1994 WinterStar Symposium appearance was canceled due to his declining health. In 1992, in front of hundreds of Neo-Pagans, Leary declared, "I've always considered myself a Pagan." [ 154 ] He also collaborated with Eric Gullichsen on Load and Run High-tech Paganism: Digital Polytheism .

[ 155 ] Shortly before his death on May 31, 1996, he recorded the album Right to Fly with Simon Stokes, which was released in July 1996.

[ 156 ] Death [ edit ] Timothy Leary reuniting with Ram Dass five days before his death In January 1995, Leary was diagnosed with inoperable prostate cancer .

[ 157 ] He then notified Ram Dass and other old friends and began the process of directed dying, which he termed "designer dying".

[ 158 ] Leary did not reveal the condition to the press at that time, but did so after Jerry Garcia 's death in August.

[ 158 ] Leary and Ram Dass reunited before Leary's death in May 1996, as seen in the documentary film Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary .

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Leary's last book was Chaos & Cyber Culture , published in 1994. In it he wrote: "The time has come to talk cheerfully and joke sassily about personal responsibility for managing the dying process." [ 158 ] His book Design for Dying , which tried to give a new perspective on death and dying, was published posthumously.

[ 161 ] Leary wrote about his belief that death is "a merging with the entire life process".

[ 161 ] His website team, led by Chris Graves, updated his website on a daily basis as a proto-blog.

[ 158 ] The website noted his daily intake of various illicit and legal chemical substances, with a predilection for nitrous oxide , LSD and other psychedelic drugs.

[ 162 ] He was also noted for his trademark "Leary Biscuit", a cannabis edible consisting of a snack cracker with cheese and a small marijuana bud, briefly microwaved.

[ 163 ] At his request, his sterile house was redecorated by the staff with an array of surreal ornamentation.

[ citation needed ] In his final months, thousands of visitors, well-wishers and old friends visited him in his California home.

[ citation needed ] Until his last weeks, he gave many interviews discussing his new philosophy of embracing death.

[ 161 ] Etoy agents with mortal remains of Timothy Leary in 2007 Leary was reportedly excited for a number of years by the possibility of freezing his body in cryonic suspension , and he announced in September 1988 that he had signed up with Alcor for such treatment after having appeared at Alcor's grand opening the year before.

[ 164 ] He did not believe he would be resurrected in the future, but did believe that cryonics had important possibilities, even though he thought it had only "one chance in a thousand".

[ 164 ] He called it his "duty as a futurist", helped publicize the process and hoped that it would work for his children and grandchildren if not for him, although he said that he was "lighthearted" about it.

[ 164 ] He was connected with two cryonic organizations—first Alcor and then CryoCare—one of which delivered a cryonic tank to his house in the months before his death. Leary initially announced that he would freeze his entire body, but due to lack of funds decided to freeze his head only.

[ 115 ] [ 158 ] Three weeks before his death, Leary changed his mind again and generally refused cryopreservation from both Alcor and CryoCare.

[ 165 ] He requested that his body be cremated, with his ashes scattered in space.

[ 115 ] Leary died aged 75 on May 31, 1996. His death was videotaped for posterity at his request by Denis Berry and Joey Cavella, capturing his final words.

[ 115 ] Berry was the trustee of Leary's archives, and Cavella had filmed Leary during his later years.

[ 115 ] According to his son Zachary, during his final moments, he clenched his fist and said: "Why?", then, unclenching his fist, said: "Why not?". He uttered the phrase repeatedly, in different intonations, and died soon after. His last word, according to Zach, was "beautiful".

[ 166 ] The film Timothy Leary's Dead (1996) contains a simulated sequence in which he allows his bodily functions to be suspended for the purposes of cryonic preservation. His head is removed and placed on ice. The film ends with a sequence showing the creation of the artificial head used in the film.

Seven grams (¼ oz) of Leary's ashes were arranged by his friend at Celestis to be buried in space aboard a rocket carrying the remains of 23 others, including Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry , space colonization advocate Gerard O'Neill and German-American rocket engineer Krafft Ehricke . A Pegasus rocket containing their remains was launched on April 21, 1997, and remained in orbit for six years until it burned up in the atmosphere.

[ 167 ] Leary's ashes were given to close friends and family. In 2015, Susan Sarandon brought some of his ashes to the Burning Man festival in Black Rock City , Nevada , and put them into an art installation there. The ashes were burned along with the installation on September 6, 2015.

[ 168 ] Personal life [ edit ] Leary and Rosemary Woodruff, 1969 Leary was legally married five times, sired three biological children and adopted a fourth child. He also regarded Joanna Harcourt-Smith (his domestic partner from 1972 to 1977) as his common-law wife for the duration of their relationship. His first wife, Marianne Busch, died by suicide [ 169 ] (as did their daughter).

1945–1955 Marianne Busch (1921–1955) daughter Susan [ 170 ] (1947–1990) son Jack [ 171 ] (1949–) 1956–1957 Mary Cioppa [ 172 ] (1920–1996) 1964–1965 Nena von Schlebrügge (1941–) 1967–1976 (separated 1972) Rosemary Woodruff [ 173 ] (1935–2002) [ 117 ] 1972–1977 Joanna Harcourt-Smith (domestic partner) (1946–2020) [ 174 ] son Marlon Gobel (1976–) [ 174 ] 1978–1992 Barbara Blum Chase (1946–) [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] son Zach (1973–) (adopted) [ 178 ] Influence [ edit ] Leary was an early influence on applying game theory to psychology, having introduced the concept to the International Association of Applied Psychology in 1961 at its annual conference in Copenhagen.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 181 ] [ H ] He was also an early influence on transactional analysis .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] His concept of the four life scripts , dating to 1951, [ 184 ] became an influence on transactional analysis by the late 1960s, popularized by Thomas Harris in his book, I'm OK, You're OK .

[ 185 ] Many consider Leary one of the most prominent figures of the counterculture of the 1960s , and since those times he has remained influential on pop culture , literature, television, [ 179 ] film and, especially, music.

Leary coined the influential term reality tunnel , a kind of representative realism . The theory states that, with a subconscious set of mental filters formed from their beliefs and experiences, everyone interprets the same world differently, hence "Truth is in the eye of the beholder." [ I ] His ideas influenced the work of his friend Robert Anton Wilson .

[ 186 ] This influence went both ways, with Leary taking just as much from Wilson. Wilson's 1983 book Prometheus Rising was an in-depth, highly detailed and inclusive work documenting Leary's eight-circuit model of consciousness . Although the theory originated in discussions between Leary and a Hindu holy man at Millbrook, Wilson was one of its most ardent proponents and introduced it to a mainstream audience in 1977's bestselling Cosmic Trigger . In 1989, they appeared together on stage in a dialog called The Inner Frontier [ 187 ] hosted by the Association for Consciousness Exploration , [ 188 ] the same group that had hosted Leary's first Cleveland appearance in 1979.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] World religion scholar Huston Smith was "turned on" by Leary after being introduced to him by Aldous Huxley in the early 1960s. Smith interpreted the experience as deeply religious, and described it in detailed religious terms in his book Cleansing of the Doors of Perception .

[ 191 ] Smith asked Leary whether he knew the power and danger of what he was conducting research with. In Mother Jones Magazine , 1997, Smith commented: First, I have to say that during the three years I was involved with that Harvard study , LSD was not only legal but respectable. Before Tim went on his unfortunate careening course, it was a legitimate research project. Though I did find evidence that, when recounted, the experiences of the Harvard group and those of mystics were impossible to tell apart—descriptively indistinguishable—that's not the last word. There is still a question about the truth of the disclosure. Was the drug-induced mystical experience just an emotional jag that messed up some neural connections? Or was it a genuine disclosure, an epiphany?

[ 192 ] In popular culture [ edit ] On screen [ edit ] Leary, John Lennon, Yoko Ono, and others recording " Give Peace A Chance " In the 1968 Dragnet episode "The Big Prophet", Liam Sullivan played Brother William Bentley, leader of the Temple of the Expanded Mind, a thinly fictionalized Leary. Bentley held forth for the entire half-hour on the rights of the individual and the benefits of LSD and marijuana, while Joe Friday argued the contrary.

[ 193 ] The 1979 musical Hair and the 1967 stage performance it is based on make multiple references to Leary.

[ 194 ] Leary appears in Cheech & Chong 's 1981 film Nice Dreams , featured in a scene in which he gives Cheech "the key to the universe".

[ 195 ] In 1994, Leary appeared as himself in the Space Ghost Coast to Coast episode "Elevator", [ 196 ] and also appeared in an episode of The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.

as the character Dr. Milo.

[ 197 ] In 1996, months before his death, Leary appeared in the feminist science fiction feature film Conceiving Ada .

[ 198 ] The 1998 movie Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas , adapted from Hunter S. Thompson 's 1971 novel , portrays heavy psychedelic drug use and mentions Leary when the protagonist ponders the meaning of the acid wave of the 1960s.

[ 199 ] A 2017 episode of Urban Myths depicts a meeting between Leary and Cary Grant , whom he introduces to LSD.

[ 200 ] In music [ edit ] The Psychedelic Experience (1964) was the inspiration for John Lennon 's song " Tomorrow Never Knows ", on The Beatles ' album Revolver (1966).

[ 69 ] The Moody Blues recorded two songs about Leary. " Legend of a Mind ", written and sung by Ray Thomas on their album In Search of the Lost Chord (1968), begins: "Timothy Leary's dead. No, no, no, no, he's outside looking in".

[ 201 ] The second was "When You're a Free Man" on the Seventh Sojourn album.

[ 202 ] Leary recruited Lennon to write a theme song for his California gubernatorial campaign against Ronald Reagan (which was interrupted by Leary's prison sentence for cannabis possession), inspiring Lennon to come up with " Come Together " (1969), based on Leary's campaign theme and catchphrase.

[ 201 ] [ 203 ] Leary was present and sang back-up vocals when Lennon and his wife, Yoko Ono , recorded " Give Peace a Chance " (1969) during their bed-in in Montreal and is mentioned in the lyrics of the song.

[ 204 ] The Who 's 1970 single " The Seeker " mentions Leary in a sequence where the song's protagonist claims that Leary (among other high-profile people) was unable to help them with their search for answers.

[ 205 ] While in exile in Switzerland, Leary and British writer Brian Barritt collaborated with the German band Ash Ra Tempel and recorded the album Seven Up (1973).

[ 206 ] He is credited as a songwriter, and his lyrics and vocals can be heard throughout the album.

[ 207 ] Commenting on the work of his friend H. R. Giger , a surrealist artist from Switzerland who won an Academy Award for his work on the film Alien , Leary noted: Giger's work disturbs us, spooks us, because of its enormous evolutionary time span. It shows us, all too clearly, where we come from and where we are going.

— Timothy Leary, The New York Times [ 208 ] During the height of rave culture from the 1980s to mid-2000s, recordings of Leary and other psychedelic thinkers speaking were often mixed into electronic music.

The Shamen honored him in the song "Ebenezer Goode" on their album Boss Drum .

[ 209 ] In 1995, Leary had a cameo at the end of the video for alternative rock group Blind Melon 's song " Galaxie ".

[ 210 ] The Marcy Playground song "It's Saturday", from its 1999 album Shapeshifter , mentions joining Leary "in a cryogenic freeze".

[ 211 ] In comic books [ edit ] In 1973, El Perfecto Comics was organized by Aline Kominsky and published by The Print Mint to raise funds for the Timothy Leary Defense Fund. The comic features 31 underground artists contributing mostly one-pagers about drug experiences (primarily LSD). The front cover and a contributed one-page story are by Robert Crumb .

[ 212 ] In 1979, Last Gasp published the one-shot edition Neurocomics: Timothy Leary . "Evolved from transmissions of Dr. Timothy Leary as filtered through Pete Von Sholly & George DiCaprio ", it is based on Leary's writings related to life, the brain, and intelligence. DiCaprio collaborated with Leary on the script.

[ 213 ] Works [ edit ] Main article: Timothy Leary bibliography Leary authored or coauthored more than 20 books and was featured on more than a dozen audio recordings. His acting career included over a dozen appearances in movies and television shows in various roles and over 30 appearances as himself. He also produced and/or collaborated with others in the creation of multimedia presentations and computer games.

In 2011, The New York Times reported that the New York Public Library had acquired Leary's personal archives, including papers, videotapes, photographs and other archival material from the Leary estate, including correspondence and documents relating to Allen Ginsberg , Aldous Huxley , William Burroughs , Jack Kerouac , Ken Kesey , Arthur Koestler , G. Gordon Liddy and other prominent cultural figures.

[ 214 ] The collection became available in September 2013.

[ 215 ] See also [ edit ] Grateful Dead John C. Lilly David Peel The Sekhmet Hypothesis Zihuatanejo Project Notes [ edit ] ^ Barbara Chase, Timothy Leary's fifth wife, is the sister of Tanya Roberts .

[ 1 ] ^ a b Higgs 2006 , p. 18: "In 1954 he became Director of Psychology Research at the Kaiser Foundation Hospital, and published nearly 50 papers in psychology journals." ^ Leary 1982 , p. 256: "Since homosexuality has always been a part of every society, you have to assume that there is something necessary, correct and valid - genetically natural - about it." ^ Wilson 2000 , p. 6: "The eight-circuit model of consciousness in this book and much of its future-vision derive from the writings of Dr. Timothy Leary, whose letters and conversations have also influenced many other ideas herein." ^ Higgs 2006 , p. 99: "His lawyers took the appeal against the Laredo arrest all the way to the Supreme Court, and on May 19, 1969 succeeded in getting the antiquated marijuana tax law declared unconstitutional." ^ Higgs 2006 , p. 268: "The last 17 months of Tim's life were a flurry of activity. There were records to be made, documentaries to film… and countless personal appearances. A stream of press flocked to his door." ^ Leary 1982 , p. 231: "O'Neill's proposal for mini-Earths was obviously the next step in human evolution..." ^ Leary 1983 , p. 196: "Psychiatrist Eric Berne popularised my concepts of transactional analysis and game theory in Games People Play , making accessible to the public concepts of behaviour-change that had formerly been reserved to the psychological priesthood." ^ Higgs 2006 , p. 282: "[Robert Anton] Wilson is often credited with creating the phrase 'reality tunnels', but when asked about it, he is quick to give Leary the credit." References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ Gates, Anita (January 5, 2021).

"Tanya Roberts, a Charlie's Angel and a Bond Girl, Is Dead at 65" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ "Timothy Leary" .

psychology.fas.harvard.edu . Retrieved February 2, 2020 .

^ Leary (1998) , p. back cover.

^ a b c d e Mansnerus, Laura (June 1, 1996).

"Timothy Leary, Pied Piper of Psychedelic 60s, Dies at 75" .

The New York Times . Obituary . Retrieved July 11, 2008 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 233.

^ a b Kansra, Nikita; Shih, Cynthia W. (May 21, 2012).

"Harvard LSD Research Draws National Attention" .

The Harvard Crimson .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2018 . Retrieved March 15, 2018 .

^ a b Department of Psychology.

"Timothy Leary (1920–1996)" .

Harvard University .

Archived from the original on April 5, 2018 . Retrieved February 16, 2018 .

^ a b c Weil (1963) .

^ Stevens (1983) , pp. 273–274.

^ Junker, Howard (July 5, 1965).

"LSD: 'The Contact High' " .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2017 . Retrieved May 31, 2017 .

^ Greenfield (2006) , p. 537.

^ Isralowitz, Richard (May 14, 2004).

Drug Use: A Reference Handbook . ABC-CLIO. p.

183 .

ISBN 978-1576077085 . Retrieved April 1, 2016 .

Leary explored the cultural and philosophical implications of psychedelic drugs ^ Donaldson, Robert H. (2015).

Modern America: A Documentary History of the Nation Since 1945 . Routledge. p. 128.

ISBN 978-0765615374 . Retrieved April 1, 2016 .

Leary not only used and distributed the drug, he founded a sort of LSD philosophy of use that involved aspects of mind expansion and the revelation of personal truth through 'dropping acid'.

^ Gillespie, Nick (June 15, 2006).

"Psychedelic, Man" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2017 . Retrieved September 16, 2017 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 17.

^ Greenfield (2006) , pp. 7, 11–12, 18.

^ Greenfield 2006 , p. 20.

^ Peter O. Whitmer, Aquarius Revisited: Seven Who Created the Sixties Counterculture That Changed America (NY: Citadel Press, 1991), 21–25 ^ Greenfield (2006) , pp. 28–55.

^ a b Greenfield (2006) , p. 65.

^ Leary (1983) , p. 144.

^ "Timothy Leary" . Pabook.libraries.psu.edu. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ "WSU - Myths and Legends" . Washington State Magazine. 2010.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2015 . Retrieved January 13, 2016 .

^ "Timothy Leary Papers 1910 - 2009" . New York Public Library. 2009.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2016 . Retrieved January 19, 2016 .

^ Leary (2000) , p. 13.

^ Leary (1950) .

^ Leary (2000) , pp. 13–15.

^ Announcement of the School of Medicine - Fall and Spring Semesters, 1950 - 1951 . University of California Medical Center. 1950 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ Greenfield (2006) , pp. 68–77.

^ Torgoff, Martin (2004).

Can't Find My Way Home: America in the Great Stoned Age . Simon and Schuster. p.

72 .

ISBN 0-7432-3010-8 .

^ Leary & Ginsberg (1995) , p. 4.

^ Current Biography - Volume 31 . H. W. Wilson Company. 1970 . Retrieved January 8, 2016 .

^ Stevens (1983) , p. 186.

^ Conners, Peter (2010).

White Hand Society - The Psychedelic Partnership of Timothy Leary and Allen Ginsberg . City Lights Books. p.

22 .

ISBN 9780872865358 .

^ Stevens (1983) , p. 187.

^ a b New York Times , December 3, 1966, p. 25 ^ Stevens (1983) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Leary (1957) .

^ "Timothy Leary, Pied Piper Of Psychedelic 60's, Dies at 75" .

New York Times . June 1, 1996.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2015 . Retrieved January 7, 2016 .

^ "She Comes in Colors".

Playboy . HMH Publishing Company Inc. September 1, 1966.

^ "Life on LSD" .

Life . Archived from the original on October 26, 2010.

^ Cashman, John. "The LSD Story". Fawcett Publications, 1966 ^ a b Ram Dass Fierce Grace , 2001, Zeitgeist Video ^ Sandison, Ronald (1997).

Psychedelia Britannica - Hallucinogenic Drugs in Britain . Turnaround. p. 57.

ISBN 1873262051 .

'Psilocybin...was synthesised in Dr Hofmann's laboratory in 1958.' ^ Goffman, K. and Joy, D. 2004.

Counterculture Through the Ages: From Abraham to Acid House . New York: Villard, 250–252 ^ Leary (1969) .

^ Metzner & Weil (1963) .

^ Metzner (1965) .

^ "Dr. Leary's Concord Prison Experiment: A 34 Year Follow-Up Study" . Maps.org.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ "Reflections on the Concord Prison Project and the Follow-Up Study" (PDF) . Maps.org. Archived from the original on May 5, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) Archived from the original on July 24, 2016.

^ Doblin, Rick (1998). "Dr. Leary's Concord Prison Experiment:A 34 Year Follow-Up Study".

Journal of Psychoactive Drugs . Vol. 30, no. 4. pp.

419– 426.

^ "International Federation For Internal Freedom – Statement of Purpose" . timothylearyarchives.org. March 21, 2009.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2017 . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ Lee & Shlain (1992) , p. 36.

^ "4: Sir Dinadan the Humorist" . Lycaeum.org. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 50.

^ "Court Finds Lisa Bieberman Guilty Of Violations of Federal Drug Laws | News | The Harvard Crimson" . Thecrimson.com. November 18, 1966.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2008 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ Hiatt, Nathaniel J. (May 23, 2016).

"A Trip Down Memory Lane: LSD at Harvard" .

Harvard Crimson .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2017 . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ hanna, jon (March 28, 2012).

"Erowid Character Vaults: Lisa Bieberman Extended Biography" . Erowid.org.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2017 . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ Davidson, Sara (Fall 2006).

"The Ultimate Trip" .

Tufts Magazine .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 15, 2018 .

^ Russin, Joseph M.; Weil, Andrew T. (January 24, 1973).

"The Crimson Takes Leary, Alpert to Task" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved April 7, 2022 .

^ Lee & Shlain (1992) , p. 97.

^ Green, Penelope (May 2, 2024).

"Peggy Mellon Hitchcock, Who Helped Timothy Leary Turn On, Dies at 90" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 3, 2024 .

^ "Timothy Leary Turns 100: America's LSD Messiah, Remembered By Those Who Knew Him" .

Vice.com . October 23, 2020 . Retrieved July 16, 2022 .

^ a b c Chevallier, Jim.

"Tim Leary and Ovum - A Visit to Castalia with Ovum" Archived June 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Chez Jim/Ovum , March 3, 2003 ^ a b c Lee & Shlain (1992) , p. 98.

^ a b c d e Lander, Devin (January 30, 2012).

"League for Spiritual Discovery" .

World Religions and Spiritualities Project .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ a b Ulrich, Jennifer.

"Transmissions from The Timothy Leary Papers: Evolution of the "Psychedelic" Show" Archived September 24, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , New York Public Library, June 4, 2012 ^ Stevens (1983) , p. 208.

^ a b c d e Sante, Lucy (June 26, 2006).

"The Nutty Professor" .

The New York Times Book Review . 'Timothy Leary: A Biography,' by Robert Greenfield.

Archived from the original on May 9, 2012 . Retrieved July 12, 2008 .

^ Wolfe (1989) , p. 99.

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 78.

^ Leary (1983) , p. 206.

^ Leary, Alpert & Metzner (2008) , p. 11.

^ Pennebaker, D. A.

" You're Nobody Till Somebody Loves You " . Pennebaker Hegedus Films.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2018 . Retrieved February 3, 2018 .

^ "Timothy Leary's Wife Drops Out" .

Village Voice . February 5, 2002.

Archived from the original on September 28, 2017 . Retrieved September 27, 2017 .

^ McLellan, Dennis (February 9, 2002).

"Rosemary W. Leary, 66; Ex-Wife of 1960s Psychedelic Guru" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2015 . Retrieved September 27, 2017 .

^ Sward, Susan (February 9, 2002).

"Rosemary Woodruff – LSD guru's ex-wife" .

SF Gate .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2017 . Retrieved September 27, 2017 .

^ a b c Hoffmann, Martina (2002).

"Rosemary Woodruff Leary – Psychedelic Pioneer" .

MAPS Bulletin .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2017 . Retrieved September 27, 2017 .

^ Chevallier, Jim.

"Jean McCreedy and Psychedelic Prayers" Archived September 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , Chez Jim/Ovum , March 3, 2003 ^ Marwick, Arthur.

The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy, and the United States . Oxford University Press, 1998, p. 312.

^ "Playboy Interview: Timothy Leary" .

Playboy . 1966.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2017 . Retrieved May 8, 2016 .

"...the fact is that LSD is a specific cure for homosexuality." ^ Leary (1982) , p. 144.

^ Leary (1982) , p. 151.

^ "Legend of a Mind: Timothy Leary and LSD" . The Pop History Dig. 2014.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2016 . Retrieved May 10, 2016 .

^ Leary (1982) , p. 148.

^ Stevens (1983) , p. 431.

^ "Smithsonian Folkways - The Psychedelic Experience: Readings from the Book "The Psychedelic Experience. A Manual Based on the Tibetan..." - Timothy Leary" .

Folkways.si.edu . March 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2015 . Retrieved May 29, 2015 .

^ Grimesmay, William.

"Chemist Who Sought to Bring LSD to the World, Dies at 75" Archived September 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , New York Times , May 12, 2017 ^ a b Forte, Robert (March 1, 1999).

Timothy Leary: Outside Looking In . Park Press. p. 79.

ISBN 978-0892817863 .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2016 . Retrieved September 24, 2017 .

^ Graboi (1991) , p. 207.

^ Graboi (1991) , p. 220.

^ Graboi (1991) , pp. 222–224.

^ Staton, Scott.

"Turn On, Tune In, Drop by the Archives: Timothy Leary at the N.Y.P.L." Archived September 24, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The New Yorker , June 11, 2011 ^ Graboi (1991) , p. 206.

^ "Human Be-In in San Francisco 1967" .

The Allen Ginsburg Project . July 9, 2011.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2016 . Retrieved May 27, 2016 .

^ Strauss, Neil.

Everyone Loves You When You're Dead: Journeys into Fame and Madness.

New York: HarperCollins, 2011, 337-38 ^ Krassner (2000) , p. 304.

^ "LSD: Lettvin vs Leary" , Open Vault from WGBH , November 30, 1967, archived from the original on October 27, 2011 , retrieved December 21, 2011 ^ Wilson (1991) , pp. 211–213.

^ Leary (1977) , p. 11.

^ Leary (1977) , p. 16.

^ Eysenck, H. J. (December 21, 1957).

"Review of Reviewed Work(s): Interpersonal Diagnosis Of Personality" .

The British Medical Journal .

2 (5059): 1478.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.2.5059.1478-a .

PMC 1962952 .

S2CID 220136866 .

^ Singer, Jerome (April 1966). "Review: The Psychedelic Reader".

American Sociological Review .

31 (2): 284.

doi : 10.2307/2090932 .

JSTOR 2090932 .

^ Harvard Crimson.

"Leary Arrested On Drug Charge" Archived December 15, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , Harvard Crimson , January 3, 1966 ^ Graboi (1991) , pp. 140–146.

^ Leary (1983) , pp. 234–241.

^ "Drugs: The Silver Snuffbox" . Time. March 16, 1966.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2024 . Retrieved December 22, 2024 .

^ Stephen D. Lerner (March 16, 1966).

"Leary Gets 30 Years On Marijuana Charge" . The Harvard Crimson.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2017 . Retrieved December 22, 2024 .

While the prosecution contended in the indictment that three ounces had been found, a government witness said that Miss Leary carried only 11 grams and the total amount found in the car was less than one-half ounce.

^ "The Beatles - Come Together - History and Information from the Oldies Guide at About.com" . Oldies.about.com.

Archived from the original on April 12, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ "RE/Search Publications – Pranks! – Timothy Leary" . Archived from the original on March 28, 2005 . Retrieved June 28, 2006 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Wilson (1991) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Rudd, Mark (2009).

Underground: My Life with SDS and the Weathermen . New York City: William Morrow and Company . pp.

225–7 .

ISBN 978-0-06-147275-6 .

^ Brian Flanagan (2002).

The Weather Underground . The Free History Project. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015 . Retrieved August 9, 2016 .

^ Leary (1983) , pp. 304–306.

^ a b c d e f g h Coleman, Kate (February 18, 2009).

"Acid Trips and Frozen Heads at San Francisco's Trippiest Party" .

Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2017 . Retrieved February 16, 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Rein, Lisa (August 30, 2017).

"Interview with Timothy Leary Archivist Michael Horowitz" . Boing Boing.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2018 .

^ a b Martin, Douglas (February 16, 2002).

"Rosemary Woodruff, 66, Wife And Fellow Fugitive of Leary" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ People v. Leary, 40 Cal.App.3d 527 Archived December 24, 2013, at the Wayback Machine (1974) ^ Greenfield (2006) , pp. 436–467.

^ and also reportedly declared, "He has preached the length and breadth of the land, and I am inclined to the view that he would pose a danger to the community if released." Jesse Walker (2006) "The Acid Guru's Long, Strange Trip" The American Conservative , November 6, 2006.

^ [ vague ] Nick Gillespie , " Psychedelic, Man , Archived February 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine " Washington Post , June 15, 2006 ^ "He was no hippie: Remembering Manson, prison, Scientology and mind control" .

Raw Story . November 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on November 26, 2017 . Retrieved November 27, 2017 .

^ "Timothy Leary was FBI informer" .

BBC World News . Retrieved December 25, 2019 .

^ Menand, Louis (June 18, 2006).

"Acid Redux" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved December 25, 2019 .

^ Lee & Shlain (1992) , p. 274.

^ Fosburgh, Lacey (September 10, 1974).

"Leary Scored as 'Cop Informant' By His Son and 2 Close Friends" .

The New York Times . New York, NY.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2018 . Retrieved February 15, 2018 .

^ a b "Open Letter from the Friends of Timothy Leary" .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2009 . Retrieved July 4, 2009 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 273.

^ "Notes on People" .

The New York Times . New York, NY. January 25, 1975.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2017 . Retrieved June 22, 2016 .

^ Leary, Horowitz & Marshall (1994) , pp. 72–73.

^ The Godparent: Conversation with Winona Ryder ^ "It's All Happening Poscast 36, Joi Ito Interview" . It's All Happening. 2016. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016 . Retrieved May 25, 2016 .

'Joi was an integral part of my formative years...he was my dad's Godson....' - Zachary Leary.

^ "Timothy Leary's daughter charged with attempted murder" .

UPI . January 9, 1990 . Retrieved December 22, 2024 .

^ Gilmore, Mikal (July 11–25, 1996). "Timothy Leary 1920-1996".

Rolling Stone .

^ "Timothy Leary Daughter Hangs Self in Cell, Dies in Hospital" .

Los Angeles Times . September 6, 1990.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved October 6, 2014 .

^ Mother American Night: My Life in Crazy Times . Crown Archetype. May 28, 2019.

ISBN 9781524760199 .

^ Greenfield (2006) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Forte, Robert (1999).

Timothy Leary – Outside Looking In . Park Street Press. p. 8.

ISBN 0892817860 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 256.

^ Greenfield (2006) , p. 186.

^ "Stuff" . Invisible Movement. 2014.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2016 . Retrieved May 25, 2016 .

^ Timothy Leary and Robert Anton Wilson.

Los Angeles (1988) "On the 25th of September we're going to have, in the room upstairs, a bone fide candidate for the President of the United States. The Libertarian Party, he's running, a man, for president... his name is Ron Paul. Many of you are probably closet Libertarians ..." ( @ 56:27 ) ^ Caldwell, Christopher (July 22, 2007).

"The Antiwar, Pro-Abortion, Anti-Drug-Enforcement-Administration, Anti-Medicare Candidacy of Dr. Ron Paul." New York Times . Archived from the original.

^ Gillespie, Nick (December 9, 2011).

"Five Myths About Ron Paul." Washington Post . Archived from the original.

^ Saunders, Debra.

"Ron Paul: Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out." Real Clear Politics (December 22, 2011). Archived from the original.

^ "More on Timothy Leary and drinking" .

^ Conners, Peter (2010).

White Hand Society - The Psychedelic Partnership of Timothy Leary and Allen Ginsberg . City Lights Books. p.

258 .

ISBN 9780872865358 .

^ Leary, Horowitz & Marshall (1994) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Ruthofer, Arno (1997).

"Think for Yourself; Question Authority" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2007 . Retrieved February 2, 2007 .

^ Elmer-Dewitt/Dallas, Philip (September 3, 1990).

"Technology: (Mis)Adventures In Cyberspace" .

Time Magazine .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 . Retrieved December 23, 2013 .

^ Forte, Robert (1999).

Timothy Leary - Outside Looking In . Park Street Press. p. 129141.

ISBN 0892817860 .

^ Saunders, Michael (May 19, 1993).

"Billy Idol turns 'Cyberpunk' on new CD" .

The Boston Globe . 135 Morrissey Boulevard. Boston, Massachusetts, United States: P. Steven Ainsley. Archived from the original on May 30, 2015 . Retrieved May 29, 2015 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ "The Cleveland Free Times :: Archives :: Circle Of Ash" .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2011 . Retrieved October 9, 2011 .

^ Quote from CD: Timothy Leary Live at Starwood ^ "Digital Polytheism" . Deoxy.org. Archived from the original on May 19, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ "Timothy Leary / Simon Stokes – Right To Fly" . Discogs. 1996.

Archived from the original on October 27, 2016 . Retrieved May 25, 2016 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 258.

^ a b c d e Mansnerus, Laura (November 26, 1995).

"Conversations/Timothy Leary; At Death's Door, the Message Is Tune In, Turn On, Drop In" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2018 . Retrieved February 21, 2018 .

^ "Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary" .

IMDb . August 26, 2016 . Retrieved February 16, 2018 .

^ Turan, Kenneth (June 16, 2016).

" 'Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary' documents two men and their trip of a lifetime" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2018 .

^ a b c Mitchell, Chris (October 1, 1997).

"Timothy Leary: Design For Dying " . Spike Magazine.

Archived from the original on December 9, 2014 . Retrieved February 16, 2018 .

^ Rothstein, Edward (April 29, 1996).

"Tuning In to Timothy Leary" .

www.archives.nytimes.com . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

^ Lei, Richard (March 10, 1996).

"Online, In Pain, The Apostle of Acid Prepares To Truly Drop Out" .

Washington Post . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

^ a b c Darwin, Mike (September 1988).

"Dr. Leary Joins Up..." Alcor Life Extension Foundation.

Archived from the original on May 20, 2010 . Retrieved August 24, 2009 .

^ Platt, Charles (July 1996).

"The Strange Case of Timothy Leary" . CryoCare Report.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2024 . Retrieved November 28, 2024 .

^ Leary (n.d.) .

^ Simons, Marlise (April 22, 1997).

"A Final Turn-On Lifts Timothy Leary Off" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2016 . Retrieved May 27, 2016 .

^ Kimble, Lindsay (September 7, 2015).

"Susan Sarandon Takes the Ashes of Timothy Leary to Burning Man" .

People .

Archived from the original on September 10, 2015 . Retrieved September 10, 2015 .

^ "LSD ADVOCATE, '60S ICON TIMOTHY LEARY DIES AT 75" .

Washington Post . June 1, 1996 . Retrieved March 11, 2022 .

^ "Leary's Daughter Dies After Hanging: Death: She was in custody after twice being judged mentally unfit to stand trial on charges of shooting her boyfriend last year" .

Los Angeles Times . September 7, 1990.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

^ "A Long, Strange Trip: Leary's Circus Chronicled" .

The New York Observer . June 19, 2006.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

^ "Family tree of Mary Della Cioppa" .

Geneanet .

^ "Rosemary Woodruff Leary -- Psychedelic Pioneer By Martina Hoffmann with Friends of Rosemary Woodruff Leary" .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2017 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

^ a b "Joanna Harcourt-Smith, socialite and author who went on the run with Timothy Leary – obituary" .

The Telegraph . November 6, 2020.

^ "Barbara Chase" .

IMDb .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

^ "FY! Charlie's Angels" .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

^ "Family tree of Barbara BLUM" .

Geneanet .

^ Leary (2019) .

^ a b Solomon, David (1964).

LSD: The Consciousness-Expanding Drug . G. P. Putnam's Sons. pp.

97– 113.

ISBN 129929507X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Conners, Peter (2010).

White Hand Society - The Psychedelic Partnership of Timothy Leary and Allen Ginsberg . City Lights Books. pp.

113–117 .

ISBN 9780872865358 .

^ Leary (1982) , p. 45.

^ Morton Schatzman (June 1, 1996).

"Obituary: Timothy Leary" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2015 . Retrieved August 27, 2015 .

^ Jeff Riggenbach (July 1, 2011).

"Libertarian Psychology" .

Mises Daily .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2015 . Retrieved August 27, 2015 .

^ Leary et al. (1951) .

^ Harris, Thomas (1973).

I'm Ok - You're Ok . Pan Books.

ISBN 0-330-23543-5 .

^ Lattin, Don (January 3, 2017).

"The War on Drugs Halted Research Into the Potential Benefits of Psychedelics - Now it's finally starting up again" .

Slate . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

^ Lesie, Michele (1989) High Priest of LSD To Drop In .

The Cleveland Plain Dealer ^ Local Group Hosts Dr. Timothy Leary by Will Allison ( The Observer September 29, 1989) ^ Two 60s Cult Heroes, on the Eve of the 80s by James Neff ( Cleveland Plain Dealer October 30, 1979) ^ Timothy Leary: An LSD Cowboy Turns Cosmic Comic by Frank Kuznik.

Cleveland magazine, November 1979.

^ Smith (2001) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Marilyn Berlin Snell.

"The World of Religion According to Huston Smith" .

Mother Jones . Archived from the original on December 8, 2013 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

{{ cite magazine }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Dragnet: The Big Prophet" .

TV.com . Archived from the original on September 28, 2018 . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ "Galt MacDermot (Ft. Caissie Levy, Gavin Creel & Sasha Allen) – the Flesh Failures / Eyes Look Your Last / Let the Sunshine in (Medley)" .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2019 . Retrieved May 9, 2019 .

^ "Nice Dreams (1981)" .

IMDb . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ "Space Ghost Coast to Coast (TV Series) Elevator (1994)" .

IMDb .

^ "The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr." Stagecoach (TV Episode 1994) - IMDb , retrieved June 23, 2021 ^ Mark Savlov, "Conceiving Ada" review , 'The Austin Chronicle', June 11, 1999.

Archived January 14, 2019, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1998) : Quotes" . IMDb.com.

Archived from the original on June 23, 2013 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ McEwan, Cameron K. (October 2, 2017).

" 'Urban Myths' Recap 1×04: 'When Cary Grant Introduced Timothy Leary To LSD' " .

The Observer .

^ a b Lattin, Don (2011).

The Harvard Psychedelic Club: How Timothy Leary, Ram Dass, Huston Smith, and Andrew Weil Killed the Fifties and Ushered in a New Age for America . HarperCollins. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-06-165594-4 .

^ Higgs (2006) , p. 173.

^ "Come Together" . The Beatles Bible. March 15, 2008.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ Perlstein, Rick (2008).

Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America . Simon and Schuster. p. 386.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4302-5 .

^ "The Who, "The Seeker" " .

American Songwriter . September 17, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2015 . Retrieved July 23, 2015 .

^ Higgs (2006) , pp. 182–185.

^ Article, "It's Frothy Man", Mojo , issue No. 113, April 2003.

^ Martin, Douglas (May 14, 2014).

"H. R. Giger, Swiss Artist, Dies at 74; His Vision Gave Life to 'Alien' Creature" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2017 . Retrieved May 14, 2014 .

^ Collin, Matthew.

"Psychedelic Techno Gurus" .

daily.redbullmusicacademy.com/ . Retrieved February 18, 2025 .

^ BlindMelonVEVO (October 12, 2012).

"Blind Melon – Galaxie" .

Archived from the original on February 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2018 – via YouTube.

^ "Marcy Playground - It's Saturday Lyrics" .

musiXmatch . Retrieved February 11, 2023 .

^ "El Perfecto Comics 1st Printing" .

comixjoint.com .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2017 . Retrieved September 21, 2017 .

^ Lauren, Davis (March 3, 2013).

"Read Timothy Leary's brain-melting comic about space migration and the future of human consciousness" .

Gizmodo .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2018 . Retrieved February 15, 2018 .

^ Cohen, Patricia (June 15, 2011).

"New York Public Library Buys Timothy Leary's Papers" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 24, 2012 . Retrieved December 23, 2013 .

^ Ilnytzky, Ula (September 18, 2013).

"What a trip: Timothy Leary's files go public in NY" . Associated Press.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2014 . Retrieved November 27, 2014 .

Works cited [ edit ] Graboi, Nina (1991).

One Foot in the Future: A Woman's Spiritual Journey . Aerial Press.

ISBN 978-0942344103 .

Greenfield, Robert (2006).

Timothy Leary: A Biography . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 978-0151005000 .

Higgs, John (2006).

I Have America Surrounded: The Life of Timothy Leary . United Kingdom: Friday Books.

ISBN 1905548257 .

Krassner, Paul (2000).

Paul Krassner's Impolite Interviews . Seven Stories Press.

ISBN 1888363924 .

Leary, Timothy (1950).

The Social Dimensions of Personality: Group Process and Structure (PhD). University of California.

Leary, Timothy; Freeman, Mervin; Ossorio, Abel; Coffey, Hubert (1951). "The Interpersonal Dimension of Personality".

Journal of Personality .

20 (2): 143– 161.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1951.tb01518.x .

PMID 14918048 .

Leary, Timothy (1957).

Interpersonal diagnosis of personality: a functional theory and methodology . New York, Ronald Press Co.

Leary, Timothy (1969). "The Effects of Consciousness Expanding Drugs in Prisoner Rehabilitation".

Psychedelic Review (10).

Leary, Timothy (1977).

Exo-Psychology: A Manual on the Use of the Human Nervous System According to the Instructions of the Manufacturers . Los Angeles: Star Seed/Peace Press.

ISBN 0-915238-16-0 . Retrieved January 27, 2020 .

Leary, Timothy (1982).

Changing My Mind, Among Others: Lifetime Writings . Prentice Hall Inc.

ISBN 0131278118 .

Leary, Timothy (1983).

Flashbacks . Heinemann.

ISBN 0874773172 .

Leary, Timothy; Horowitz, Michael; Marshall, Vicky (1994).

Chaos & Cyber Culture . Ronin Publishing.

ISBN 0-914171-77-1 .

Leary, Timothy; Ginsberg, Allen (1995).

High Priest . Ronin Publishing.

ISBN 0-914171-80-1 .

Leary, Timothy (1998).

The Politics of Ecstasy . Ronin.

ISBN 978-1579510312 .

Leary, Timothy (2000).

The Politics of Self-Determination . Ronin.

ISBN 1-57951-015-9 .

Leary, Timothy; Alpert, Richard ; Metzner, Ralph (2008).

The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead . Penguin Classics.

ISBN 978-0141189635 .

Leary, Zachary (n.d.).

"It Was Twenty Years Ago Today..." zachleary.com . Archived from the original on June 1, 2016.

Leary, Zachary (January 8, 2019).

"Private Guided Journeys" . Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2019 .

Lee, Martin A.; Shlain, Bruce (1992).

Acid Dreams: The Complete Social History of LSD: The CIA, the Sixties, and Beyond . Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0802130624 .

Metzner, Ralph ; Weil, G. (1963).

"Predictive Recidivism: Base Rates for Concord Constitution" .

Journal of Criminal Law, Criminology, and Police Science .

doi : 10.2307/1140984 .

JSTOR 1140984 .

Metzner, Ralph (July 1965). "A New Behavior Change Program for Adult Offenders Using Pscilocybin".

Psychotherapy .

Smith, Huston (2001).

Cleansing the Doors of Perception: The Religious Significance of Entheogenic Plants and Chemicals . Jeremy P Tarcher.

ISBN 1585420344 .

Stevens, Jay (1983).

Storming Heaven: LSD and the American Dream . Flamingo.

ISBN 0586087966 .

Weil, Andrew T.

(November 5, 1963). "The Strange Case of the Harvard Drug Scandal".

Look . No. 27.

Wilson, Robert Anton (2000) [1983].

Prometheus Rising . Falcon Press.

ISBN 0941404196 .

Wilson, Robert Anton (1991).

Cosmic Trigger . Vol. 1. New Falcon Publications.

ISBN 0941404463 .

Wolfe, Tom (1989).

The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test . Black Swan.

ISBN 0552993662 .

Further reading [ edit ] Fallowell, Duncan (1994). "Timothy Leary, Wonderland Park, Los Angeles".

20th Century Characters . London: Vintage Books.

Minutaglio, Bill; Davis, Steven L. (2018).

The Most Dangerous Man in America: Timothy Leary, Richard Nixon and the Hunt for the Fugitive King of LSD . Grand Central.

ISBN 978-1455563586 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Timothy Leary .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Timothy Leary .

TimothyLeary.info – biography, archives, links, and more Lectures from the Leary Archive in audio format Archived October 2, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Timothy Leary at IMDb "Unlimited Virtual Realities for Everyone!" Archived August 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Artfutura , 1990.

Timothy Leary papers, 1910-2009 , held by the Manuscripts and Archives Division, New York Public Library .

Rosemary Woodruff Leary papers, 1935-2006 at Manuscripts and Archives Division at the New York Public Library Image of Timothy Leary and his wife, Rosemary Woodruff holding a news conference in Los Angeles, California, 1969.

Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive (Collection 1429). UCLA Library Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library , University of California, Los Angeles .

v t e Timothy Leary Bibliography Books The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead (1964) High Priest (1968) Neurologic (1973) Flashbacks (1983) Theories Reality tunnel Philosophy Eight-circuit model of consciousness Models Interpersonal circumplex Research Harvard Psilocybin Project Concord Prison Experiment Marsh Chapel Experiment League for Spiritual Discovery Communities Zihuatanejo Project Millbrook Music Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out (1967 album) " Give Peace a Chance " (1969, vocals) You Can Be Anyone This Time Around (1970 album) Collaborators Ram Dass Ralph Metzner Robert Anton Wilson Related Set and setting Turn on, tune in, drop out Question authority Ego death Leary–Lettvin debate Leary v. United States " Tomorrow Never Knows " (1966 song) " Legend of a Mind " (1968 song) " Come Together " (1969 song) Return Engagement (1983 documentary) The Sekhmet Hypothesis (1995 book) Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary (2014 documentary) Joanna Harcourt-Smith Winona Ryder (goddaughter) v t e Chicago Seven Defendants Rennie Davis David Dellinger John Froines Tom Hayden Abbie Hoffman Jerry Rubin Bobby Seale Lee Weiner Lawyers/Judge William Kunstler (defense lawyer) Leonard Weinglass Julius Hoffman (judge) Tom Foran (prosecutor) Richard Schultz Supporters Center for Constitutional Rights Stew Albert Noam Chomsky Judy Collins Bernardine Dohrn Allen Ginsberg Judy Gumbo Anita Hoffman Paul Krassner Nancy Kurshan Timothy Leary Norman Mailer Country Joe McDonald Graham Nash Phil Ochs Pigasus Ed Sanders Context Youth International Party (Yippies) 1968 Democratic National Convention protests " The whole world is watching " Counterculture of the 1960s National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam Mayor Richard J. Daley Vietnam War opposition Miami and the Siege of Chicago (1968 book) Weather Underground Media "Chicago" (1970 song) Conspiracy: The Trial of the Chicago 8 (1987 film) Steal This Movie!

(2000 film) Chicago 10 (2007 film) William Kunstler: Disturbing the Universe (2009 documentary) The Chicago 8 (2011 film) The Trial of the Chicago 7 (2020 film) v t e Ram Dass Writings The Psychedelic Experience (1964) Be Here Now (1971) Other work Harvard Psilocybin Project Zihuatanejo Project Seva Foundation Prison-Ashram Project Associations Timothy Leary Bhagavan Das Neem Karoli Baba Baba Hari Dass Related Marsh Chapel Experiment Millbrook Lama Foundation Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary (2014 documentary) Ram Dass, Going Home (2017 documentary) " Tomorrow Never Knows " (song) "Be Here Now" (song) v t e Weather Underground Background Anti-Vietnam War movement Counterculture of the 1960s New Left ( New Communist movement · Maoism ) Students for a Democratic Society ( Revolutionary Youth Movement ) 1968 Democratic National Convention ( riots ) Flint War Council Domestic terrorism in the United States Women's Brigade of Weather Underground Seattle Weather Collective FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives, 1970s Bill Clinton pardon controversy Bill Ayers 2008 presidential election controversy Members Jane Alpert Bill Ayers Kit Bakke Alan Berkman Silas Bissell Kathy Boudin Scott Braley Judith Alice Clark Bernardine Dohrn Dianne Donghi Elizabeth Ann Duke Linda Evans Brian Flanagan Larry Grathwohl (informant) David Gilbert Ted Gold Phoebe Hirsch John Jacobs Naomi Jaffe Jeff Jones Michael Justesen Michael Kazin Sharon Krebs Nancy Kurshan Howard Machtinger Eric Mann Sam Melville Mark D. Naison Diana Oughton Robin Palmer Eleanor Raskin Jonah Raskin Terry Robbins Susan Rosenberg Robert Roth Mark Rudd Matthew Steen Susan Stern Laura Whitehorn Cathlyn Platt Wilkerson Attacks Days of Rage ( Weather High School Jailbreaks ) Greenwich Village townhouse explosion Bombing of the National Guard Bombing of the Presidio of San Francisco Bombing of the Bank of America HQ Timothy Leary escape from California Men's Colony Bombing of Marin County Courthouse Bombing at Harvard University Bombing of the United States Capitol Bombings of the Office of California Prisons Bombing of the New York Department of Corrections Bombing of the Pentagon Brink's robbery 1983 United States Senate bombing ( Resistance Conspiracy case ) Derivatives Prairie Fire Organizing Committee ( May 19th Communist Organization ) Associates Seattle Liberation Front ( Michael Lerner ) Media The Weather Underground Katherine Underground The Company You Keep American Pastoral Osawatomie Mother Right Fugitive Days The Anarchist Columbus Free Press See also Protests of 1968 Communist terrorism Yippies Rainbow Coalition John Brown Anti-Klan Committee Michael Klonsky and Communist Party (Marxist–Leninist) Tate–LaBianca murders ( Charles Manson ) Attica Prison riot Bob Dylan 's Subterranean Homesick Blues Black Power movement Jewish left Student activism White privilege theory ( Critical race theory ) COINTELPRO Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timothy_Leary&oldid=1304714657 " Categories : Timothy Leary 1920 births 1996 deaths 20th-century American memoirists 20th-century American psychologists American consciousness researchers and theorists American expatriates in Algeria American founders American free speech activists American modern pagans American people of Irish descent American psychedelic drug advocates American SubGenii College of the Holy Cross alumni Deaths from prostate cancer in California Drug culture ESP-Disk artists Filmed deaths Former Roman Catholics Harvard University Department of Psychology faculty Hippies Lysergic acid diethylamide Military personnel from Massachusetts Modern pagan writers People from Millbrook, New York Psychedelic drug researchers Psychonautics researchers Ram Dass Space burials United States Army Air Forces non-commissioned officers United States Army Air Forces personnel of World War II United States Army personnel of World War II United States Army soldiers United States Military Academy alumni University of Alabama alumni University of California, Berkeley alumni University of California, Berkeley faculty Washington State University alumni Writers from Springfield, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2021 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Webarchive template wayback links All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2017 CS1 maint: location CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2025 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Articles with incomplete citations from July 2024 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timothy Leary 47 languages Add topic

