Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Major figures Toggle Major figures subsection 3.1 Protagoras 3.2 Xeniades 3.3 Gorgias 3.4 Lycophron 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Aristophanes 4.2 Socrates 4.3 Isocrates 4.4 Plato 5 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 5.1 Democracy 5.2 Education 5.2.1 Athens 5.2.2 Rome 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Sophist 56 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sophistry ) Teachers of 5th century BC Greece This article is about the intellectual phenomenon of the 5th century BC. For the movement of the 2nd and 3rd century AD, see Second Sophistic . For the work by Plato, see Sophist (dialogue) .

"Sophism" redirects here; not to be confused with Sufism or Sophiology .

A sophist ( Greek : σοφιστής , romanized : sophistēs ) was a teacher in ancient Greece in the fifth and fourth centuries BC. Sophists specialized in one or more subject areas, such as philosophy , rhetoric , music , athletics and mathematics . They taught arete , " virtue " or "excellence", predominantly to young statesmen and nobility .

The arts of the sophists were known as sophistry and gained a negative reputation as tools of arbitrary reasoning.

Protagoras , regarded as the first of the sophists, became notorious for his claim to "make the weaker argument the stronger".

[ 1 ] In modern usage, sophism , sophist , and sophistry are used disparagingly. Sophistry, or a sophism, is a fallacious argument, especially one used deliberately to deceive.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] A sophist is a person who reasons with clever but deceptive or intellectually dishonest arguments.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] The Greek word σοφός , sophos , 'a wise man' is related to the noun σοφία , sophia , 'wisdom'. Since the times of Homer , it commonly referred to an expert in his profession or craft.

Charioteers , sculptors, or military experts could be referred to as sophoi in their occupations. The word has gradually come to connote general wisdom and especially wisdom in human affairs such as politics, ethics, and household management. This was the meaning ascribed to the Greek Seven Sages of 7th and 6th century BC (such as Solon and Thales ), and it was the meaning that appears in the histories of Herodotus .

The word σοφός gives rise to the verb σοφίζω , sophizo , 'to instruct / make learned', the passive voice of which means "to become or be wise", or "to be clever or skilled". From the verb is derived the noun σοφιστής , sophistes , which originally meant "a master of one's craft" and later "a prudent man" or "wise man".

[ 6 ] The word for "sophist" in various languages comes from sophistes .

The word "sophist" could be combined with other Greek words to form compounds . Examples include meteorosophist , which roughly translates to "expert in celestial phenomena"; gymnosophist (or "naked sophist", a word used to refer to Indian philosophers), deipnosophist or "dinner sophist" (as in the title of Athenaeus 's Deipnosophistae ), and iatrosophist , a type of physician in the later Roman period.

History [ edit ] In the second half of the 5th century BC, particularly in Athens , "sophist" came to denote a class of mostly itinerant intellectuals who taught courses in various subjects, speculated about the nature of language and culture, and employed rhetoric to achieve their purposes, generally to persuade or convince others. Nicholas Denyer observes that the Sophists "did ... have one important thing in common: whatever else they did or did not claim to know, they characteristically had a great understanding of what words would entertain or impress or persuade an audience." [ 7 ] Sophists went to Athens to teach because the city was flourishing at the time. It was good employment for those good at debate, which was a speciality of the first sophists, and they received the fame and fortune they were seeking.

Protagoras is generally regarded as the first of these professional sophists. Others include Gorgias , Prodicus , Hippias , Thrasymachus , Lycophron , Callicles , Antiphon , and Cratylus . A few sophists claimed that they could find the answers to all questions. Most of these sophists are known today primarily through the writings of their opponents (particularly Plato and Aristotle ), which makes it difficult to assemble an unbiased view of their practices and teachings. In some cases, such as Gorgias, original rhetorical works are extant, allowing the author to be judged on his own terms, but in most cases, knowledge about what individual sophists wrote or said comes from fragmentary quotations that lack context and are usually hostile.

The Greeks were "experimenting with a new form of government, democracy" (W. Keith, 5). Therefore, they were navigating how to make decisions without a higher authority. They needed to create laws based on demand and popular vote of the people. Back in the fifth century they did not have mass media, printing presses, and barely any texts. They mostly relied on speech. This meant that "the Athenians needed a strategy for effectively talking to other people in juries, in forums, and in the senate" (W. Keith, 5). This is when the sophist began to come about. Originally known as Sicilians, they began to teach Athenians how to speak in a persuasive manner in order to work with the courts and senate. It is not really known how these Sicilians, who came to be Sophists, initially grew an interest to teach others how to speak persuasively. However, the interest in receiving training from the Sophists increased. 
( The Origins of Rhetoric Keith & Lundberg) Sophists could be described both as teachers and philosophers , having travelled about in Greece teaching their students various life skills, particularly rhetoric and public speaking. These were useful qualities of the time, during which persuasive ability had a large influence on one's political power and economic wealth. Athens became the center of the sophists' activity, due to the city's freedom of speech for non-slave citizens and its wealth of resources. The sophists as a group had no set teachings, and they lectured on subjects that were as diverse as semantics and rhetoric , to ontology , and epistemology . Most sophists claimed to teach arete ("excellence" or "virtue") in the management and administration of not only one's affairs, but the city's as well. Before the 5th century BC, it was believed that aristocratic birth qualified a person for arete and politics. However, Protagoras, who is regarded as the first sophist, argued that arete was the result of training rather than birth.

[ 8 ] [ full citation needed ] Major figures [ edit ] Most of what is known about sophists comes from commentaries from others. In some cases, such as Gorgias, some of his works survive, allowing the author to be judged on his own terms. In one case, the Dissoi logoi , an important sophist text survived but knowledge of its author has been lost. However, most knowledge of sophist thought comes from fragmentary quotations that lack context. Many of these quotations come from Aristotle , who seems to have held the sophists in slight regard.

[ citation needed ] Protagoras [ edit ] Main article: Protagoras Protagoras was one of the best known and most successful sophists of his era; however, some later philosophers, such as Sextus Empiricus [ 9 ] treat him as a founder of a philosophy rather than as a sophist. Protagoras taught his students the necessary skills and knowledge for a successful life, particularly in politics. He trained his pupils to argue from both points of view because he believed that truth could not be limited to just one side of the argument. Protagoras wrote about a variety of subjects and advanced several philosophical ideas, particularly in epistemology . Some fragments of his works have survived. He is the author of the famous saying, "Man is the measure of all things", which is the opening sentence of a work called Truth .

[ 10 ] Xeniades [ edit ] Main article: Xeniades Xeniades was a skeptical philosopher from Corinth , probably a follower of the pre-Socratic Xenophanes . There may have been two such persons, as he is referenced by Democritus c. 400 BC, though he was also supposedly the purchaser of Diogenes the Cynic c. 350 BC, when he was captured by pirates and sold as a slave . Xeniades was supposed to have been the man who persuaded Monimus to become a follower of Diogenes, and was the source of his skeptical doctrines.

[ 11 ] The little that is known of him is derived from Sextus Empiricus , who represents him as holding the most ultrasceptical opinions, and maintaining that all notions are false, and that there is absolutely nothing true in the universe .

[ 12 ] He more than once couples him with Xenophanes .

[ 13 ] Gorgias [ edit ] Main article: Gorgias Gorgias was a well-known sophist whose writings showcased his ability to make counter-intuitive and unpopular positions appear stronger. Gorgias authored a lost work known as On the Non-Existent , which argues that nothing exists. In it, he attempts to persuade his readers that thought and existence are different.

[ 14 ] He also wrote Encomium of Helen in which he presents all of the possible reasons for which Helen could be blamed for causing the Trojan War and refutes each one of them.

Lycophron [ edit ] Main article: Lycophron (sophist) Lycophron is mentioned as a sophist by Aristotle, and was probably among the students of Gorgias .

[ 15 ] He rejected the supposed value of an aristocratic birth , [ 15 ] claiming that "Now the nobility of good birth is obscure, and its grandeur a matter of words." [ 15 ] meaning that there is no factual difference between those well-born and those low-born; only words and opinion assign value to these different circumstances of birth.

[ 16 ] This statement may indicate that Lycophron shared the beliefs of Antiphon , that (regardless of their ancestry) both Greeks and barbarians are born with the same capacities: An egalitarian belief that was a minority view in the 5th century BC.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] He is also known for his statement (reproduced by Aristotle, in the latter's Politics , 1280b10), that " law is only a convention, a surety to another of justice"., [ 18 ] also translated as "a guarantor of men's rights against one another". He, thus, believed that law is a matter of agreement, a social convention and not a natural or universal standard (there is no evidence that Lycophron rejected the idea that law is a universal standard – indeed his view appears far more universalist than that of Aristotle, in that Lycophron proposes a single standard, what would now be called the non aggression principle, in relation to all states). In this respect his views on law are similar to those of Protagoras .

[ 15 ] [ 19 ] This means that he treats law as a mere means, in the context of a (perhaps primitive) social contract theory, without considering it as something special, in contradistinction to, e.g., Plato but similar to both Thrasymachus and Callicles , albeit that their theories have – as far as can be ascertained from the information available about them – more specific characteristics.

[ 18 ] Criticism [ edit ] Socrates was lampooned by Aristophanes in The Clouds as a pedantic wordsmith who lived in a basket. Later philosophers such as Plato and Xenophon sought to distinguish Socrates' ethical teachings from this comic portrayal of a sophist.

Many sophists taught their skills for a price. Due to the importance of such skills in the litigious social life of Athens, practitioners often commanded very high fees. The sophists' practice of questioning the existence and roles of traditional deities and investigating into the nature of the heavens and the earth prompted a popular reaction against them. As there was a popular view of Socrates as a sophist, he was among the targets (which prompted a vigorous condemnation from his followers, including Plato and Xenophon ). For example, in the comic play The Clouds , Aristophanes criticizes the sophists as hairsplitting wordsmiths, and makes Socrates their representative.

[ 20 ] Such criticism,  coupled with the wealth garnered by many sophist practitioners, eventually led to popular resentment against sophists and the ideas and writings associated with sophism.

Aristophanes [ edit ] The comic playwright Aristophanes , a contemporary of the sophists, criticized the sophists as hairsplitting wordsmiths. Aristophanes, however, made no distinction between sophists and philosophers, and showed either of them as willing to argue any position for the right fee. In Aristophanes's comedic play The Clouds , Strepsiades seeks the help of Socrates (a parody of the actual philosopher) in an effort to avoid paying his debts. In the play, Socrates promises to teach Strepsiades' son to argue his way out of paying his debts.

[ 21 ] Socrates [ edit ] An ongoing debate is centered on the difference between the sophists, who charged for their services, and Socrates , who did not.

[ 22 ] Instead of giving instruction Socrates professed a self-effacing and questioning posture, exemplified by what is known as the Socratic method (although Diogenes Laërtius wrote that Protagoras, a sophist, invented this method [ 23 ] [ 24 ] ). Socrates' attitude towards the sophists was not entirely oppositional. In one dialogue Socrates even stated that the sophists were better educators than he was, [ 25 ] which he validated by sending one of his students to study under a sophist.

[ 26 ] W. K. C. Guthrie classified Socrates as a sophist in his History of Greek Philosophy .

[ 26 ] Isocrates, one of the later sophists, was critical of the education practices of his predecessors Isocrates [ edit ] One of the few speeches that have survived from ancient Greece is Isocrates ' Against the Sophists .

The speech offers scathing criticisms against sophist teachers and their failures.

While a sophist himself, Isocrates sought to distinguish his school's pedagogical focus from other sophistic teachings. In particular, Isocrates wanted to establish an institution that educated Athenian students in a manner that would promote the success of Athenian democracy. By developing a school in Athens around 392 BC, approximately five years after Plato opened his Platonic Academy , Isocrates gave sophism more credibility in society.

Plato [ edit ] As only small portions of the sophists' writings have survived they are mainly known through the works of Plato . Plato's dialogs present his generally hostile views on the sophists' thought, due to which he is largely responsible for the modern view of the sophist as an avaricious instructor who teaches deception.

Before Plato, the word "sophist" could be used as either a respectful or contemptuous title. It was in Plato's dialogue, Sophist , that the first record of an attempt to answer the question "what is a sophist?" is made. Plato described sophists as paid hunters after the young and wealthy, as merchants of knowledge, as athletes in a contest of words, and purgers of souls. From Plato's assessment of sophists it could be concluded that sophists do not offer true knowledge, but only an opinion of things. Plato describes them as shadows of the true, saying, "the art of contradiction making, descended from an insincere kind of conceited mimicry, of the semblance-making breed, derived from image making, distinguished as portion, not divine but human, of production, that presents, a shadow play of words—such are the blood and the lineage which can, with perfect truth, be assigned to the authentic sophist". Plato sought to distinguish sophists from philosophers, arguing that a sophist was a person who made his living through deception, whereas a philosopher was a lover of wisdom who sought the truth. To give the philosophers greater credence, Plato gave the sophists a negative connotation.

[ 27 ] Plato depicts Socrates as refuting sophists in several dialogues. These texts often depict the sophists in an unflattering light, and it is unclear how accurate or fair Plato's representation of them may be; however, Protagoras and Prodicus are portrayed in a largely positive light in Protagoras .

Protagoras argued that "man is the measure of all things", meaning man decides for himself what he is going to believe.

[ 28 ] The works of Plato and Aristotle have had much influence on the modern view of the "sophist" as a greedy instructor who uses rhetorical sleight-of-hand and ambiguities of language in order to deceive, or to support fallacious reasoning. In this view, the sophist is not concerned with truth and justice , but instead seeks power .

Some scholars, such as Ugo Zilioli [ 29 ] argue that the sophists held a relativistic view on cognition and knowledge . However, this may involve the Greek word " doxa ", which means "culturally shared belief" rather than "individual opinion". The sophists' philosophy contains criticisms of religion , law , and ethics . Although many sophists were apparently as religious as their contemporaries, some held atheistic or agnostic views (for example, Protagoras and Diagoras of Melos ).

Influence [ edit ] Few writings from and about the first sophists survive. The early sophists charged money in exchange for education and providing wisdom, and so were typically employed by wealthy people. This practice resulted in the condemnations made by Plato through Socrates in his dialogues, as well as by Xenophon in his Memorabilia and, somewhat controversially, by Aristotle . As a paid tutor to Alexander the Great , Aristotle could be accused of being a sophist. Aristotle did not actually accept payment from Philip , Alexander's father, but requested that Philip reconstruct Aristotle's home town of Stageira as payment, which Philip had destroyed in a previous campaign, terms which Philip accepted.

[ citation needed ] James A. Herrick wrote: "In De Oratore , Cicero blames Plato for separating wisdom and eloquence in the philosopher's famous attack on the sophists in Gorgias ." [ 30 ] Through works such as these, sophists were portrayed as " specious " or "deceptive", hence the modern meaning of the term.

Democracy [ edit ] The sophists' rhetorical techniques were useful for any young nobleman seeking public office. The societal roles the sophists filled had important ramifications for the Athenian political system. The historical context provides evidence for their considerable influence, as Athens became more and more democratic during the period in which the sophists were most active.

[ 31 ] Even though Athens was already a flourishing democracy before their arrival, the cultural and psychological contributions of the sophists played an important role in the growth of Athenian democracy. Sophists contributed to the new democracy in part by espousing expertise in public deliberation, the foundation of decision-making, which allowed—and perhaps required—a tolerance of the beliefs of others. This liberal attitude would naturally have made its way into the Athenian assembly as sophists began acquiring increasingly high-powered clients.

[ 32 ] Continuous rhetorical training gave the citizens of Athens "the ability to create accounts of communal possibilities through persuasive speech".

[ 33 ] This was important for the democracy, as it gave disparate and sometimes superficially unattractive views a chance to be heard in the Athenian assembly.

In addition, sophists had a great impact on the early development of law , as the sophists were the first lawyers in the world. Their status as lawyers was a result of their highly developed skills in argument.

[ 34 ] Education [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Athens [ edit ] The sophists were the first formal teachers of the art of speaking and writing in the Western world. Their influence on education in general, and medical education in particular, has been described by Seamus Mac Suibhne.

[ 35 ] The sophists "offer quite a different epistemic field from that mapped by Aristotle", according to scholar Susan Jarratt , writer of Rereading the Sophists: Classical Rhetoric Refigured .

For the sophists, the science of eloquence became a method to earn money. In order to teach their students the art of persuasion and demonstrate their thoughts, they focused on two techniques: dialectics and rhetoric . The sophists taught their students two main techniques: the usage of sophisms and contradictions. These means distinguished the speeches of the sophists from the other speakers. Contradictions (antithesis [ 36 ] ) were important to the Sophists because they believed that a good rhetorician should be able to defend both his own opinion and the exact opposite one. In this way, was developed the ability to find clear, convincing arguments for any thesis. For the sophists, the primary purpose was to win the dispute in order to prove their excellence in word usage. They were convinced that there was no verity, but there were different opinions, equal in importance, and the "verity" was the only one that would be more convincingly demonstrated by the rhetorician.

Sophists were not limited in their speeches only to topics in which they were aware. For them, there were no topics they could not dispute, because their skill reached such a level that they were able to talk about completely unknown things to them and still impress upon listeners and the opponent. The main purpose was to pick an approach to the audience, to please it and to adapt the speech to it. Unlike Plato 's approach, the Sophist rhetoricians did not focus on identifying the truth, but the most important thing for them was to prove their case.

The first sophist whose speeches are a perfect example of a sophisticated approach is Gorgias. One of his most famous speeches is the "Praise of Helen", which has made a significant contribution to rhetorical art. In this speech, Gorgias aims to make something almost impossible – to justify Helen, about whom the people have already had a negative opinion. By methods of double oppositions, stringing of repetitive positive qualities and insightful consistent arguments, Gorgias gradually purifies the poor reputation of a woman. Later, Aristotle described the means used in Gorgias' speech as "Gorgias figures". All of these figures create the most accessible path for the audience to the argument offered, varying depending on the type of speech and audience.

Rome [ edit ] The classical tradition of rhetoric and composition refers more to philosophers such as Aristotle, Cicero, and Quintilian than to the sophists. Owing largely to the influence of Plato and Aristotle, philosophy came to be regarded as distinct from sophistry, the latter being regarded as specious and rhetorical, a practical discipline. Thus, by the time of the Roman Empire , a sophist was simply a teacher of rhetoric and a popular public speaker. For instance, Libanius , Himerius , Aelius Aristides , and Fronto were sophists in this sense.

[ citation needed ] However, despite the opposition from philosophers Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, it is clear that sophists had a vast influence on a number of spheres, including the growth of knowledge and on ethical-political theory. Their teachings had a huge influence on thought in the 5th century BC.

[ citation needed ] The sophists focused on the rational examination of human affairs and the betterment and success of human life. They argued that gods could not be the explanation of human action.

Many rhetoricians during this period were instructed under specialists in Greek rhetorical studies as part of their standard education.

Cicero , a prominent rhetorician during this period in Roman history, is one such example of the influence of the Second Sophistic on Roman education. His early life coincided with the suppression of Latin rhetoric in Roman education under the edicts of Crassus and Domitius. Cicero was instructed in Greek rhetoric throughout his youth, as well as in other subjects of the Roman rubric under Archias. Cicero benefited in his early education from favorable ties to Crassus.

[ 37 ] In his writings, Cicero is said to have shown a "synthesis that he achieved between Greek and Roman culture" summed up in his work De Oratore .

Despite his oratorical skill, Cicero pressed for a more liberal education in Roman instruction which focused more in the broad sciences including Roman history. He entitled this set of sciences as politior humanitas (2.72). Regardless of his efforts toward this end, Greek history was still preferred by the majority of aristocratic Romans during this time.

[ 38 ] From the late 1st century CE the Second Sophistic , a philosophical and rhetorical movement, was the chief expression of intellectual life. The term "Second Sophistic" comes from Philostratus , who, rejecting the term "New Sophistic", traced the beginnings of the movement to the orator Aeschines in the 4th century BC. But its earliest representative was really Nicetes of Smyrna , in the late 1st century CE. Unlike the original Sophistic movement of the 5th century BC, the Second Sophistic was little concerned with politics . But it was, to a large degree, to meet the everyday needs and respond to the practical problems of Greco-Roman society. It came to dominate higher education and left its mark on many forms of literature.

[ citation needed ] Lucian , himself a writer of the Second Sophistic, even calls Jesus "that crucified sophist".

[ 39 ] During the Second Sophistic , the Greek discipline of rhetoric heavily influenced Roman education. During this time Latin rhetorical studies were banned for the precedent of Greek rhetorical studies. In addition, Greek history was preferred for educating the Roman elites above that of their native Roman history.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] Apologetics – Religious discipline of systematic defence of a position Appeal to nature – Rhetorical tactic and potential fallacy Corporate jargon – Buzzwords and specialized vocabulary used by businesspeople Casuistry – Reasoning by extrapolation Confidence trick – Attempt to defraud a person or group Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Demagogue – Politician or orator who panders to fears and emotions of the public Fallacy – Argument that uses faulty reasoning Pseudophilosophy – Philosophical idea or system which does not meet an expected set of standards Manipulation (psychology) – Exploitative type of social influence School of Names – Ancient Chinese philosophical school Sleight of mouth – Pseudo-scientific intellectual framework Sophist (dialogue) – Book by Plato that uses 'method of division' Sophistic works of Antiphon – Works  by ancient Athenian philosopher Sophistication – Word derived from sophistry Notes [ edit ] ^ Taylor, C. C. W. (2015-07-30), "sophists" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Classics , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.5994 , ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5 , retrieved 2025-06-26 ^ "Sophism" .

Dictionary.com .

^ "Sophism" .

Merriam-Webster .

^ "Sophists" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ "The Sophists" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2020.

^ A Lexicon Abridged from Liddell and Scott's Greek-English Lexicon , Oxford: Clarendon, 1996, s.v.v. σοφίζω and σοφιστής.

^ Denyer, N., Plato, Protagoras: Introduction , p. 1, Cambridge University Press, 2008 ^ "Sophists | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Outlines of Pyrrhonism , Book I, Chapter 32.

^ Vaulker, Aashish (2012).

Markets and measurements in nineteenth-century Britain . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

218– 228.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, vi. 82 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Adversus Mathematicos vii. 388, 399 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrhōneioi hypotypōseis ii. 18,; Adversus Mathematicos vii. 48 ^ Gaines, Robert N. (1997).

Philosophy & Rhetoric . Pennsylvania: Penn State University Press. pp.

1– 12.

^ a b c d e Quarles (2004), pp. 135–136 ^ Diels, Dent Sprague (2001), pp. 68–69 ^ quoted in Mario Untersteiner, The Sophists, tr.

Kathleen Freeman (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1954), p. 252 ^ a b Mulgan (1979), pp. 121–128 ^ Quarles (2004), pp. 121–122 ^ Aristophanes' "clouds"; Aeschines 1.173; Diels & Kranz, "Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker", 80 A 21 ^ Nichols, Mary P. (1987-01-01).

Socrates and the Political Community: An Ancient Debate . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-88706-395-4 .

^ Blank, David L. (1985-01-01). "Socratics versus Sophists on Payment for Teaching".

Classical Antiquity .

4 (1): 1– 49.

doi : 10.2307/25010822 .

JSTOR 25010822 .

^ Jarratt, Susan C.

Rereading the Sophists: Classical Rhetoric Refigured . Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press , 1991, p. 83 ^ Sprague, Rosamond Kent, The Older Sophists , Hackett Publishing Company ( ISBN 0-87220-556-8 ), p. 5 ^ Guthrie, W. K. C.

Vol. 3 of History of Greek Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1969, p. 399 ^ a b Guthrie, W. K. C.

Vol. 3 of History of Greek Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969, p. 401 ^ Shiappa, Edward. "Protagoras and Logos" (University of South Carolina Press, 1991) 5 ^ Versenyi, Laszlo (1962-01-01). "Protagoras' Man-Measure Fragment".

The American Journal of Philology .

83 (2): 178– 184.

doi : 10.2307/292215 .

JSTOR 292215 .

^ Zilioli, Ugo (2009). Waterfield, Robin (ed.).

"Protagoras and the Challenge of Relativism: Plato's Subtlest Enemy" .

The Heythrop Journal .

50 (3): 509– 510.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2265.2009.00484_1.x .

^ Herrick, James (2005).

The History and Theory of Rhetoric: An Introduction . Boston: Allyn and Bacon. p. 103.

ISBN 978-0-205-41492-5 .

^ Blackwell, Christopher.

"Demos: Classical Athenian Democracy" . 28 February 2003. The Stoa: a Consortium for Scholarly Publication in the Humanities. 25 April 2007.

^ Sprague, Rosamond Kent, The Older Sophists , Hacker Publishing Company ( ISBN 0-87220-556-8 ), p. 32 ^ Jarratt, Susan C.

Rereading the Sophists: Classical Rhetoric Refigured . Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, 1991, p. 98 ^ Martin, Richard. "Seven Sages as Performers of Wisdom".

Cultural Poetics in Archaic Greece . New York: Oxford University Press, 1988. 108–130.

^ Mac Suibhne, Seamus (Jan 2010). "Sophists, sophistry, and modern medical education".

Medical Teacher .

32 (1): 71– 75.

doi : 10.3109/01421590903386799 .

PMID 20095778 .

S2CID 36624580 .

^ Schnitker, Sarah A.; Emmons, Robert A. (2013). "Hegel's Thesis-Antithesis-Synthesis Model".

Encyclopedia of Sciences and Religions . Berlin: Springer. p. 978.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-8265-8_200183 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-8264-1 .

^ a b Clarke, M. L. (April 1968). "Cicero at School".

Greece & Rome . Second Series.

15 (1). Cambridge University Press on behalf of The Classical Association: 18– 22.

doi : 10.1017/s001738350001679x .

JSTOR 642252 .

S2CID 162158134 .

^ Eyre, J.J. (March 1963). "Roman Education in the Late Republic and Early Empire".

Greece & Rome, Second Edition .

10 (1). Cambridge University Press: 47– 59.

doi : 10.1017/s0017383500012869 .

JSTOR 642792 .

S2CID 162790971 .

^ Lucian, Peregrinus 13 (τὸν δὲ ἀνεσκολοπισμένον ἐκεῖνον σοφιστὴν αὐτὸν), cited by Guthrie p. 34.

References [ edit ] Blackwell, Christopher.

Demos: Classical Athenian Democracy . 28 February 2003. The Stoa: a Consortium for Scholarly Publication in the Humanities. 25 April 2007.

Clarke, M.L. "Cicero at School".

Greece & Rome , Second Series, Vol. 15, No. 1 (Apr., 1968), pp. 18–22; Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of The Classical Association; JSTOR 642252 Eyre, J.J. "Roman Education in the Late Republic and Early Empire".

Greece & Rome ,Second Series, Vol. 10, No. 1 (Mar., 1963), pp. 47–59, Published by: Cambridge University Press; JSTOR 642792 Guthrie, W. K. C.

Vol. 3 of History of Greek Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969 Jarratt, Susan C.

Rereading the Sophists: Classical Rhetoric Refigured . Carbondale and Edwardsville: Southern Illinois University Press, 1991.

Kerferd, G. B., The Sophistic Movement , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1981 ( ISBN 0-521-28357-4 ).

Mac Suibhne, Seamus (Jan 2010). "Sophists, sophistry, and modern medical education".

Medical Teacher .

32 (1): 71– 75.

doi : 10.3109/01421590903386799 .

PMID 20095778 .

S2CID 36624580 .

Rosen, Stanley , Plato's 'Sophist', The Drama of Original and Image , Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, 1983.

Sprague, Rosamond Kent, The Older Sophists , Hackett Publishing Company ( ISBN 0-87220-556-8 ).

Herrick, James A. The History and Theory of Rhetoric: An Introduction. Boston: Allyn and Beacon, 2005. Print McKay, Brett, and Kate McKay. "Classical Rhetoric 101: A Brief History." The Art of Manliness RSS. The Art of Manliness, 30 Nov. 2010. Web.

Further reading [ edit ] Corey, D. 2002. "The Case against Teaching Virtue for Pay: Socrates and the Sophists." History of Political Thought 23:189–210.

Dillon, J., and T. Gergel. 2003.

The Greek Sophists.

London: Penguin.

Gibert, J. 2002. "The Sophists." In The Blackwell Guide to Ancient Philosophy.

Edited by C. Shields, 27–50. Oxford: Blackwell.

Montiglio, S. 2000. "Wandering Philosophers in Classical Greece." Journal of Hellenic Studies 120:86–105.

Robinson, E. 2007. "The Sophists and Democracy beyond Athens." Rhetorica 25:109–122.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Sophists Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Quotations related to Sophist at Wikiquote The dictionary definition of sophist at Wiktionary Plato's Dialogue: Sophist "The Sophists" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Sophists" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Sophists of the 5th century BC Antiphon Callicles Critias Damon Dionysodorus Euthydemus Gorgias Hippias Lycophron Prodicus Protagoras Thrasymachus v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐8r92m
Cached time: 20250818112128
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.943 seconds
Real time usage: 1.180 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7638/1000000
Revision size: 37330/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 297049/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6920/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131406/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.566/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14842431/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  952.028      1 -total
 21.41%  203.861      1 Template:Reflist
 11.90%  113.294      5 Template:Langx
 10.60%  100.886      1 Template:Rhetoric
 10.39%   98.895      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.20%   97.076     20 Template:Navbox
  9.70%   92.334     14 Template:Annotated_link
  8.93%   85.040      1 Template:Citation
  6.73%   64.091      1 Template:Short_description
  6.21%   59.147      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49646:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818112128 and revision id 1305499278. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sophist&oldid=1305499278 " Categories : Sophists Ancient Greek educators Presocratic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sophist 56 languages Add topic

