Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 2.1 Sistine Chapel 2.2 Raphael Rooms 2.3 Borgia Apartments 2.4 Papal apartments 2.5 Clementine Hall 2.6 Loggias 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Apostolic Palace 57 languages العربية Беларуская Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°54′13″N 12°27′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90361°N 12.45639°E ﻿ / 41.90361; 12.45639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Official residence of the Pope in Vatican City Not to be confused with Lateran Palace .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Apostolic Palace" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Apostolic Palace Palazzo Apostolico ( Italian ) Official residence of the Pope A view of the palace from Saint Peter's Square Location within Vatican City Alternative names Palace of Sixtus V Palace of the Vatican Papal Palace General information Type Official residence Country Vatican City Coordinates 41°54′13″N 12°27′23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90361°N 12.45639°E ﻿ / 41.90361; 12.45639 Current tenants Pope Leo XIV Construction started 30 April 1589 [ 1 ] The Apostolic Palace [ a ] is the official residence of the Pope , the head of the Catholic Church , located in Vatican City . It is also known as the Papal Palace , the Palace of the Vatican and the Vatican Palace . The Vatican itself refers to the building as the Palace of Sixtus V , in honor of Pope Sixtus V , who built most of the present form of the palace.

[ 2 ] The Portone di Bronzo at the Vatican Apostolic Palace entrance The building contains the papal apartments , various offices of the Catholic Church and the Holy See , private and public chapels, the Vatican Museums , and the Vatican Library , including the Sistine Chapel , Raphael Rooms , and the Borgia Apartments . The modern tourist can see these last and other parts of the palace, but other parts, such as the Sala Regia (Regal Room) and Cappella Paolina , had long been closed to tourists, though the Sala Regia allowed occasional tourism by 2019. The Scala Regia (Regal Staircase) can be viewed from one end and used to enter the Sala Regia.

[ 3 ] The Cappella Paolina remains closed to tourists.

History [ edit ] In the 5th century, Pope Symmachus built a papal palace close to the Old St. Peter's Basilica which served an alternative residence to the Lateran Palace . The construction of a second fortified palace was sponsored by Pope Eugene III and extensively modified under Pope Innocent III in the twelfth century.

[ 4 ] Upon returning to Rome in 1377 after the interlude of the Avignon Papacy , which saw Rome subject to civil unrest and the abandonment of several Christian monuments, the popes chose to reside first at Basilica di Santa Maria in Trastevere and then at Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore . The Vatican Palace had fallen into disrepair from lack of upkeep, and the Lateran Palace underwent two destructive fires, in 1307 and 1361, which resulted in irreparable harm.

[ 5 ] In 1447, Pope Nicholas V razed the ancient fortified palace of Eugene III to erect a new building, the current Apostolic Palace.

[ 6 ] In the 15th century, the palace was placed under the authority of a prefect . This position of apostolic prefecture lasted from the 15th century until the 1800s, when the Papal States fell into economic difficulties. In 1884, when this post was reviewed in light of saving money, Pope Leo XIII created a committee to administer the palace.

[ 7 ] The major additions and decorations of the palace are the work of the following popes for 150 years. Construction of the current version of the palace began on 30 April 1589 [ 1 ] under Pope Sixtus V and its various intrinsic parts were completed by later successors, Pope Urban VII , Pope Innocent XI and Pope Clement VIII . In the 20th century, Pope Pius XI built a monumental art gallery and museum entrance.

Construction of the Papal Palace (also known as the Apostolic Palace or Vatican Palace) at the Vatican in Vatican City, took place mainly between 1471 and 1605. Covering 162,000 square metres (1,743,753 square feet), it contains the papal apartments, offices of the Roman Catholic Church and Holy See, chapels, Vatican Library, museums and art galleries.

[ 8 ] Structure [ edit ] A model of the palace in the Vatican Museums . The buildings are arranged around a central courtyard.

The Apostolic Palace is run by the Prefecture of the Pontifical Household . The palace is more accurately a series of self-contained buildings within the well-recognized outer structure which is arranged around the Courtyard of Sixtus V (Cortile di Sisto V). It is located northeast of St Peter's Basilica and adjacent to the Bastion of Nicholas V and Palace of Gregory XIII.

The Apostolic Palace houses both residential and support offices of various functions as well as administrative offices not focused on the life and functions of the Pope himself.

Sistine Chapel [ edit ] Main article: Sistine Chapel Under the patronage of Julius II , Michelangelo painted the chapel ceiling between 1508 and 1512.

Perhaps the best known of the palace chapels is the Sistine Chapel named in honor of Sixtus IV (Francesco della Rovere). It is famous for its decoration that was frescoed throughout by Renaissance artists including Michelangelo , Sandro Botticelli , Pietro Perugino , Pinturicchio , Domenico Ghirlandaio , and others.

One of the primary functions of the chapel is as a venue for the election of each successive Pope in a conclave of the College of Cardinals . In this closed-door election, the cardinals choose a successor to the apostle and traditional first Pope, Peter , who is (according to tradition) buried in the crypts of nearby St. Peter's Basilica.

Raphael Rooms [ edit ] Main article: Raphael Rooms The Stanza della Segnatura This suite of rooms is famous for its frescos by a large team of artists working under Raphael . They were originally intended as a suite of apartments for Pope Julius II . He commissioned Raphael, then a relatively young artist from Urbino , and his studio in 1508 or 1509 to redecorate the existing interiors of the rooms entirely. It was possibly Julius' intent to outshine the apartments of his predecessor (and rival) Pope Alexander VI , as the Stanze are directly above Alexander's Borgia Apartments. They are on the second floor, overlooking the south side of the Belvedere Courtyard .

From east to west, as a visitor would have entered the apartment, but reversing the sequence in which the Stanze were frescoed, and also the route of the modern visitor, the rooms are the Sala di Constantino ("Hall of Constantine"), the Stanza di Eliodoro ("Room of Heliodorus"), the Stanza della Segnatura (the earliest and the most admired) ("Room of the Signature") and the Stanza dell'Incendio del Borgo ("The Room of the Fire in the Borgo ").

After the death of Julius in 1513, with two rooms frescoed, Pope Leo X continued the program. Following Raphael's death in 1520, his assistants Gianfrancesco Penni , Giulio Romano and Raffaellino del Colle finished the project with the frescoes in the Sala di Costantino .

Borgia Apartments [ edit ] Main article: Borgia Apartments The Borgia Apartments is a suite of rooms in the palace adapted for personal use by Pope Alexander VI (Rodrigo de Borja). He commissioned the Italian painter Pinturicchio to lavishly decorate the apartments with frescoes.

The paintings and frescoes, which were executed between 1492 and 1494, drew on a complex iconographic program that used themes from medieval encyclopedias, adding an eschatological layer of meaning and celebrating the supposedly divine origins of the Borgias .

[ 9 ] The rooms are variously considered a part of the Vatican Library and Vatican Museums . Some of the rooms are now used for the Vatican Collection of Modern Religious Art , inaugurated by Pope Paul VI in 1973.

Papal apartments [ edit ] Main article: Papal apartments Since the 17th century, the papal apartments have been the official residence of the pope. They occupy much of the top floor of the Apostolic Palace.

With the exception of Pope Francis , who took up residence in the Domus Sanctae Marthae , all reigning popes have resided in the Apostolic Palace since the move from the Quirinal Palace in 1870.

[ b ] Clementine Hall [ edit ] Main article: Clementine Hall The Clementine Hall was established in the 16th century by Pope Clement VIII in honor of Pope Clement I , the third pope. Like other chapels and apartments in the palace, the hall is notable for its large collection of frescos and other art.

Loggias [ edit ] Main article: Vatican loggias The loggias are corridors designed by Donato Bramante and decorated by Raphael with frescoes, which depict 52 biblical events divided into bays in groups of four. They served as inspiration to Italian architect Giacomo Quarenghi while working on the Raphael loggias in the Hermitage Museum .

Gallery [ edit ] The Papal apartments seen from St. Peter's Square Apostolic Palace from St. Peter's Square Scala Regia by Gian Lorenzo Bernini Plan of the Apostolic Palace (1893–1901) See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apostolic Palace .

Vatican City portal Domus Sanctae Marthae Index of Vatican City-related articles Notes [ edit ] ^ Latin : Palatium Apostolicum ; Italian : Palazzo Apostolico ^ Pope Leo XIV intends to take up residence in the apartments after they are renovated.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b The lives of the modern painters, sculptors and architects – Giovanni Pietro Bellori ^ Vatican Press Office guide – buildings of the Vatican Archived May 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Vatican's Apostolic Palace Tour" .

Viator.com . Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 October 2019 .

^ "Le Palais du Vatican" [Palace of the Vatican] (in French). Rome Découverte. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 14 August 2013 .

^ Pedro Tafur, Andanças e viaje (in Spanish) ^ Müntz, Eugène (1878).

Les arts à la cour des Papes pendant le XVe et le XVIe siècle (in French). Georg Olms Verlag.

ISBN 9783487413006 . Retrieved 14 August 2013 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Levillain 2002 , pp. 1093–1094.

^ Glenday, Craig (2013).

Guinness Book of World Records . Guinness World Records Limited. p.

155 .

ISBN 978-1-908843-15-9 .

^ Krén, Emil; Marx, Daniel.

"Frescoes in the Borgia Apartments of the Palazzi Pontifici in Vatican" . Web Gallery of Art . Retrieved 14 August 2013 .

^ Hernández, Virginia (May 9, 2025).

"Adiós a Santa Marta: León XIV residirá en el Palacio Apostólico y la Misa de inicio de su Pontificado será el 18 de mayo" .

El Mundo (in Spanish) . Retrieved May 10, 2025 .

Works cited [ edit ] Levillain, Philippe (2002), Dictionnaire historique de la papauté , The Papacy: An Encyclopedia, vol. II (Illustrated ed.), Routledge, ISBN 0-415-92230-5 , retrieved 20 December 2009 Morton, H.V.

(2002), A Traveller in Rome (Reprint ed.), Da Capo Press, ISBN 0-306-81131-6 , retrieved 20 December 2009 The Vatican: spirit and art of Christian Rome . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. 1982.

ISBN 0870993488 .

v t e Art of the Sistine Chapel Life of Moses Moses Leaving for Egypt 1 The Youth of Moses 2 The Crossing of the Red Sea 3/4/5 The Descent from Mount Sinai 3/6 The Punishment of the Sons of Korah 2 Testament and Death of Moses 7/8 Life of Christ The Baptism of Christ 1 The Temptations of Christ 2 The Vocation of the Apostles 4 The Sermon on the Mount 3 The Delivery of the Keys 1 The Last Supper 3/5 Ceiling 9 ( Gallery ) Scenes from Genesis The Separation of Light from Darkness The Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants The Separation of Land and Water The Creation of Adam The Creation of Eve The Fall and Expulsion from the Garden of Eden The Sacrifice of Noah The Flood The Drunkenness of Noah Prophets Jonah Jeremiah Ezekiel Joel Zechariah Isaiah Daniel Sibyls Persian Sibyl Erythraean Sibyl Delphic Sibyl Cumaean Sibyl Libyan Sibyl Altar wall The Last Judgment 9 Tapestries Raphael Cartoons 10 Related Art patronage of Julius II Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Sistine Chapel Choir Room of Tears Vatican City The Agony and the Ecstasy (1965 film) Key : 1 Pietro Perugino 2 Sandro Botticelli 3 Cosimo Rosselli 4 Domenico Ghirlandaio 5 Biagio d'Antonio 6 Piero di Cosimo 7 Luca Signorelli 8 Bartolomeo della Gatta 9 Michelangelo 10 Raphael Pope Sixtus IV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Vatican City articles Index Outline Holy See Properties Pope : Leo XIV List of sovereigns Vicar General for Vatican City History History of the papacy " Prisoner in the Vatican " Circus of Nero Old St. Peter's Basilica Papal tombs Navicella Leonine City Cortile del Belvedere Santo Stefano degli Ungheresi Lateran Treaty Borgo Nuovo Borgo Vecchio Piazza Scossacavalli Geography Major basilica St. Peter's Basilica Chair of Saint Peter Door of the Dead Monument to the Royal Stuarts St. Peter's Baldachin Saint Longinus Pietà Vatican Necropolis Saint Peter's tomb Papal tombs Tomb of the Julii Vatican Grottoes Apostolic Palace Redemptoris Mater Chapel Borgia Apartments Clementine Hall Loggias Papal apartments Stufetta del cardinal Bibbiena Cappella Paolina Raphael Rooms Niccoline Chapel Sala Ducale Sala Regia Scala Regia The Vision of Constantine Sistine Chapel altarpiece ceiling Room of Tears Vatican Museums Historical Paintings Modern and Contemporary Art Pio-Clementino Chiaramonti Gregoriano Etrusco Gregoriano Egiziano Pio Cristiano Ethnographic Bramante Staircase Maps Gregorian Tower Casina Pio IV Sant'Anna dei Palafrenieri Domus Sanctae Marthae Holy Spirit Chapel Gardens Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Mater Ecclesiae Monastery Sant'Egidio in Borgo Santi Martino e Sebastiano degli Svizzeri Paul VI Audience Hall The Resurrection Passetto di Borgo San Pellegrino in Vaticano St. Peter's Square Via della Conciliazione Fountains Porta San Pellegrino Ricciolo d'Italia Saint John's Tower Santo Stefano degli Abissini Vatican Pharmacy Vatican Hill Politics Elections Foreign relations Vicar General Law Crime Fundamental Law Governance Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Vacant Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Military Corps of Gendarmerie Swiss Guard See also: Corps of Firefighters Economy Banking Vatican euro coins Communications .va [Internet domain] Poste Vaticane Postage stamps and postal history Homelessness Secretariat for the Economy Tourism Infrastructure Transport Heliport Rail Culture Academy of Sciences AT telescope observatory Architecture Archives Apostolic Archive Climate Forest Demographics Languages Library film Music Sistine Chapel Choir Philatelic and Numismatic Office Public holidays Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Information Service Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Radio Vatican Television Center Vatican News App Vatican Publishing House Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio L'Osservatore Romano Pope2you Religion Catholic Church Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Sports Amateur Sports Association Cricket team National football team (Men) National football team (Women) Vatican Athletics Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Holy See Apostolic see of Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome Sovereignty of Vatican City Legal status of the Holy See History Apostolic see Primacy of Peter History of papal primacy Patrimony of Saint Peter Old St. Peter's Basilica Lateran Palace Museum Duchy of Rome Donation of Sutri Donation of Pepin Avignon Papacy Papal States Temporal power Investiture Controversy Age of Revolution " Prisoner in the Vatican " Savoyard era Vatican City Lateran Treaty World War II Warsaw Pact Sovereign judicial entity under international law ( Legal status ) Officials Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin Cardinals List Advisers Governance Secretariat of State College of Cardinals Conclave Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Foreign affairs ( Multilateral policy ) Section for Relations with States To the Holy See Of the Holy See Heads Italy United Nations Permanent Observer in Geneva European Union Permanent Observer to the Council of Europe Apostolic nunciature Nuncio Treaties Concordats Diocese of Rome with universal full communion ( Papal primacy ) Synods Ordinary general assemblies Extraordinary general assemblies Special assemblies Ecclesiastical province of Rome ( Vicariate : Rome , Vatican City ) Suburbicarian sees Ostia Velletri–Segni Porto–Santa Rufina Frascati Palestrina Albano Sabina–Poggio Mirteto Territorial abbeys Monte Cassino Subiaco Suffragan dioceses Gaeta Anagni-Alatri Civita Castellana Civitavecchia-Tarquinia Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino Latina-Terracina-Sezze-Priverno Rieti Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo Tivoli Viterbo Properties including extra- territoriality Inside Rome Major basilicas St. Peter's Basilica Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Lateran Palace Lateran University Scala Sancta Sancta Sanctorum Adjoining buildings Palace of Saint Callixtus Gianicolo Hill area Pontifical Urban University Pontifical North American College Bambino Gesù Hospital Palazzo della Cancelleria Palace of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Palace of the Holy Office Palace of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches Palazzo Pio Palazzo Maffei Marescotti (Palace of the Vicariate} Pontifical Roman Minor Seminary Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Benedictine monastery Pontifical Oratory of San Paolo Beda College Paul VI Audience Hall St. Peter's Square Non- extraterritorial Palace of the Holy Apostles Palace of San Carlo ai Catinari Collegio Bellarmino Archaeological Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Pontifical Lombard Seminary Russian College Two Palaces of Sant'Apollinare House of Retreat for the Clergy of Saints John and Paul Nympheum of Nero Outside Rome Palace of Castel Gandolfo Papal farm Gardens of the Villa Cybo Villa Barberini Adjacent gardens Pontifical College Josephinum Summer estate of Pontificio Collegio Urbano de Propaganda Fide Vatican Radio antennae area of Santa Maria di Galeria Non- extraterritorial Basilica della Santa Casa Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua See also Acta Apostolicae Sedis Awards Papal household Peter's Pence Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Swiss Guard Vatican.va Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States 2 Latvia Israel Geographic Structurae MusicBrainz place Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gs55l
Cached time: 20250817045356
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.849 seconds
Real time usage: 1.104 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4824/1000000
Revision size: 14568/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 270954/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25561/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94951/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.516/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19405741/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  869.911      1 -total
 27.75%  241.435      1 Template:Infobox_building
 26.32%  228.967      1 Template:Infobox
 13.05%  113.561      2 Template:Reflist
 12.06%  104.920      2 Template:Unbulleted_list
 11.09%   96.511      1 Template:Small
 10.80%   93.940      1 Template:Native_name
 10.46%   90.981      5 Template:Navbox
  9.33%   81.184      1 Template:Sistine_Chapel
  9.01%   78.350      4 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:313895:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045356 and revision id 1293856513. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apostolic_Palace&oldid=1293856513 " Categories : Apostolic Palace Episcopal palaces Geography of Vatican City Official residences Palaces in Rome Palaces in Vatican City Sites of papal elections Official residences in Vatican City Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apostolic Palace 57 languages Add topic

