Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage 2 In philosophy Toggle In philosophy subsection 2.1 Correspondence and the slingshot argument 2.2 Compound facts 2.3 Fact–value distinction 2.4 Factual–counterfactual distinction 3 In mathematics 4 In science Toggle In science subsection 4.1 The scientific method 5 In history 6 In law Toggle In law subsection 6.1 Legal pleadings 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Fact 68 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български Català Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Luganda Magyar Македонски Malti Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Datum or structured component of reality For other uses, see Fact (disambiguation) .

A fact is a true datum about one or more aspects of a circumstance.

[ 1 ] Standard reference works are often used to check facts . Scientific facts are verified by repeatable careful observation or measurement by experiments or other means. Generally speaking, facts are independent of belief , knowledge and opinion . 
Facts are different from inferences , theories , values , and objects .

[ 2 ] For example, "This sentence contains words." accurately describes a linguistic fact, and "the Sun is a star" describes an astronomical fact. Further, " Abraham Lincoln was the 16th president of the United States" and "Abraham Lincoln was assassinated" are both historical facts.

Etymology and usage The word fact derives from the Latin factum . It was first used in English with the same meaning: "a thing done or performed" – a meaning now obsolete outside the law.

[ 3 ] The common usage of "something that has really occurred or is the case" dates from the mid-16th century.

[ 3 ] Barbara J. Shapiro wrote in her book A Culture of Fact how the concept of a fact evolved, starting within the English legal tradition of the 16th century.

[ 4 ] In 1870, Charles Sanders Peirce described in his book The Fixation of Belief four methods which people use to decide what they should believe: tenacity, method of authority, a priori and scientific method.

[ 5 ] The term fact also indicates a matter under discussion deemed to be true or correct, such as to emphasize a point or prove a disputed issue; (e.g., "... the fact of the matter is ...").

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Alternatively, fact may also indicate an allegation or stipulation of something that may or may not be a true fact , [ 8 ] (e.g., "the author's facts are not trustworthy"). This alternate usage, although contested by some, has a long history in standard English according to the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language.

[ 9 ] The Oxford English Dictionary dates this use to 1729.

[ 10 ] Fact may also indicate findings derived through a process of evaluation , including review of testimony, direct observation, or otherwise; as distinguishable from matters of inference or speculation.

[ 11 ] This use is reflected in the terms "fact-find" and "fact-finder" (e.g., "set up a fact-finding commission").

[ 12 ] Facts may be checked by reason, experiment, personal experience, or may be argued from authority.

Roger Bacon wrote "If in other sciences we should arrive at certainty without doubt and truth without error, it behooves us to place the foundations of knowledge in mathematics." [ 13 ] In philosophy In philosophy , the concept fact is considered in the branch of philosophy concerned with knowledge, called epistemology and ontology , which studies concepts such as existence , being , becoming , and reality . Questions of objectivity and truth are closely associated with questions of fact. A fact can be defined as something that is the case, in other words, a state of affairs .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Facts may be understood as information , which makes a true sentence true: "A fact is, traditionally, the worldly correlate of a true proposition, a state of affairs whose obtaining makes that proposition true." [ 16 ] Facts may also be understood as those things to which a true sentence refers. The statement "Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System" is about the fact that Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System .

[ 17 ] Correspondence and the slingshot argument Pascal Engel's version of the correspondence theory of truth explains that what makes a sentence true is that it corresponds to a fact.

[ 18 ] This theory presupposes the existence of an objective world.

The Slingshot argument claims to show that all true statements stand for the same thing, the truth value true . If this argument holds, and facts are taken to be what true statements stand for, then one arrives at the counter-intuitive conclusion that there is only one fact: the truth .

[ 19 ] Compound facts Any non-trivial true statement about reality is necessarily an abstraction composed of a complex of objects and properties or relations . Facts "possess internal structure, being complexes of objects and properties or relations".

[ 16 ] For example, the fact described by the true statement "Paris is the capital city of France" implies that there is such a place as Paris, there is such a place as France, there are such things as capital cities, as well as that France has a government, that the government of France has the power to define its capital city, and that the French government has chosen Paris to be the capital, that there is such a thing as a place or a government , and so on. The verifiable accuracy of all of these assertions, if facts themselves, may coincide to create the fact, that Paris is the capital of France.

Difficulties arise, however, in attempting to identify the constituent parts of negative, modal, disjunctive, or moral facts.

[ 20 ] Fact–value distinction Main article: Fact–value distinction Moral philosophers since David Hume have debated whether values are objective, and thus factual. In A Treatise of Human Nature Hume pointed out there is no obvious way for a series of statements about what ought to be the case to be derived from a series of statements of what is the case.  This is called the is–ought distinction .  Those who insist there is a logical gulf between facts and values , such that it is fallacious to attempt to derive values (e.g., "it is good to give food to hungry people") from facts (e.g., "people will die if they can't eat"), include G. E. Moore , who called attempting to do so the naturalistic fallacy .

Factual–counterfactual distinction Main article: Counterfactual conditional Factuality —what has occurred—can also be contrasted with counterfactuality: what might have occurred, but did not. A counterfactual conditional or subjunctive conditional is a conditional (or "if–then") statement indicating what would be the case if events had been other than they were. For example, "If Alexander had lived, his empire would have been greater than Rome." This contrasts with an indicative conditional, which indicates what is (in fact) the case if its antecedent is (in fact) true—for example, "If you drink this, it will make you well." Such sentences are important to modal logic , especially since the development of possible world semantics.

[ citation needed ] In mathematics In mathematics, a fact is a statement (called a theorem ) that can be proven by logical argument from certain axioms and definitions .

[ citation needed ] In science Further information: Scientific method and Philosophy of science The definition of a scientific fact is different from the definition of fact, as it implies knowledge . A scientific fact is the result of a repeatable careful observation or measurement by experimentation or other means, also called empirical evidence . These are central to building scientific theories . Various forms of observation and measurement lead to fundamental questions about the scientific method , and the scope and validity of scientific reasoning .

In the most basic sense, a scientific fact is an objective and verifiable observation, in contrast with a hypothesis or theory , which is intended to explain or interpret facts.

[ 21 ] Various scholars have offered significant refinements to this basic formulation. Philosophers and scientists are careful to distinguish between: 1) states of affairs in the external world and 2) assertions of fact that may be considered relevant in scientific analysis. The term is used in both senses in the philosophy of science.

[ 22 ] Scholars and clinical researchers in both the social and natural sciences have written about numerous questions and theories that arise in the attempt to clarify the fundamental nature of scientific fact.

[ 21 ] Pertinent issues raised by this inquiry include: the process by which "established fact" becomes recognized and accepted as such; [ 22 ] : 182 fn. 1 whether and to what extent "fact" and "theoretic explanation" can be considered truly independent and separable from one another; [ 22 ] : 185 [ 21 ] : 138 to what extent "facts" are influenced by the mere act of observation; [ 21 ] : 138 and to what extent factual conclusions are influenced by history and consensus, rather than a strictly systematic methodology.

[ 21 ] : 7 Consistent with the idea of confirmation holism , some scholars assert "fact" to be necessarily "theory-laden" to some degree.

Thomas Kuhn points out that knowing what facts to measure, and how to measure them, requires the use of other theories. For example, the age of fossils is based on radiometric dating , which is justified by reasoning that radioactive decay follows a Poisson process rather than a Bernoulli process . Similarly, Percy Williams Bridgman is credited with the methodological position known as operationalism , which asserts that all observations are not only influenced, but necessarily defined, by the means and assumptions used to measure them.

[ citation needed ] The scientific method Apart from the fundamental inquiry into the nature of scientific fact, there remain the practical and social considerations of how fact is investigated, established, and substantiated through the proper application of the scientific method.

[ 22 ] : 181 ff Scientific facts are generally believed independent of the observer: no matter who performs a scientific experiment, all observers agree on the outcome.

[ 23 ] In addition to these considerations, there are the social and institutional measures, such as peer review and accreditation, that are intended to promote factual accuracy among other interests in scientific study.

[ 22 ] In history Further information: Historiography A common rhetorical cliché states, " History is written by the winners ". This phrase suggests but does not examine the use of facts in the writing of history.

[ citation needed ] E. H. Carr in his 1961 volume What is History?

argues that the inherent biases from the gathering of facts makes the objective truth of any historical perspective idealistic and impossible. Facts are, "like fish in the Ocean", of which we may only happen to catch a few, only an indication of what is below the surface. Even a dragnet cannot tell us for certain what it would be like to live below the Ocean's surface. Even if we do not discard any facts (or fish) presented, we will always miss the majority; the site of our fishing, the methods undertaken, the weather and even luck play a vital role in what we will catch. Additionally, the composition of history is inevitably made up by the compilation of many different biases of fact finding – all compounded over time. He concludes that for a historian to attempt a more objective method, one must accept that history can only aspire to a conversation of the present with the past – and that one's methods of fact gathering should be openly examined. The set of highlighted historical facts, and their interpretations, therefore changes over time, and reflect present consensuses.

[ citation needed ] In law Further information: Evidence (law) and Trier of fact This section of the article emphasizes common law jurisprudence as primarily represented in Anglo-American–based legal tradition. Nevertheless, the principles described herein have analogous treatment in other legal systems such as civil law systems as well.

In most common law jurisdictions, the general concept and analysis of fact reflects fundamental principles of jurisprudence , and is supported by several well-established standards.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Matters of fact have various formal definitions under common law jurisdictions.

These include: an element required in legal pleadings to demonstrate a cause of action ; [ 26 ] [ 27 ] the determinations of the finder of fact after evaluating admissible evidence produced in a trial or hearing; [ 28 ] a potential ground of reversible error forwarded on appeal in an appellate court ; [ 29 ] and any of various matters subject to investigation by official authority to establish whether a crime has been perpetrated, and to establish culpability.

[ 30 ] Legal pleadings Main article: Pleading A party (e.g., plaintiff ) to a civil suit generally must clearly state the relevant allegations of fact that form the basis of a claim . The requisite level of precision and particularity of these allegations varies, depending on the rules of civil procedure and jurisdiction. Parties who face uncertainties regarding facts and circumstances attendant to their side in a dispute may sometimes invoke alternative pleading.

[ 31 ] In this situation, a party may plead separate sets of facts that when considered together may be contradictory or mutually exclusive. This seemingly logically-inconsistent presentation of facts may be necessary as a safeguard against contingencies such as res judicata that would otherwise preclude presenting a claim or defense that depends on a particular interpretation of the underlying facts and ruling of the court.

[ 32 ] See also Brute fact Common misconceptions Consensus reality Counterfactual history De facto , or 'from fact' Factoid False statement Fiction Lie Truth References ^ "fact" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 17 May 2023 .

^ Mulligan, Kevin; Correia, Fabrice (2021), "Facts" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 18 November 2022 , Facts, philosophers like to say, are opposed to theories and to values (cf. Rundle 1993) and are to be distinguished from things, in particular from complex objects, complexes and wholes, and from relations.

^ a b "Fact" (1a). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 Joye Exp. Dan.

xi. Z vij b, Let emprours and kinges know this godly kynges fact. 1545 (but note the conventional uses: after the fact and before the fact ) ^ Shapiro, Barbara J. (2000).

A culture of fact : England, 1550-1720 . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0-8014-3686-9 .

OCLC 41606276 .

^ Charles Sanders Peirce.

The Fixation of Belief paperback – July 26, 2017 ISBN 1973922991 , 38 pp ^ "Fact" (6c). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 ^ (See also "Matter" (2,6).

Compact_Oxford English Dictionary ) ^ "Fact" (5). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 ^ American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language _4th_Ed.

^ "Fact" (5). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 ^ "Fact" (6a). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 ^ "Fact" (8). Oxford English Dictionary_2d_Ed_1989 ^ Roger Bacon, translated by Robert Burke Opus Majus , Book I, Chapter 2.

^ "A fact, it might be said, is a state of affairs that is the case or obtains." – Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy.

States of Affairs ^ Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , Proposition 2: What is the case—a fact—is the existence of states of affairs.

^ a b Oxford Companion to Philosophy ^ Alex Oliver, Fact , in Craig, Edward (2005).

Shorter Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge, Oxford.

ISBN 0-415-32495-5 .

^ Engel, Pascal (2002).

Truth . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP.

ISBN 0-7735-2462-2 .

^ The argument is presented in many places, but see for example Davidson , Truth and Meaning , in Davidson, Donald (1984).

Truth and Interpretation . Clarendon Press, Oxford.

ISBN 0-19-824617-X .

^ Fact , in The Oxford Companion to Philosophy , Ted Honderich, editor. (Oxford, 1995) ISBN 0-19-866132-0 ^ a b c d e Gower, Barry (1997).

Scientific Method: A Historical and Philosophical Introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-12282-1 .

^ a b c d e Ravetz, Jerome Raymond (1996).

Scientific Knowledge and Its Social Problems . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 1-56000-851-2 .

^ Cassell, Eric J.

The Nature of Suffering and the Goals of Medicine Oxford University Press . Retrieved 16 May 2007.

^ Estrich, Willis Albert (1952).

American Jurisprudence: A Comprehensive Text Statement of American Case Law . Lawyers Co-operative Publishing Company.

^ Elkouri, Frank (2003).

How Arbitration Works . BNA Books. p. 305.

ISBN 1-57018-335-X .

^ Bishin, William R. (1972).

Law Language and Ethics: An Introduction to Law and Legal Method . Foundation Press. p. 277.

ISBN 9780882773797 . Original from the University of Michigan Digitized 2006.

^ The Yale Law Journal: Volume 7 . Yale Law Journal Co. 1898.

^ Per Lord Shaw of Dunfermline, Clarke v. Edinburgh and District Tramways Co , 1919 S.C.(H.L.) 35, at p 36.

^ Merrill, John Houston (1895).

The American and English Encyclopedia of Law . E. Thompson. Original from Harvard University Digitized 2007.

^ Bennett, Wayne W. (2003).

Criminal Investigation . Thomson Wadsworth.

ISBN 0-534-61524-4 .

^ Roy W. McDonald, "Alternative Pleading in the United States".

Columbia Law Review , Vol. 52, No. 4 (Apr. 1952), pp. 443–478 ^ McDonald 1952 External links Wikiversity has learning resources about Facing Facts Wikiquote has quotations related to Fact .

"Facts" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category Portal : Philosophy Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐s6mbz
Cached time: 20250811235420
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.500 seconds
Real time usage: 0.629 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4253/1000000
Revision size: 20556/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76757/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4251/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90769/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.291/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7235648/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  535.057      1 -total
 28.01%  149.886      1 Template:Reflist
 16.36%   87.535      3 Template:Navbox
 15.56%   83.281      1 Template:Philosophy_of_science
 12.12%   64.849      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
 11.21%   59.979      1 Template:Short_description
 10.02%   53.595     12 Template:Cite_book
  9.25%   49.486      5 Template:Citation_needed
  7.98%   42.704      5 Template:Fix
  7.01%   37.533      6 Template:Rp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58617:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235420 and revision id 1300948116. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fact&oldid=1300948116 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Concepts in logic Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in the philosophy of language Concepts in the philosophy of science Information Knowledge Logical truth Statements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from May 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 07:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fact 68 languages Add topic

