Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early African-American art Toggle Early African-American art subsection 1.1 Pre-colonial, Antebellum and Civil War eras 1.2 Reconstruction 2 Contemporary art Toggle Contemporary art subsection 2.1 The Harlem Renaissance 2.2 Mid-century 2.3 Late 20th/early 21st century 3 Galleries Toggle Galleries subsection 3.1 Art 3.1.1 Early African-American 3.1.2 Harlem Renaissance 3.1.3 Contemporary 3.2 Artists 3.2.1 Harlem Renaissance 3.2.2 Contemporary 4 Collections of African-American art 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents African-American art 4 languages Français Bahasa Indonesia Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Visual arts of the people of African descent in the United States of America This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "African-American art" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on African Americans History Periods Timeline Atlantic slave trade Abolitionism in the United States Slavery in the colonial history of the US Revolutionary War Antebellum period Slavery and military history during the Civil War Reconstruction era Politicians Juneteenth Civil rights movement (1865–1896) Jim Crow era (1896–1954) Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Black power movement Post–civil rights era Aspects Agriculture history Black Belt in the American South Business history Military history Treatment of the enslaved Migrations Great Migration Second Great Migration New Great Migration Culture Lifeways Dance Family structure Film Folktales Music Musical theater Names Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Schools Education during the slave period in the US Education of freed people during the Civil War History of African-American education , after the Civil War Historically black colleges and universities Fraternities Academic study Studies Art Literature Celebrations Martin Luther King Jr. Day Black History Month Juneteenth Kwanzaa Economic class African-American businesses Middle class Upper class Billionaires Symbols and ideas African-American beauty Black is beautiful Black pride African-American hair Good hair Stepping " Lift Every Voice and Sing " Self-determination Religion Institutions Black church Theologies Black theology Womanist theology Non-Christian groups Hoodoo Black Hebrew Israelites African-American Jews African-American Muslims Nation of Islam Louisiana Voodoo African Diaspora Religions Politics Organizations Congressional Black Caucus Joint Center National Black Caucus of State Legislators National Conference of Black Mayors Ideologies Afrocentrism Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Capitalism Conservatism Garveyism Leftism Liberalism Nationalism Pan-Africanism Patriotism Populism Radicalism Socialism Civic/economic groups Organizations Association for the Study of African American Life and History Black conductors NAACP National Black Chamber of Commerce National Council of Negro Women National Pan-Hellenic Council National Urban League TransAfrica UNCF Sports Negro league baseball Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) HBCU (HBCUAC) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Sub-communities Multiethnic African-American Jews Afro-Puerto Ricans Alabama Creole people Black Indians Black Seminoles Mascogos Blaxicans Brass Ankles Creoles of color Dominickers Freedmen Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creoles Melungeon Carmel Redbone Specific ancestries Americo-Liberians Creek Freedmen Gullah Merikins Nova Scotians Samaná Americans Sierra Leone Creole Sexual orientation LGBT community Dialects and languages English dialects African-American English African-American Vernacular English Liberian English Samaná English Tutnese Languages and other dialects Gullah Afro-Seminole Creole Negro Dutch Black American Sign Language Population US states Alabama Arkansas California Florida Georgia Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Louisiana Maryland Mississippi Nebraska New York North Carolina Ohio Oklahoma Oregon South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Virginia US cities Black mecca List of neighborhoods Atlanta Baltimore Boston Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Davenport Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kentucky Lexington Los Angeles New York City Omaha Philadelphia San Antonio San Francisco Historic places District of Columbia Florida Georgia Mississippi Missouri Omaha, Nebraska North Carolina South Carolina Texas West Virginia Population count US states and territories US metropolitan areas US cities US communities Places by plurality of population Diaspora Africa Canada France Ghana Israel Liberia Nova Scotia Sierra Leone Prejudice Racism Black genocide Race and ethnicity in the US census Racism against Black Americans Reparations for slavery School segregation in the US Unarmed African Americans killed by police officers Stereotypes and media depictions Blackface Criminal stereotypes Hollywood Magical Negro Minstrel show United States portal Category Index v t e African-American art is known as a broad term describing visual art created by African Americans . The range of art they have created, and are continuing to create, over more than two centuries is as varied as the artists themselves.

[ 1 ] Some have drawn on cultural traditions in Africa, and other parts of the world where the Black diaspora is found, for inspiration. Others have found inspiration in traditional African-American plastic art forms, including basket weaving , pottery , quilting , woodcarving and painting , all of which are sometimes classified as " handicrafts " or " folk art ".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Many have also been inspired by European traditions in art, as well as personal experience of life, work and studies there.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Like their Western colleagues, many work in Realist , Modernist and Conceptual styles, and all the variations in between, including America's home-grown Abstract expressionist movement, an approach to art seen in the work of Howardena Pindell , McArthur Binion and Norman Lewis , among others.

[ 7 ] Like their peers, African-American artists also work in an array of media, including painting, print-making, collage, assemblage, drawing, sculpture and more.

[ 8 ] Their themes are similarly varied, although many also address, or feel they must address, issues of American Blackness.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Once known as the "sculptor of horrors", Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller favored a mix of conceptual realism and symbolism , and took inspiration from ghost stories.

[ 11 ] Mentored by Henry Ossawa Tanner , critiqued by Auguste Rodin , and exhibited in the 1903 Salon , [ 11 ] [ 12 ] she recognized that a continued career relied on "meet[ing] requests for race-based work from the leading Black scholars, activists, and luminaries who controlled the commission pipeline".

[ 13 ] By accepting that reality, W. E. B. Du Bois became one of her patrons, and she became the first African-American woman recipient of a federal commission ... for progress-themed dioramas for Jamestown's tercentennial ... and, later, for the fiftieth anniversary celebration of the Emancipation Proclamation ", but it all came at some cost.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Another extreme is illustrated by an artist like Emory Douglas , the former minister of culture for the Black Panther Party , whose art was consciously radical, and has since become iconic.

[ 14 ] "[C]redited with popularising the term 'pigs' for corrupt police officers", his best-known imagery was often harshly critical of the existing power structure, openly violent and, like all political iconography, intended to persuade.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Three sculptors Edmonia Lewis was commissioned to do President Grant's portrait, c.

1870 .

Augusta Savage with Realization , her WPA Federal Art Project , 1938.

Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller was Rodin 's protegee, 1910.

Sculptor Edmonia Lewis , by contrast, financed her first trip to Europe in 1865 by selling sculptures of abolitionist John Brown and Robert Gould Shaw , the Union Colonel who led the enlisted black 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment during the Civil War .

[ 16 ] She would later incorporate issues of race more subtly, using modern themes and ancient symbols in Neoclassical sculpture to suggestive ends.

[ 5 ] In response to a bust Lewis had made of her, her patron Anna Quincey Waterston wrote admiringly of her: "Tis fitting that a daughter of the race / Whose chains are breaking should receive a gift / So rare as genius." [ 16 ] The grandchild of slaves , print artist and sculptor Elizabeth Catlett was also an activist. Although some of her art includes confrontational symbols from the Black Power movement , she is best known for her portrayals of African-American heroes — Martin Luther King , Malcolm X , Harriet Tubman — and strong maternal women.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Sculptor Augusta Savage 's work was similarly uplifting. In a large commission for the 1939 New York World's Fair , Lift Every Voice and Sing , which is often described as the Black National Anthem , inspired a called Lift Every Voice and Sing , also known as The Harp as it depicted black singers as the strings of the instrument.

[ 6 ] Richard Hunt , is a sculptor born on Chicago's South Side in 1935. A recurrent theme of his work is the integration and expression of African-American history and culture, despite his focus on his own freedom as an artist to work in an abstract mode or one referential or suggestive of his subjects. A descendant of enslaved people brought to this country through the port of Savannah , Georgia, Richard Hunt has singularly made the largest contribution to public art in the U.S.; more than 160 public sculpture commissions grace prominent locations in 24 states and Washington D.C. As a 19-year-old, Richard Hunt taught himself how to weld. Only two years later, he gained national recognition when the Museum of Modern Art acquired his sculpture, Arachne . Another Richard Hunt sculpture, Hero Construction , now stands as the centerpiece of The Art Institute of Chicago .

Richard Hunt has held over 150 solo exhibitions and is represented in more than 100 public museums.

[ 20 ] Painter Faith Ringgold , who is known for her politicized art, has been described as having a "gorgeous gut punch".

[ 21 ] Her The American People Series #20: Die which depicts a bloody clash between Cubist black and white figures, was hung opposite Pablo Picasso's Les Demoiselles d’Avignon in the newly renovated MOMA in 2019, the better to start a conversation between the "savage force" of their respective compositions.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Conceptual artist Fred Wilson focuses on other kinds of composition, "juxtaposing wildly anomalous items, such as a slave statue and a set of fine china". A 1999 MacArthur "genius grant " recipient, his work encourages "unpacking and upending assumptions about race and history surrounding each".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Narrative artists like Jacob Lawrence use history painting to tell a story in images, as his own Migration Series shows. The 60-panel epic depicts the relocation of a million African Americans to the industrialized North after World War II.

[ 8 ] [ 26 ] As in the cases of Kehinde Wiley [ citation needed ] and Amy Sherald , [ 27 ] history painting can also involve portraiture ; in this instance, the official portraits of Barack and Michelle Obama, respectively.

Artists like Horace Pippen and Romare Bearden chose more ordinary subject matter, relying on contemporary life to inspire uncontroversial imagery. The influential Henry Tanner did, too, in paintings like The Banjo Lesson and the Thankful Poor [ 4 ] although those paintings — like many of his landscapes and Biblical scenes — often seem illuminated from within. The first African-American to enroll in the prestigious Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in 1880, Tanner studied with Realist painter Thomas Eakens .

[ 4 ] He went on to become the first African-American artist to earn international acclaim. He was elected to the National Academy of Design in 1910 and designated an honorary chevalier of the Order of the Legion of Honor in 1923.

[ 28 ] African-American art is influenced by traditional African culture and Western culture that was forced upon black slaves.

[ 29 ] Early African-American art [ edit ] Pre-colonial, Antebellum and Civil War eras [ edit ] Early African-American Art Powder horn carved by John Bush , 1754 Engraving of a chained female slave by Patrick H. Reason , 1835. Often circulated with the caption "Am I not a woman and a sister?" Harriet Powers , Bible quilt, Mixed Media. 1898.

The earliest evidence of African-American art in the United States is the work of skilled craftsmen slaves from New England . Two categories of slave craft items survive from colonial America: articles that were created for personal use by slaves and articles created for public use. Examples from between the 17th century and the early 19th century include: small drums, quilts, wrought-iron figures, baskets, ceramic vessels, woodcuts, and gravestones.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Many of Africa's most skilled slave artisans were hired out by slave owners. With the consent of their masters, some slave artisans were also able to keep a small percentage of the wages earned in their spare time to save enough money to purchase their freedom, and that of their family members.

[ 32 ] The public works of art produced by slave craftsmen were an important contribution to the Colonial economy. In New England and the Mid-Atlantic colonies, slaves were apprenticed as goldsmiths, cabinetmakers, engravers, carvers, portrait painters, carpenters, masons and iron workers. The construction and decoration of the Janson House , built on the Hudson River in 1712, was the work of African-Americans. Many of the oldest buildings in Louisiana , South Carolina, and Georgia were built by craftsmen slaves.

[ 31 ] Some colonial art may have been by enslaved artists, but because the works are not signed, cannot be positively identified as such. For instance, the Boston printer Thomas Fleet is known to have owned an enslaved woodcut artist named Peter Fleet , who is mentioned by Isaiah Thomas in his history of early American printing, [ 33 ] and whose initials appear on a woodcut illustration for the 1743 pamphlet The Prodigal Daughter .

[ 34 ] It is not possible to identify exactly how many other woodcuts in John Fleet's many publications were cut by James Fleet.

In the mid-18th century, John Bush was a powder horn carver and soldier with the Massachusetts militia fighting with the British in the French and Indian War .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Patrick H. Reason , Joshua Johnson , and Scipio Moorhead were among the earliest known portrait artists, from the period of 1773–1887. Patronage by some white families allowed for private tutoring in special cases. Many of these sponsoring whites were abolitionists . The artists received more encouragement and were better able to support themselves in cities, of which there were more in the North and border states.

Harriet Powers (1837–1910) was an African-American folk artist and quilt maker from rural Georgia , born into enslavement. Now nationally recognized for her quilts , she used traditional appliqué techniques to combine local legends, African symbolism, Bible stories, and natural phenomena on her quilts. In her storytelling quilts she critically reflects her complex experience of the post-slavery United States.

[ 37 ] Only two of her late quilts have survived: Bible Quilt 1886 and Bible Quilt 1898 . Her quilts are considered among the finest examples of 19th-century Southern quilting.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Like Powers, the women of Gee's Bend developed a distinctive, bold and sophisticated quilting style based on traditional American (and African-American) quilts, but with a geometric simplicity. Although widely separated by geography, they have qualities reminiscent of Amish quilts and Modern art . The women of Gee's Bend passed their skills and aesthetic down through at least six generations to the present.

[ 40 ] At one time, scholars believed slaves sometimes used quilt blocks to alert other slaves to escape plans during the time of the Underground Railroad , [ 41 ] but most historians do not agree. Quilting remains alive as form of artistic expression in the African-American community.

Reconstruction [ edit ] After the Civil War, it became increasingly acceptable for African-American-created works to be exhibited in museums, and painters and sculptors increasingly produced works for this purpose.

[ 42 ] These were works mostly in the European Romantic and Classical traditions of landscapes and portraits.

Edward Mitchell Bannister , Henry Ossawa Tanner and Edmonia Lewis are the most notable from this period. Others include Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller , a female artist who, like Edmonia Lewis, was a sculptor, as well as Grafton Tyler Brown and Nelson A. Primus .

[ 13 ] [ 11 ] [ 43 ] The goal of widespread recognition across racial boundaries was first eased within America's big cities, including Philadelphia , Boston , Chicago , New York , and New Orleans . Even in these places, however, there were discriminatory limitations. Abroad, however, African Americans were much better received. In Europe — especially Paris , France — these artists were freer to experiment with techniques outside traditional western art. Freedom of expression was much more prevalent in Paris and, to a lesser extent, Munich and Rome .

[ 44 ] Contemporary art [ edit ] Archibald Motley Self portrait, 1920 Self portrait, 1933 Jacob Lawrence Jacob Lawrence gained recognition at age 23 for his 60-panel Migration Series, depicting the Great Migration of African Americans from the rural South to the urban North. The name of this panel is Douglass Argued Against Poor Negroes Leaving the South Portrait of Jacob Lawrence, 1941.

The Harlem Renaissance [ edit ] See also: Harlem Renaissance , Chicago Black Renaissance , and Black Renaissance in D.C.

The Harlem Renaissance refers to an enormous flourishing in African-American art of all kinds, including visual art. Ideas that were already widespread in other parts of the world at the time had begun to spread into U.S. artistic communities during the 1920s. Notable artists in this period included Richmond Barthé , Aaron Douglas , Lawrence Harris , Palmer Hayden , William H. Johnson , Sargent Johnson , John T. Biggers , Earle Wilton Richardson , Malvin Gray Johnson , Archibald Motley , Augusta Savage , Hale Woodruff and photographer James Van Der Zee .

[ citation needed ] William E. Harmon, an art patron and aficionado, established the Harmon Foundation in 1922, and it served as a large-scale patron of African-American art until 1967, generating interest in, and recognition for, artists who might have otherwise remained unknown. The Harmon Award and the annual "Exhibition of the Work of Negro Artists" further contributed to the support, as did the William E. Harmon Foundation Award for Distinguished Achievement Among Negroes , which although not limited to visual artists was awarded to several of them, including Hale Woodruff , Palmer Hayden and Archibald Motley . In 1929, the funding temporarily ended as a result of the Great Depression , only to resume mounting exhibitions and offering funding once the economy revived artists like Jacob Lawrence , Laura Wheeler Waring and others.

[ citation needed ] By 1933, the U.S. Treasury Department 's Public Works of Art Project was attempting to provide support for artists in 1933, but their efforts proved ineffective. President Franklin D. Roosevelt created the Works Progress Administration (WPA) in 1935, and that program succeeded at providing all American artists, and especially African-American artists, with a means to earn a living in a devastated economy. By the middle of the 1930s, more than 250,000 African Americans were involved with the WPA, [ 45 ] including Jacob Lawrence , Gwendolyn Knight , sculptor William Artis ; painter and children's book illustrator Ernest Crichlow , cartoonist and illustrator Elton C. Fax , photographer Marvin Smith , Dox Thrash , who invented the printmaking method carborundum Mezzotint , painters Georgette Seabrooke and Elba Lightfoot , best known for their Harlem Hospital murals; Chicago printmaker Eldzier Cortor ; and renowned Illinois-based artist Adrian Troy and many others.

[ 45 ] Many of these artists found themselves drawn to the interwar movement known as Social Realism , which reflected the politics and socioeconomic views of a generation that had been drafted into WWI, only to dance through the Roaring 1920s and crash in the Great Depression.

Important cities with significant black populations and important African-American art circles included Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco and Washington, D.C. The WPA led to a new wave of important black art professors. Mixed media, abstract art, cubism, and social realism became not only acceptable, but desirable. Artists of the WPA united to form the 1935 Harlem Artists Guild , which developed community art facilities in major cities. Leading forms of art included drawing, sculpture, printmaking, painting, pottery, quilting, weaving and photography. In 1939, however, the costly WPA and its projects all were terminated.

[ citation needed ] In 1943, James A. Porter , a professor in the Department of Art at Howard University , wrote the first major text on African-American art and artists, Modern Negro Art .

[ citation needed ] Mid-century [ edit ] Sunday Morning Breakfast by Horace Pippin , 1943.

Romare Bearden , After Church , n.d.

In the 1950s and 1960s, few African-American artists were widely known or accepted. Despite this, the Highwaymen , a loose association of 26 African-American artists from Fort Pierce , Florida , created idyllic, quickly realized images of the Florida landscape and peddled some 200,000 of them from the trunks of their cars. In the 1950s and 1960s, it was impossible to find galleries interested in selling artworks by a group of unknown, self-taught African Americans, [ 46 ] so they sold their art directly to the public rather than through galleries and art agents. Rediscovered in the mid-1990s, they are recognized today as an important part of American folk history, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] and the current market price for an original Highwaymen painting can easily bring in thousands of dollars. In 2004, the original group of 26 were inducted into the Florida Artists Hall of Fame .

[ 49 ] Currently eight of the 26 are deceased, including A. Hair, H. Newton, Ellis and George Buckner, A. Moran, L. Roberts, Hezekiah Baker and, most recently, Johnny Daniels. The full list of 26 can be found in the Florida Artists Hall of Fame, as well as various highwaymen and Florida art websites.

After the Second World War , some artists took a global approach, working and exhibiting abroad, in Paris, and as the decade wore on, relocated gradually in other welcoming cities such as Copenhagen, Amsterdam, and Stockholm: Barbara Chase-Riboud , Edward Clark , Harvey Cropper , Beauford Delaney , Herbert Gentry , [ 50 ] Bill Hutson , Clifford Jackson, [ 51 ] Sam Middleton , [ 52 ] Larry Potter, Haywood Bill Rivers, Merton Simpson , and Walter Williams.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Some African-American artists did make it into important New York galleries by the 1950s and 1960s: Horace Pippin , Romare Bearden , Jacob Lawrence , Richard Hunt , William T. Williams , Norman Lewis , Thomas Sills , [ 55 ] and Sam Gilliam were among the few who had successfully been received in a gallery setting.

Richard Hunt was the first African American visual artist to serve on the National Council on the Arts , appointed by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968. Hunt was the fourth African American on the council, after Marian Anderson , Ralph Ellison , and Duke Ellington . In 1971, Richard Hunt was the first African American sculptor to have a major solo retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art .

The Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s and 1970s led artists to capture and express the changing times. Galleries and community art centers developed for the purpose of displaying African-American art, and collegiate teaching positions were created by and for African-American artists. Some African-American women were also active in the feminist art movement in the 1970s.

Faith Ringgold made work that featured black female subjects and that addressed the conjunction of racism and sexism in the U.S., while the collective Where We At (WWA) held exhibitions exclusively featuring the artwork of African-American women.

[ 56 ] By the 1980s and 1990s, hip-hop graffiti began to predominate in urban communities. Most major cities had developed museums devoted to African-American artists. The National Endowment for the Arts provided increasing support for these artists.

[ citation needed ] Late 20th/early 21st century [ edit ] Midnight Golfer by Eugene J. Martin , mixed media collage on rag paper, 1990.

Kara Walker , a contemporary American artist, is known for her exploration of race, gender, sexuality, violence and identity in her artworks. Walker's silhouette images work to bridge unfinished folklore in the Antebellum South and are reminiscent of the earlier work of Harriet Powers . Her nightmarish yet fantastical images incorporate a cinematic feel. In 2007, Walker was listed among Time magazine's "100 Most Influential People in The World, Artists and Entertainers".

[ 57 ] Textile artists are part of African-American art history. According to the 2010 Quilting in America industry survey, there are 1.6 million quilters in the United States.

[ 58 ] One historic non profit organization with several members who are quilters and fiber artists is Women of Visions, Inc. located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania at the Pittsburgh Center for the Arts . WOV Inc artists past and present work in a variety of mediums. Those who have shown internationally include Renee Stout and Tina Williams Brewer .

Influential contemporary artists include Larry D. Alexander , Laylah Ali , Amalia Amaki , Emma Amos , Jean-Michel Basquiat , Dawoud Bey , Camille Billops , Mark Bradford , Edward Clark , Willie Cole , Robert Colescott , Louis Delsarte , David Driskell , Leonardo Drew , Melvin Edwards , Ricardo Francis, Charles Gaines , Ellen Gallagher , Herbert Gentry , Sam Gilliam , David Hammons , Jerry Harris , Joseph Holston , Richard Hunt , Martha Jackson-Jarvis , Katie S. Mallory, M. Scott Johnson, Rashid Johnson , Joe Lewis , Glenn Ligon , James Little , Edward L. Loper Sr.

, Alvin D. Loving , Kerry James Marshall , Eugene J. Martin , Richard Mayhew , Sam Middleton , Howard McCalebb , Charles McGill, Thaddeus Mosley , Sana Musasama , Senga Nengudi , Joe Overstreet , Martin Puryear , Adrian Piper , Howardena Pindell , Faith Ringgold , Gale Fulton Ross , Alison Saar , Betye Saar , John Solomon Sandridge , Raymond Saunders , John T. Scott , Joyce Scott , Gary Simmons , Lorna Simpson , Renee Stout , Kara Walker , Carrie Mae Weems , Stanley Whitney , William T. Williams , Jack Whitten , Fred Wilson , Richard Wyatt Jr.

, Richard Yarde , and Purvis Young , Kehinde Wiley , Mickalene Thomas , Barkley Hendricks , Jeff Sonhouse , William Walker , Ellsworth Ausby, Che Baraka , Emmett Wigglesworth , Otto Neals , Dindga McCannon , Terry Dixon (artist) , Frederick J. Brown , Gee Horton and many others.

[ citation needed ] Galleries [ edit ] Art [ edit ] Early African-American [ edit ] (Selection was limited by availability.) Painter Edward Mitchell Bannister , Pleasant Pastures , 1887.

Painter Grafton Tyler Brown , Old Faithful Geyser, Yellowstone National Park , 1887.

Sculptor Edmonia Lewis , Old Arrow Maker , 1872.

Painter Henry Ossawa Tanner , The Annunciation , 1898.

Harlem Renaissance [ edit ] (Selection was limited by availability.) Self-portrait by painter Malvin Gray Johnson , 1934.

Photo by the painter William H. Johnson , 1931.

Photographer James Van Der Zee' s photo of a woman in evening attire, 1922.

William H. Johnson' s Three Friends , c. 1945.

Archibald Motley , Gettin' Religion , 1948.

Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller' s Ethiopia Awakening , 1921.

Laura Wheeler' s Heirlooms , 1916.

Contemporary [ edit ] (Selection was limited by availability.) Larry D. Alexander , Send in the Clown , 2007.

Adrian Piper ' s Alice Down the Rabbit Hole , 1965.

Howardeena Pindell' s Queens, Festival , 2007.

Artists [ edit ] Harlem Renaissance [ edit ] (Selection was limited by availability.) Painter, sculptor, illustrator and muralist Charles Alston in 1939.

Sculptor and character artist Henry W. Bannarn in 1937.

Sculptor Richmond Barthé working on a clay figure, n.d.

Artist Romare Bearden , photographed in his military uniform in 1944.

Sculptor Leslie Bolling carving a sculpture, n.d.

Modernist painter Beauford Delaney in 1952.

Painter and illustrator Aaron Douglas , n.d.

Painter Palmer Hayden working on a landscape, n.d.

Artist Sargent Johnson , assessing his own sculpture, n.d.

Artist Loïs Mailou Jones in 1936.

Sculptor Augusta Savage , photographed between 1935 and 1947.

Painter Hale Woodruff at work on a canvas, c. 1936.

Contemporary [ edit ] (Selection was limited by availability.) Painter and collagist Mark Bradford in 2016.

Sculptor, printer, and conceptual and visual artist Willie Cole in 2004.

Artist Leonardo Drew in Brooklyn studio in 2012.

Artist, scholar and curator David C. Driskell in 2016.

Sculptor and collagist Jerry Harris in 2008.

Conceptual post-black artist Rashid Johnson in 2008.

Painter, collagist and draftsman Eugene J. Martin in 1990.

Artists Sana Musasama and Janet Olivia Henry in 2019.

Painter and mixed media artist Howardena Pindell in 2019.

Conceptual artist Adrian Piper in 2005.

Painter and mixed media sculptor Faith Ringgold in 2017.

Assemblage artist Betye Saar in 2017.

Multimedia painter Raymond Saunders in 1995.

Photographer and multimedia artist Lorna Simpson in 2009.

Collections of African-American art [ edit ] Many American museums hold works by African-American artists, including Smithsonian American Art Museum [ 59 ] Colleges and universities with important collections include Fisk University , Spelman College and Howard University .

[ 60 ] Other important collections of African-American art include the Walter O. Evans Collection of African American Art , the Paul R. Jones collections at the University of Delaware and University of Alabama , the David C. Driskell Center 's art collection, the Harmon and Harriet Kelley Collection of African American Art, the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture , the Studio Museum in Harlem and the Mott-Warsh collection .

See also [ edit ] United States portal Art portal African-American culture African-American literature African-American music Black Abstractionism Black Arts Movement Black Art: In the Absence of Light Chicano art Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor The Highwaymen (landscape artists) James A. Porter Colloquium on African American Art List of African-American visual artists Visual art of the United States References [ edit ] ^ "Art by African Americans | Highlights | Smithsonian American Art Museum" .

americanart.si.edu . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Langford, Ellison (December 16, 2019).

"Finding the thread: The tradition of African-American quilting" .

Scalawag . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "Crafts and Slave Handicrafts: An Overview" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ a b c "Henry Ossawa Tanner" .

Biography . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ a b Alexandra Kiely (February 13, 2020).

"The Fabulous Sculpture and Mysterious Life of Edmonia Lewis" .

DailyArt Magazine . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ a b Blain, Keisha N. (March 3, 2017).

"The most important black woman sculptor of the 20th century deserves more recognition" .

Timeline .

Medium . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ O’Grady, Megan (February 12, 2021).

"Once Overlooked, Black Abstract Painters Are Finally Given Their Due" .

T: The New York Times Style Magazine .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ a b Stidhum, Tonja Renée (February 7, 2018).

"On The 25th Anniversary Of His Death, We Remember And Honor Iconic Tennis Player Arthur Ashe - Blavity" .

Blavity News & Politics . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Smith, Melissa (April 29, 2019).

"Young Black Artists Are More in Demand Than Ever—But the Art World Is Burning Them Out" .

ArtNet .

^ "The Miseducation of the Black Artist" .

The Pioneer . Retrieved February 25, 2021 .

^ a b c d Davidson and P. Biddle, Benjamin.

"The Sculpture of Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller" (PDF) .

The Magazine Antiques (September/October 2020): 34– 40.

^ a b Lewis, Femi (November 27, 2020).

"Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller: Visual Artist of the Harlem Renaissance" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved October 4, 2022 .

^ a b c "The Meta Vaux Warrick Fuller Collection – Danforth" .

danforth.framingham.edu . Retrieved February 25, 2021 .

^ a b "The revolutionary art of Emory Douglas, Black Panther" .

The Guardian . October 27, 2008.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ Rayner, Alex (October 24, 2008).

"Fight the power: Alex Rayner meets the former Black Panthers' minister of culture" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ a b "Edmonia Lewis - Smithsonian American Art Museum" .

Google Arts & Culture . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ "Elizabeth Catlett | Artist Profile" .

NMWA . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ Rosenberg, Karen (April 4, 2012).

"Elizabeth Catlett, Sculptor With Eye on Social Issues, Is Dead at 96" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ Keyes, Allison (February 12, 2012).

"BLack, Female And An Inspirational Modern Artist" .

NPR.org . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ Introduction by Courtney J. Martin. Text by John Yau, Jordan Carter, LeRonn Brooks. Interview by Adrienne Childs. (2022).

Richard Hunt . Gregory R. Miller & Co.

ISBN 9781941366448 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Morris, Bob (June 11, 2020).

"Faith Ringgold Will Keep Fighting Back" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Farago, Jason (October 3, 2019).

"The New MoMA Is Here. Get Ready for Change. (Published 2019)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Weschler, Lawrence (January 31, 2017).

'Destroy this mad brute': The African root of World War I . Bloomsbury USA.

ISBN 9781632867186 .

^ Chung, Evan (September 26, 2019).

"Fred Wilson uses the museum as his palette" .

The World from PRI (Radio) . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Baltas, Ioli (September 12, 2019).

"Pace Chelsea Reopens With Fred Wilson's 'Chandeliers' " .

Surface . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "Introduction | Jacob Lawrence: The Migration Series" .

lawrencemigration.phillipscollection.org . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ Fikes, Robert (November 25, 2018).

"Amy Sherald (1973- ) •" . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "Henry Ossawa Tanner | American painter" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved February 23, 2021 .

^ "The History of Black Art" .

^ Patton, Sharon F. (1998), African-American Art , Oxford University Press.

^ a b Lewis, Samella (2003).

African American Art and Artists . University of California Press.

^ Romare Bearden, Harry Henderson, A History of African-American Artists. From 1792 to the Present . New York: Pantheon Books , 1993.

^ Thomas, Isaiah (1874).

The history of printing in America, with a biography of printers . Boston University of Massachusetts. New York, B. Franklin. pp. xxv.

^ "Many Hands: Enslavement, Needlework, and a Will | Historic New England" .

www.historicnewengland.org . May 13, 2022 . Retrieved December 2, 2024 .

^ USA Today . May 2005, Vol. 133 Issue 2720, pp. 48–52. 5p.

^ "The Great Warpaths" .

^ Böke, Paula (2025).

"Embodying the Mind: Anagrammatical Storytelling in Harriet Powers' Pictorial Quilt II" .

TEXTILE - Cloth and Culture : 1– 12 – via Taylor & Francis.

^ Hicks, Kyra E. (2009), This I Accomplish: Harriet Powers' Bible Quilt and Other Pieces .

^ Harriet Powers , Early Women Masters.

Archived October 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine .

^ The Quilts of Gees Bend .

^ Raymond Dobard Jr., Ph.D., and Jacqueline Tobin, Hidden in Plain View , 1999.

[ where?

] ^ "Host Europe GmbH – www.widewalls.ch" .

www.widewalls.ch . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ George, Alice (August 22, 2019).

"Sculptor Edmonia Lewis Shattered Gender and Race Expectations in 19th-Century America" .

Smithsonian . Retrieved February 25, 2021 .

^ Rosenberg, Raphael (July 5, 2017), "Artists as beholders: drawings after sculptures as a medium and source for the experience of art" , The Beholder , Routledge, pp.

102– 122, ISBN 978-1-315-08706-1 , retrieved December 16, 2024 ^ a b "Artists of the New Deal" .

HISTORY . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ "Painting Florida | They Did Not Call Themselves 'Highwaymen ' " , Highwaymen Art.

Archived November 8, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Hall, Ken, "The Highwaymen" , go-star.com.

Archived October 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Updates & Snapshots 2006 Archived March 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ The Florida Highwaymen ^ Bearden. R., in An Ocean Apart: American Artists Abroad . New York: Studio Museum in Harlem.

^ Malone, L., in An Ocean Apart: American Artists Abroad . New York: Studio Museum in Harlem.

^ Williams, J. A., in An Ocean Apart: American Artists Abroad . New York: Studio Museum in Harlem.

^ Driskell, David C., in An Ocean Apart: American Artists Abroad . New York: Studio Museum in Harlem.

^ Mercer, Valerie (1996), Explorations in the City of Light . New York: The Studio Museum in Harlem.

^ I. C. K., (1957), "The Surprise of Painter Tom Sills", The Village Voice , p. 17.

^ Brown, Kay (2011). "The Emergence of Black Women Artists: The Founding of 'Where We Ar' ".

Nka: Journal of Contemporary African Art .

2011 (29): 118– 127.

doi : 10.1215/10757163-1496399 .

S2CID 194127365 .

^ Kruger, Barbara (2007), "Kara Walker" , Time online. Retrieved July 26, 2007.

^ Hicks, Kyra E. (2010), 1.6 Million African American Quilters: Survey, Sites, and a Half-Dozen Art Quilt Blocks .

^ "Smithsonian American Art Museum and Renwick Gallery" .

americanart.si.edu . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

^ "Museum of Fine Art | Spelman College" .

www.spelman.edu . Retrieved April 4, 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Romare Bearden , Harry Henderson, A History of African-American Artists. From 1792 to the Present , New York: Pantheon Books, 1993.

Driskell, David C. (2001), The Other Side of Color: African American Art in the Collection of Camille O.

and William H. Cosby Jr.

Pomegranate.

ISBN 978-0-7649-1455-3 Sylvester, Melvin R.

African Americans in Visual Arts: A Historical Perspective . Long Island University. Retrieved January 23, 2005.

Perry, Regenia A. (1972).

Selections of nineteenth-century Afro-American art . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to African American art .

Wikiquote has quotations related to African-American art .

Secretary of State Glenda E. Hood Announces 2004 Hall of Fame Inductees Promoting Natural Florida Through the Arts Blog About African American Artists, Photographers, Galleries & Museums Jake Adam York , "Medicine as Memory: Radcliffe Bailey at Atlanta's High Museum of Art" , Southern Spaces , January 26, 2012.

v t e African Americans History Timeline Abolitionism African American founding fathers Afrocentrism American Civil War Atlantic slave trade Black Codes Black cowboys Black genocide Black Lives Matter Brown v. Board of Education (1954) Children of the plantation Civil Rights Acts 1964 Voting Rights Act of 1965 1968 Civil rights movement 1865–1896 Civil right movement 1896–1954 Civil rights movement 1954–1968 Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle (1956) Sit-in movement Freedom Riders Birmingham movement March on Washington Freedom Summer Selma to Montgomery marches Chicago Freedom Movement Post–civil rights era Cornerstone Speech COVID-19 impact Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857) Free Negro Free people of color George Floyd protests Great Migration Second New Exodusters Inauguration of Barack Obama 2009 / Inauguration of Barack Obama 2013 Jim Crow laws Lynching Military history Million Man March Nadir of American race relations The Negro Motorist Green Book Partus sequitur ventrem Plantations Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) Reconstruction Amendments Reconstruction era Redlining Separate but equal Silent Parade Slavery Treatment of slaves Tulsa race massacre Underground Railroad Women's suffrage movement Culture Afrofuturism Art Black mecca Businesses Dance Family structure Film Folktales Hair Harlem Renaissance New Negro Hoodoo Juneteenth Kwanzaa LGBTQ community Literature Music Musical theater Names Negro National Anthem Neighborhoods Newspapers Soul food Stereotypes Middle class Upper class Notable people Ralph Abernathy Maya Angelou Crispus Attucks James Baldwin James Bevel Julian Bond Amelia Boynton James Bradley Carol Moseley Braun Edward Brooke Blanche Bruce Ralph Bunche George Washington Carver Shirley Chisholm Claudette Colvin Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Medgar Evers James Farmer Henry Highland Garnet Marcus Garvey Fred Gray Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Kamala Harris Jimi Hendrix Jesse Jackson Ketanji Brown Jackson Michael Jackson Harriet Jacobs Barbara Jordan Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Huddie Ledbetter John Lewis Joseph Lowery Malcolm X Thurgood Marshall Toni Morrison Bob Moses Diane Nash Barack Obama Michelle Obama Rosa Parks Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Colin Powell Gabriel Prosser Joseph Rainey A. Philip Randolph Hiram Revels Paul Robeson Al Sharpton Fred Shuttlesworth Clarence Thomas Emmett Till Sojourner Truth Harriet Tubman Nat Turner Denmark Vesey C. T. Vivian David Walker Booker T. Washington Ida B. Wells Roy Wilkins Oprah Winfrey Andrew Young Whitney Young Education, science and technology Black studies Black schools Historically black colleges and universities Inventors and scientists Museums Women in computer science in medicine in STEM fields Religion African-American Jews Islam American Society of Muslims Nation of Islam Black church Azusa Street Revival Black Hebrew Israelites Black theology Doctrine of Father Divine Political movements Anarchism Back-to-Africa movement Black power Movement Capitalism Conservatism Leftism Pan-Africanism Populism Raised fist Self-determination Nationalism Socialism Civic and economic groups Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH) Black Panther Party Committee to Eliminate Media Offensive to African People (CEMOTAP) Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) Nashville Student Movement National Black Chamber of Commerce (NBCC) National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) National Urban League (NUL) Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) Thurgood Marshall College Fund United Negro College Fund (UNCF) Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League (UNIA-ACL) Sports Negro league baseball Baseball color line Black players in professional American football Black NFL quarterbacks Black players in ice hockey Muhammad Ali Arthur Ashe Jack Johnson Joe Louis Jesse Owens Jackie Robinson Serena Williams Athletic associations and conferences Central (CIAA) Mid-Eastern (MEAC) Southern (SIAC) Southwestern (SWAC) Ethnic subdivisions By African descent Fula Gullah Igbo Yoruba Alabama Creole Black Indians Black Seminoles Cherokee Freedmen Choctaw Freedmen Creek Freedmen Black Southerners Blaxicans Great Dismal Swamp maroons Louisiana Creole of color Melungeon Demographics Neighborhoods list U.S. cities with large populations 2000 majorities 2010 majorities Metropolitan areas States and territories Languages Afro-Seminole Creole American Sign Black American Sign English American English African-American English African-American Vernacular English social context Gullah Louisiana Creole By state/city Alabama Arkansas California Los Angeles San Francisco Florida Jacksonville Tallahassee Georgia Atlanta Hawaii Illinois Chicago Indiana Iowa Davenport Kansas Kentucky Lexington Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Massachusetts Boston Michigan Detroit Mississippi Nebraska Omaha New Jersey New York New York City North Carolina Ohio Cleveland Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Philadelphia Puerto Rico South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Austin Dallas–Fort Worth Houston San Antonio Utah Virginia West Virginia Diaspora Africa Gambia Ghana Liberia Sierra Leone America Canada Dominican Republic Haiti Mexico Trinidad and Tobago Israel Europe France Lists African Americans Activists Actors Astronauts Billionaires Journalists Jurists Mathematicians Republicans Singers Sportspeople Spingarn Medal winners US cabinet members US representatives US senators Visual artists Writers African-American firsts Mayors Sports firsts US state firsts Historic places Index of related articles Landmark African-American legislation Lynching victims Monuments Neighborhoods Topics related to the African diaspora Category United States portal v t e Feminist art movement in the United States Feminist art movement Women artists Precursors American Association of University Women (1881) National Association of Women Artists (1889) New York School of Applied Design for Women (1892) Venues or organizations A.I.R. Gallery Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art ( Brooklyn Museum ) Feminist Art Coalition Hera Gallery Lesbian Art Project National Museum of Women in the Arts New York Feminist Art Institute SOHO20 Gallery tArt Collective Washington Women's Art Center Women Artists in Revolution (WAR) Women's Art Resources of Minnesota Woman's Building (Los Angeles) The Women's Building (San Francisco) Women's Graphic Center Women's Interart Center Women's Studio Workshop Exhibitions or installations Twenty Six Contemporary Women Artists (1971) Womanhouse (1972) Three Weeks in May (1977) The Sister Chapel (1974–1978) The Dinner Party (1979) WACK! Art and the Feminist Revolution (2007) Films or documentaries !Women Art Revolution Publications Heresies: A Feminist Publication on Art and Politics (1977–1992) The Feminist Art Journal (1972–1977) Women Artists News {1975-1992) " Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?

" (1971) Groups subRosa Guerrilla Girls The Waitresses Women Artists in Revolution Women's Caucus for Art Where We At Notable women Alison Bechdel Lynda Benglis Louise Bourgeois Norma Broude Judy Chicago Elaine de Kooning Mary Beth Edelson Suzi Ferrer Helen Frankenthaler Mary Garrard Nancy Graves Eva Hesse Lila Katzen Jane Kaufman Lee Krasner Georgia O'Keeffe Barbara Kruger Louise Nevelson Yoko Ono M. C. Richards Rachel Rosenthal Carolee Schneemann Cindy Sherman Sylvia Sleigh Alma Thomas June Wayne Lists List of feminist artists Women in the art history field Feminist movements and ideologies Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=African-American_art&oldid=1300404086 " Categories : African-American art African-American cultural history American contemporary art Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from January 2011 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from July 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 04:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents African-American art 4 languages Add topic

