Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable books 3 Former imprints 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Addison-Wesley 13 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American publisher Addison-Wesley Parent company Pearson Education Founded 1942 ; 83 years ago ( 1942 ) Founder Lew Addison Cummings, Melbourne Wesley Cummings Country of origin United States Headquarters location Boston Publication types Textbooks Nonfiction topics Computer Science, Economics, Finance, Mathematics, and Statistics Official website www .savvas .com (school), www .pearsonhighered .com (higher education), informit.com (professional) Addison–Wesley is an American publisher of textbooks and computer literature. It is an imprint of Pearson plc , a global publishing and education company. In addition to publishing books, Addison–Wesley also distributes its technical titles through the O'Reilly Online Learning e-reference service. Addison–Wesley's majority of sales derive from the United States (55%) and Europe (22%).

[ 1 ] The Addison–Wesley Professional Imprint produces content including books, eBooks, and video for the professional IT worker including developers, programmers, managers, system administrators.  Classic titles include The Art of Computer Programming , The C++ Programming Language , The Mythical Man-Month , and Design Patterns .

History [ edit ] Lew Addison Cummings and Melbourne Wesley Cummings founded Addison–Wesley in 1942, with the first book published by Addison–Wesley being Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor Francis Weston Sears ' Mechanics .

Its first computer book was Programs for an Electronic Digital Computer , by Wilkes, Wheeler, and Gill. In 1977, Addison–Wesley acquired W. A. Benjamin Company , and merged it with the Cummings division of the company to form Benjamin Cummings . It was purchased by the global publishing and education company Pearson PLC in 1988 [ 2 ] and became part of Addison Wesley Longman in 1994. The trade publishing division of Addison–Wesley was sold to Perseus Books Group in 1997, leaving Addison–Wesley as solely an educational publisher.

[ 3 ] Pearson acquired the educational division of Simon & Schuster in 1998, and merged it with Addison Wesley Longman to form Pearson Education and subsequently rebranded to Pearson in 2011. Pearson moved the former Addison Wesley Longman offices from Reading, Massachusetts , to Boston in 2004. Its current executives hail from the original Addison–Wesley with a storied history of their own.

Notable books [ edit ] Addison–Wesley Secondary Math: An Integrated Approach: Focus on Algebra The Art of Computer Programming by Donald Knuth The Feynman Lectures on Physics by Richard Feynman , Robert B. Leighton , and Matthew Sands Alonso, M.; Finn, E.J. (1968).

Fundamental University Physics Volume . Addison–Wesley.

ISBN 978-0-201-00262-1 .

Concrete Mathematics : A Foundation For Computer Science by Ronald Graham, Donald Knuth, and Oren Patashnik Evolutionary Biology by Eli C. Minkoff Programming Pearls by Jon Bentley Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software by Erich Gamma , Richard Helm , Ralph Johnson , and John Vlissides The C++ Programming Language by Bjarne Stroustrup Hacker's Delight by Henry S. Warren, Jr.

Exploratory Data Analysis (see) by John W. Tukey , based on a course taught at Princeton.

The Mythical Man-Month by Fred P. Brooks. Jr.

Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment and TCP/IP Illustrated by W. Richard Stevens Iron John: A Book About Men by Robert Bly Theory Z by William G. Ouchi The Nature of Prejudice by Gordon W. Allport Former imprints [ edit ] Merloyd Lawrence Books [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Pearson PLC (PSO) Company Profile" .

Reuters.com . Archived from the original on November 2, 2011 . Retrieved November 14, 2012 .

^ "History" . Pearson. Archived from the original on July 11, 2006 . Retrieved May 14, 2013 .

^ "Perseus Books Buys Addison-Wesley Unit" .

The New York Times . December 22, 1997 . Retrieved November 13, 2011 .

^ "Book Publisher Merloyd Ludington Lawrence Dies at 89" .

External links [ edit ] Official site (education) Official site (professional) Official site (Germany) Archived 2016-01-09 at the Wayback Machine v t e Pearson plc Pearson School Heinemann (outside US) York Notes Pearson Higher Education Addison-Wesley Allyn & Bacon Benjamin Cummings Longman Pearson Education Prentice Hall College Propero Pearson Professional Addison-Wesley Professional Adobe Press Apple Certified Allyn & Bacon Professional Cisco Press FT Press IBM Press InformIT Peachpit Pearson Assessment & Information Pearson VUE Prentice Hall Professional Sams Publishing Wharton School Press Other BTEC Connections Academy Eighty Strand Edexcel Pearson College London Pearson Language Tests Glen Moreno Weetman Pearson, 1st Viscount Cowdray Marjorie Scardino Former/defunct companies All American Television Financial Times Pearson Television Penguin Random House RTL Group Fremantle Scotti Brothers Records The Economist Group The Software Toolworks Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Other MusicBrainz label Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Addison-Wesley&oldid=1289664121 " Categories : Addison-Wesley Companies based in Boston Computer book publishing companies Pearson plc Publishing companies established in 1942 1942 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2023 Use American English from November 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 01:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Addison-Wesley 13 languages Add topic

