Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Contemporary application Toggle Contemporary application subsection 2.1 Arab Spring 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Secular liberalism 5 languages العربية Español فارسی Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of liberalism which involves secular values Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Secular liberalism is a form of liberalism in which secularist principles and values, and sometimes non-religious ethics , are especially emphasised. It supports the separation of religion and state . Moreover, secular liberals are usually advocates of liberal democracy and the open society as models for organising stable and peaceful societies.

Secular liberalism stands at the other end of the political spectrum from religious authoritarianism, as seen in theocratic states and illiberal democracies . It is often associated with stances in favour of social equality and political freedom .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Description [ edit ] Being secularists by definition, secular liberals tends to favour secular states over theocracies or states with a state religion . Secular liberals advocate separation of church and state in the formal constitutional and legal sense.

[ 3 ] Secular liberal views typically see religious ideas about society, and religious arguments from authority drawn from various sacred texts, as having no special status, authority, or purchase in social, political, or ethical debates.

[ 1 ] It is common for secular liberals to advocate the teaching of religion as a historical and cultural phenomenon, and to oppose religious indoctrination or lessons which promote religion as fact in schools.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Among those who have been labelled as secular liberals are prominent atheists like Richard Dawkins , Christopher Hitchens , and Sam Harris .

[ 2 ] The label of "secular liberal" can sometimes be confusing as to what it refers to. While the term secular can sometimes be used as an adjective for atheists and non-religious people, chiefly in American usage, in British English it is more likely to refer to people who are secular ists , which is to say, people who believe in keeping religion and government apart. The atheist writer Richard Dawkins can be categorised under both definitions, while the British Muslim liberal commentator Maajid Nawaz and liberal Christians who advocate secularism (such as Ed Davey , Tim Farron , and Barack Obama ) only meet the latter. The Liberal Democrats political party in the United Kingdom is secular liberal in philosophy, but its membership is made up of people from many religions and non-religious approaches.

In a modern democratic society, a plurality of conflicting doctrines share an uneasy co-existence within the framework of civilization.

Contemporary application [ edit ] Arab Spring [ edit ] Secular liberalism is sometimes connected with the Arab Spring protests. One commentator labels it as a "secular liberal fantasy".

[ 4 ] Others have labeled the motivations behind it, and the temporary governments created as a result as secular liberalism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Secular liberalism has a long and complicated history in Egypt. The history of secular liberalism was represented in early Egyptian political thought and literature, but the ideas were never effectively put into practice by the Wafd party . Liberal constitutional principles failed to gain a consensus of public opinion and were eventually forced to contend with the political realities of Nasserism. Middle Eastern liberalism, already detached from its Classical philosophical foundation, lacked the economic context in which Western liberalism succeeded, and was effectively replaced by secular authoritarianism in Egypt after the 1952 Egypt Revolution , which dealt more harshly with the Brotherhood. The failures of Nasserism and Pan-Arabism contributed to the growing power of an increasingly violent and radicalized Muslim Brotherhood , further weakening the principles of secularism that had long been challenged by certain political factions within Egypt.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Age of Enlightenment Culture war Modernism Muscular liberalism Postchristianity Religious liberalism Secular ethics Secular humanism Secularism Secular state Secularity Secularization References [ edit ] ^ a b Rod Dreher (6 April 2011).

" Secular Liberalism as Consensus " . Real Clear Politics . Retrieved 9 June 2011 .

^ a b c " Secular liberalism misunderstood " .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 15 October 2010 . Retrieved 2011-06-09 .

^ a b Hobson, Theo (29 April 2010).

" Clegg should assert secular liberalism " .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 2011-06-09 .

^ Jonathan Jones (9 December 2011).

"Tahrir Square aflame: the visual basis of an imaginary revolution" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 14 February 2012 .

^ Bradley, John (2012).

After the Arab Spring: How Islamists Hijacked the Middle East Revolts . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-230-33819-7 .

^ John M. Owen IV (6 January 2012).

"Why Islamism is Winning" .

New York Times . Retrieved 14 February 2012 .

^ Khan, Razib (2012).

"Secular liberals the tip of the Islamist spear" .

Discover Magazine . Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 .

^ Hatina, Meir (2007).

Identity Politics in the Middle East . London: Tauris Academic Studies. pp.

8– 31.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Secular_liberalism&oldid=1240866907 " Categories : Liberalism Economic systems Political culture Political ideologies Political philosophy Politics and secularism Secular humanism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 August 2024, at 22:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Secular liberalism 5 languages Add topic

