Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The islands 2 History 3 Governance Toggle Governance subsection 3.1 Chairs 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Torres Strait Regional Authority Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian government body Torres Strait Regional Authority Regional authority overview Formed 1 July 1994 ( 1994-07-01 ) Jurisdiction Torres Strait Islands Annual budget $39.14 million AUD (2018–19) Minister responsible Malarndirri McCarthy , Minister for Indigenous Australians Regional authority executives Vonda Malone , Chief Executive Officer Napau Pedro Stephen AM, Board Chairperson Website tsra .gov .au The Torres Strait Regional Authority is an Australian Government body established in 1994 to administer the Torres Strait Islands . It consists of 20 elected representatives. The primary function of the authority is to strengthen the economic, social and cultural development of the peoples of the Torres Strait area.

The islands [ edit ] The Torres Strait Islands lie to the north of Tropical Queensland 's Cape York Peninsula and comprise 274 small islands, of which 17 are inhabited, located in Torres Strait which separates Australia and Papua New Guinea . Each island community elects a member to the Torres Strait Regional Authority.

[ 1 ] Thursday Island (Waiben) and Horn Island (Nurupai) are the most well-known of the Torres Strait Islands. Activities on the islands are quite traditional, with fishing being the major economic activity.

[ 2 ] To travel to the remote islands (other than Thursday and Horn Islands) permission is required from the Torres Strait Island Regional Council .

[ 3 ] The five major island groups of the Torres Strait include: Northern Division (Boigu, Dauan, Saibai) Eastern Islands (Darnley, Murray, Stephen) Western Division (St. Pauls, Kubin, Badu, Mabuiag) Central Division (Yorke, Coconut, Warraber, Yam) Southern Division (TI and Inner Islands, NPA [ clarification needed ] and Mainland Australia) History [ edit ] The authority was established in 1994, as a separate authority from the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission , to deliver better services and programs to the Torres Strait Islander people living on the Islands.

[ 4 ] Together with the Island Co-ordinating Council, the Torres Strait Regional Authority has been active in implementing community based management strategies. The adoption of a Marine Strategy for the monitoring and management of dugong and turtle populations in the seas around the islands was undertaken in 1999.

[ 5 ] A 2001 evaluation found that employment and housing were the two areas of greatest need for improvement, being even worse than that of Torres Strait Islander people on the mainland and Australian Aboriginal people. However, in most other areas, such as health, cultural integrity and crime, the people on Islands fared better.

[ 4 ] The Torres Strait Regional Authority's 2001 Bamaga Accord, which proposed a new regional governance framework for the Islands, was an expression of the people's aspiration to have greater autonomy.

[ 6 ] In 2006, successful lobbying by the authority and the Island Co-ordinating Council resulted in the granting of $300,000 from the Federal Government to study the risks of climate change on the six largest Torres Strait Islands.

[ 7 ] In 2010, after a nine-year legal battle, the Torres Strait Regional Authority made a successful native title claim to 40,000 km² of sea between Cape York Peninsula and Papua New Guinea.

[ 8 ] This was the largest native title claim in Australia's history.

[ 9 ] The Torres Strait Territory Coalition was formed in 2010, by the elected leaders of the Torres Strait Island Regional Council, the Torres Strait Regional Authority and the Torres Shire Council , with the aim of gaining official Territory status for the Torres Strait Islands. The plan would see the Torres Strait Regional Authority and local governments in the area abolished, but this has not come to pass.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] Governance [ edit ] The Torres Strait Regional Authority consists of 20 elected representatives, with its primary function being to strengthen the economic, social and cultural development of the peoples of the Torres Strait area.

[ 11 ] The Torres Strait Regional Authority board is led by a chair of the Torres Strait Regional Authority and a deputy chair. The current chair is Napau Pedro Stephen.

[ 12 ] The day-to-day functions of the Torres Strait Regional Authority are carried out by an Administration Department led by a chief executive officer, currently Vonda Malone.

[ 13 ] Chairs [ edit ] 1 July 1994 – March 1997: Getano Lui (Jnr) (b. 1952) March 1997 – 19 April 2000:  John Abednego 19 April 2000 – May 2004: Terry Waia May 2004 – November 2012: John Toshie Kris November 2012 – September 2016: Joseph Elu [ 14 ] September 2016 – Present: Napau Pedro Stephen [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Torres Strait Island Region (a Queensland LGA) List of Australian government entities References [ edit ] ^ Kaye, Stuart B. (1997).

The Torres Strait . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Kluwer Law International. p. 13.

ISBN 90-411-0506-9 .

^ Queensland Destinations – The Torres Strait Islands . Tourism Queensland.

^ "Travelling to our Communities" .

Torres Strait Island Regional Council . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ a b Kelly, John (22 June 2001).

"Evaluation of the Torres Strait Regional Authority" (PDF) . Office of Evaluation and Audit. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

^ Nettheim, Garth; Gary D. Meyers; Donna Craig (2002).

Indigenous Peoples and Governance Structures . Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press. p. 386.

ISBN 0-85575-379-X .

^ a b "[Letter to PM Julia Gillard from Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland]" (PDF) . Retrieved 8 January 2020 .

^ "Going Under" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 12 August 2006 . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

^ Nicole Butler (3 July 2010).

"Islanders celebrate historic native title decision" .

ABC Online Indigenous . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 September 2010 .

^ "Historic native title decision looms" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 2 July 2010. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010 . Retrieved 28 June 2011 .

^ "TSRA, Councils to go under Territory plan" .

Torres News . 28 August 2010 . Retrieved 10 September 2010 .

^ "Qld councils urged to cooperate" .

The Age . 26 July 2007 . Retrieved 2 June 2008 .

^ "The TSRA Chair" . TSRA. 27 February 2017 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ "Local leader appointed top role in Torres Strait" .

TSRA . 6 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 April 2022 .

^ "Torres Strait Regional Authority Annual Report 2012-2013" .

TSRA . 22 March 2018.

ISSN 1324-163X . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ "Torres Strait Regional Authority annual report 2016-2017" .

Annual Report . TSRA. 9 October 2017.

ISSN 1324-163X . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Torres Strait Regional Authority Australian Govt – TRSE website with links to resorts, island, links and details of Gab Titui Cultural Centre.

Details of individual islands and local administration Flag of the Torres Strait and map Dauan Island Indigenous Knowledge Centre v t e List of Torres Strait topics Torres Strait Islands , islets , and cays Bellevue group Aipus Cap Kamutnab Keatinge Mabuiag Pulu Subur Warakuikul Talab Widul Bourke group Aukane Aureed Kabbikane Layoak Mimi Roberts Yam Duncan group Kanig Maitak Meth Inner group Port Lihou Yeta Adolphus Channel group Albany Bush Eborac Ida Middle Brother Talbot group Aubussi Boigu Moimi The Three Sisters group Bet Poll Sue Yorke group Keats Marsden Rennel Smith Ungrouped Allison Anchor Arden Badu Barn Barney Bond Booby Bramble Browne Campbell Canoe Castle Coconut Crab Dalrymple Darnley Dauan Dayman Deliverance Dove Dugong Dumaralug East East Strait Entrance Farewell Flat Friday Gabba Getullai Goods Great Woody Green Halfway Hammond Hawkesbury High Horn Kaumag Kerr Lacey Little Adolphus Little Woody Lowry Mai Meddler Moa Morilug Mouinndo Mount Adolphus Mount Ernest Murangi Murray Nepean Nicklin North North Possession North West Obelisk Packe Passage Pearce Phipps Portlock Prince of Wales Quoin Red Red Wallis Roko Saddle Saibai Salter Sassie Spencer Stephens Suarji Thursday Tobin Travers Tree Trochus Tudu Tukupai Turnagain Turtle Head Turtle Turu Twin Underdown Wednesday West Whale Woody Wallis York Yorke Zagai People, culture, communities and languages Notable Torres Strait Islanders Christine Anu Seaman Dan Aaron Fa'aoso Josh Hoffman Nathan Jawai Ellen Jose Robert Lui Eddie Mabo Rachael Maza Patty Mills Rita Mills Mills Sisters Danny Morseu Tanu Nona Albert Proud Wendell Sailor Sam Thaiday Brent Webb Jesse Williams Culture Indigenous music of Australia Mabo (film) Taba Naba Communities Bamaga Kaurareg Mabuiag Meriam (people) Seisia Languages Bine Eastern Trans-Fly Gizrra Kalaw Lagaw Ya Meriam Torres Strait Creole Torres Strait English Wipi Governance and legal matters Governance Shire of Torres Torres Strait Islander Flag Torres Strait Island Region Torres Strait Regional Authority Legal cases and principles Akiba v Commonwealth Mabo v Queensland No 1 No 2 Terra nullius Buildings and structures Boigu Island Airport Booby Island Light Coconut Island Airport Darnley Island Airport Eborac Island Light Goods Island Light Kubin Airport Murray Island Airport Saibai Island Airport Warraber Island Airport Wyborn Reef Light Yam Island Airport Yorke Island Airport Other Adolphus Channel Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Birds of Boigu, Saibai and Dauan Islands Endeavour Strait Alfred Cort Haddon Margaret Lawrie Sea Swift Warul Kawa Indigenous Protected Area Category Commons See also: List of Torres Strait Islands v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Authority control databases International VIAF National United States People Trove Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Torres_Strait_Regional_Authority&oldid=1284336633 " Categories : 1994 establishments in Australia Commonwealth Government agencies of Australia Organisations serving Indigenous Australians Torres Strait Islands Government agencies established in 1994 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2020 Use Australian English from August 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2021 This page was last edited on 6 April 2025, at 23:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Torres Strait Regional Authority Add languages Add topic

