Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 In popular culture 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Filippo Buonaccorsi 17 languages Asturianu Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian humanist Bronze epitaph of Buonaccorsi, Basilica of the Holy Trinity , Kraków.

Filippo Buonaccorsi , called Callimachus, Callimaco, Bonacurarius, Caeculus, Geminianensis (Latin : Philippus Callimachus Experiens , Bonacursius ; Polish : Filip Kallimach , 2 May 1437 – 1 November 1496) was an Italian humanist , writer and diplomat active in Poland.

Life [ edit ] Filippo Buonaccorsi was born in San Gimignano , in Tuscany , in central Italy. He first appeared in Venice and Rome, where he was secretary to Bishop Bartolomeo Roverella . He moved to Rome in 1462 and became a member of the Rome Academy of Julius Pomponius Laetus .

In 1468 he took part in a supposed assassination attempt upon Pope Paul II and fled to Poland. In Poland he found work with the Bishop of Lwów, Gregory of Sanok .

Pomponius implied he was homosexual and referred to his "perverted habits". The homo-erotic verses (including one addressed to the then Bishop of Segni , Lucio Fazini) which were found in his papers, while earning him a reputation as a sodomite , seem to have been restricted to his youth. This seems to have reflected the aims of the Rome Academy to revive the concept of homosexual love as the ideal, drawing on the precedents set by antiquity. But Buonaccorsi seems to have been particularly active within the group in writing about sexual infatuation between men. However, once in Poland, he seemed to have turned his attention to heterosexual love instead; perhaps a cautious reaction to the violent events in Rome.

[ 1 ] Buonaccorsi later became tutor to the sons of Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon and took part in diplomatic missions. In 1474 he was named royal secretary, in 1476 he served as ambassador to Constantinople , and in 1486 he became the King's representative in Venice. With the accession to the Polish throne of Buonaccorsi's former pupil as John I of Poland , his influence peaked.

He is credited with the first Western use of the word “ Balkan ” (referring to the Bulgarian mountain range), in a 1490 letter to Pope Innocent VIII , writing as Buonaccorsi Callimaco.

In his writings, Buonaccorsi argued for the strengthening of the king's power at the expense of the aristocracy. In Kraków he joined Conrad Celtis ' Sodalitas Vistuliana .

Callimachus wrote poems and prose in Latin, and is best remembered for his biographies of Bishop Zbigniew Oleśnicki , Bishop Gregory of Sanok , and King Władysław III of Poland .

His tomb in Kraków's Basilica of the Holy Trinity was created by Veit Stoss .

[ 2 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Callimaco Buonaccorsi is a recurring figure in Dorothy Dunnett 's House of Niccolo series of historical novels, particularly in volume seven, Caprice and Rondo .

See also [ edit ] Nicolaus Copernicus List of Poles References [ edit ] ^ Anthony D'Elia, A sudden terror: The plot to murder the Pope in renaissance Rome , Harvard, 2009 ^ "Basilica of the Holy Trinity – Zabytki Krakowa" . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Filippo Buonaccorsi, Repertorium Pomponianum Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Filippo_Buonaccorsi&oldid=1292425501 " Categories : 1437 births 1496 deaths People from San Gimignano Italian Renaissance humanists Italian people of Polish descent Polish LGBTQ poets Polish Renaissance humanists Polish male writers Medieval Latin-language poets 15th-century LGBTQ people Gay poets 15th-century writers in Latin Italy–Poland relations Italian LGBTQ poets Italian emigrants to Poland Italian male poets 15th-century Polish writers 15th-century Italian writers Medieval Italian LGBTQ people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Articles containing Polish-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Filippo Buonaccorsi 17 languages Add topic

