Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and cultural background Toggle History and cultural background subsection 1.1 Ancestry 1.2 Education and professions 1.3 Language 2 See also 3 References 4 Resources Toggle the table of contents Venezuelan Australians 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Venezuelan Australians Venezolano-Australiano Total population 6,627 (by ancestry, 2021) [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations New South Wales 1,629 [ 1 ] Victoria 1,123 [ 1 ] Queensland 1,109 [ 1 ] Western Australia 485 [ 1 ] Languages Australian English · Venezuelan Spanish · Arabic · Italian · Portuguese Religion Predominately Roman Catholic · Protestant Related ethnic groups Italians · Spaniards · Portuguese · South Americans • Colombian Australians • Brazilian Australians Venezuelan Australians ( Spanish : venezolanos australiano ) refers to Australian citizens of Venezuelan descent or birth. According to the 2021 Census there were 6,627 Venezuelan-born citizens who were residing in Australia at the moment of the census. There are an estimated 10,000 Australians of Venezuelan ancestry according to a study of Ivan De La Vega from Simón Bolívar University .

[ 2 ] Almost 76% of Venezuelan Australians are concentrated in Eastern Australia .

History and cultural background [ edit ] Small numbers of Venezuela-born have migrated to Australia since the 1960s, but the majority, about 72.9% of the population, arrived in Australia after 2001 as a part of the brain drain of the Venezuelan diaspora . Most came as skilled migrants, because of uncertainty of economic conditions in Venezuela.

[ 3 ] Ancestry [ edit ] According to the 2011 census , 42.1% of Venezuelans reported to have Venezuelan ancestry, 13.9% Venezuelans reported to have Spanish Venezuelan ancestry, 8.1% of Venezuelans reported to have Italo-Venezuelan ancestry, 3.4% of Venezuelans reported to have English Venezuelan ancestry and 32.4% of Venezuelans reported to have other ancestries, including Portuguese Venezuelan .

Education and professions [ edit ] 83.7% of Venezuelan Australians over 15 years of age had a form of higher non-school qualifications. 57.6% had an occupation that was either being a skilled managerl, professional or in trade.

[ 3 ] Language [ edit ] The main language spoken at home by Venezuela-born people is Spanish in a 77.7% followed by English with 13.8%. With a difference to others Hispanic Australian diasporas that speaks mainly Romance languages and English languages , an important percent of Venezuelan-born people main language spoken at home is Arabic in 2.6%. The remaining 6% speak others language at home (2% of them speak Italian , and at least 1% of them speak(s) Portuguese ).

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Venezuela portal Demographics of Australia Demographics of Venezuela European Australians Europeans in Oceania Hispanic and Latin American Australians Immigration to Australia References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Census of Population and Housing: Cultural diversity data summary, 2021" (XLSX) .

Abs.gov.au . Retrieved 16 February 2024 .

^ "Venezolanos en el exterior - Infografías | Últimas Noticias" . Archived from the original on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved 30 November 2014 .

^ a b c "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 December 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Resources [ edit ] v t e Venezuelan diaspora Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Dominican Republic Guyana Mexico Panama Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Europe Italy Portugal Spain Sweden Asia & Oceania Australia Israel Syria History Venezuelan refugee crisis v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Venezuelan_Australians&oldid=1285312271 " Categories : Venezuelan diaspora South American diaspora in Australia Australian people of South American descent Australian people of Latin American descent Australia–Venezuela relations Oceanian people of Venezuelan descent People of Venezuelan descent Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 23:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Venezuelan Australians 1 language Add topic

