Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Views Toggle Views subsection 2.1 Futurism 2.1.1 Events 2.2 Preterism 2.3 Historicism 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Sources 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Great Tribulation 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Calamitous end times period as found in the Synoptic Gospels "Tribulation" redirects here. For other uses, see Tribulation (disambiguation) .

Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e In Christian eschatology , the Great Tribulation ( Ancient Greek : θλῖψις μεγάλη , romanized : thlîpsis megálē ) is a period mentioned by Jesus in the Olivet Discourse as a sign that would occur in the time of the end .

[ 1 ] At Revelation 7:14 , "the Great Tribulation" (Ancient Greek: τῆς θλῑ́ψεως τῆς μεγάλης , romanized: tês thlī́pseōs tês megálēs , lit.

'the great tribulation') is used to indicate the period spoken of by Jesus .

[ 2 ] Matthew 24:21, 29 uses tribulation (θλίβω) in a context denoting afflictions of those hard-pressed by siege and the calamities of war.

[ 3 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term "Great Tribulation" occurs four times in the New Testament: Matthew 24:21 , Acts 7:11 , Revelation 2:22 , and Revelation 7:14 . Some take the words of Jesus in Matthew 24:21 to be describing a period of intense persecution and tribulation at the end of the age, prior to Jesus's return.

[ 4 ] Views [ edit ] Christians disagree over whether the Tribulation will be a relatively short period of great hardship before the end of the world and Second Coming of Christ (a school of thought sometimes called " Futurism "); or has already occurred, having happened in AD 70 when Roman legions laid siege to Jerusalem and destroyed its temple (sometimes called Preterism ); or began in 538 AD when papal Rome came to power—popes being anti-Christs—and will intensify shortly before the end of the world, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] (sometimes called " Historicism ").

Futurism [ edit ] In the futurist view of Christian eschatology , the Great Tribulation is a relatively short period of time where everyone will experience worldwide hardships, persecution, disasters, famine, war, pain, and suffering, which will affect all of creation, and precede judgment of all when the Second Coming takes place. Some pretribulationists believe that those who choose to follow God will be raptured before the tribulation, and thus escape it.

[ citation needed ] On the other hand, posttribulationists believe Christians who are alive at the time of the Great Tribulation must endure the Great Tribulation and will receive great blessings.

[ citation needed ] According to dispensationalists , the Tribulation is thought to occur before the Second Coming of Jesus and during the End Times . In this view, the Tribulation will last seven prophetic Hebrew years (lasting 360 days each) in all, but the Great Tribulation will be the second half of the Tribulation period.

[ 7 ] In this view, this seven-year period is considered to be the final week of Daniel's Prophecy of Seventy Weeks , found in Daniel chapter 9. It is theorized that each week represents seven years, with the timetable beginning from Artaxerxes ' order to rebuild the Second Temple in Jerusalem. After seven weeks and 62 weeks, the prophecy says that the messiah will be "cut off", which is taken to correspond to the death of Christ . This is seen as creating a break of indeterminate length in the timeline, with one week remaining to be fulfilled.

The time period for these beliefs is also based on other passages: in the Book of Daniel, " time, times, and half a time ", interpreted as "three and a half years," and the Book of Revelation, "a thousand two hundred and threescore days" and "forty and two months" (the prophetic month averaging 30 days, hence 1260/30 = 42 months or 3.5 years). The 1290 days of Daniel 12:11 , (rather than the 1260 days of Revelation 11:3 ), is thought to be the result of either a simple intercalary leap month adjustment, or due to further calculations related to the prophecy, or due to an intermediate stage of time that is to prepare the world for the beginning of the millennial reign .

[ 8 ] Events [ edit ] Among Futurists there are differing views about what will happen to Christians during the Tribulation: Pretribulationists believe that all righteous Christians (deceased and living) will be taken bodily up to Heaven (called the Rapture ) before the Tribulation begins.

[ 9 ] According to this belief, every true Christian that has ever existed throughout the course of the entire Christian era will be instantaneously transformed into a perfect resurrected body, and will thus escape the trials of the Tribulation. Those who become Christians after the rapture will live through (or perish during) the Tribulation. After the Tribulation, Christ will return to establish his Millennial Kingdom.

Prewrathers believe the rapture will occur during the Tribulation, at some unknown time in the second half of the 70th week of Daniel, but before the seven trumpets and seven bowls of the wrath of God . Thus the rapture cuts short the Tribulation and initiates the wrath of God.

Midtribulationists believe that the rapture will occur halfway through the Tribulation, but before the worst part of it occurs. The seven-year period is divided into halves—the "beginning of sorrows" and the "Great Tribulation".

Posttribulationists believe that Christians will not be taken up into Heaven for eternity, but will be received or gathered in the air by Christ, to descend together to establish the Kingdom of God on earth at the end of the Tribulation.

In pretribulationism and midtribulationism, the rapture and the Second Coming of Christ are separate events, while in post-tribulationism the two events are identical or simultaneous. Another feature of the pre- and mid-tribulation beliefs is the idea that after the rapture, Christ will return for a third time (when also counting the first coming) to set up his kingdom on the earth.

[ citation needed ] The Catholic Church teaches that there will be a "final Passover" or last "purgatory" before the final parousia (Second Coming), in which the church will "pass through a final fire that will shake the faith of many". Generally neither the Catholic Church, the various Orthodox and Anglican communions, nor the older Protestant denominations use the term "rapture", and tend toward amillennialism . In this view, the millennium is regarded as the initial period of Christ's reign (manifested in the life and activity of the church) that began with the Pentecost and will lead up to the messiah's eventual return, with the outcome being a single and permanent event at the end of present time.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Preterism [ edit ] In the Preterist view, the Tribulation took place in the past when Roman legions destroyed Jerusalem and its temple in AD 70 during the end stages of the First Jewish–Roman War , and it only affected the Jewish people rather than all mankind.

Christian preterists believe that the Tribulation was a divine judgment visited upon the Jews for their sins, including rejection of Jesus as the promised Messiah . It occurred entirely in the past, around AD 70 when the armed forces of the Roman Empire destroyed Jerusalem and its temple.

A preterist discussion of the Tribulation has its focus on the Gospels, in particular the prophetic passages in Matthew 24, Mark 13 and Luke 21, rather than on the Apocalypse or Book of Revelation. (Preterists apply much of the symbolism in the Revelation to Rome, the Cæsars , and their persecution of Christians, rather than to the Tribulation upon the Jews.) Jesus' warning in Matthew 24:34 that "this generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled" [ 13 ] is tied back to his similar warning to the Scribes and the Pharisees that their judgment would "come upon this generation", [ 14 ] that is, during the first century rather than at a future time long after the Scribes and Pharisees had died. The destruction in AD 70 occurred within a 40-year generation from the time when Jesus gave that discourse.

The judgment on the Jewish nation was executed by the Roman legions, "the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet." [ 15 ] Since Matthew 24 begins with Jesus visiting the Jerusalem Temple and pronouncing that "there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down" (vs. 3), preterists see nothing in Scripture to indicate that another Jewish temple will ever be built.  The prophecies were all fulfilled on the then-existing temple that Jesus spoke about and that was subsequently destroyed within that generation.

Historicism [ edit ] The Historicist view applies Tribulation to the period known as "persecution of the saints" (Daniel 7, Revelation 13). This is believed to have begun with the period after the "falling away" when papal Rome came to power for 1260 years from 538 to 1798 (using the day-year principle ). They believe that the Tribulation is not a future event, but it intensifies right at the end to a time such as never before.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Matthew's reference to "Great Tribulation" [ 16 ] as parallel to Revelation 6:12-13, will reach a point that if it was not shortened even the just would not survive.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Historicists are prone to see prophecy fulfilled down through the centuries and rather than a single Antichrist to rule the earth during a future Tribulation period, Martin Luther , John Calvin and the other Protestant Reformers saw the Antichrist as fulfilled in the papacy . The reformers like Martin Luther, John Calvin and others saw the papacy's claim of temporal power over all secular governments and the autocratic character of the papal office as the falling away from the original faith founded by Jesus and the apostles, and challenged papal authority as it had deviated from scripture with its tradition and was a corruption from the early church.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Similarly, some modern historicists see the Tribulation on the Jews as beginning in AD 70 and continuing for centuries, covering the same time span as "the times of the Gentiles" during which "Jerusalem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles." [ 21 ] This view would have it encompass not only the death of a million Jews at the hands of the Roman legions, but also the death of six million Jews in the Holocaust .

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Christian eschatology References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ See Matthew 24, Mark 13, and Luke 21.

^ Vine, William E.

Vine's Expository Dictionary of New Testament Words , Tribulation ^ Thayer, Joseph.

Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament , θλίβω ( tribulation ) ^ Hays, Duvall & Pate 2007 , p. 192.

^ a b Benware, Paul N.

Understanding End Times Prophecy: A Comprehensive Approach . Moody Publishers (Chicago, IL, USA). Ch. 13: The Posttribulation Rapture View. pg. 240 ^ a b "ESCHATOLOGY - Different Rapture Views - Greg Rugh" . Biblebb.com . Retrieved 2015-03-06 .

^ see Matt 24:15 and Matt 24:21 showing the Great Tribulation is after the Abomination of Desolation , which marks the midpoint of the Tribulation ^ Tim F. LaHaye; Thomas Ice (2001).

Charting the End Times: A Visual Guide to Understanding Bible Prophecy . Harvest House Publishers. pp.

66– 67.

ISBN 978-0-7369-0138-3 .

^ "1 Thessalonians 4:13–18 (ESV) - "But we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers, about those who are asleep, that you may not grieve as others do who ..." - Biblia.com" .

Biblia . Retrieved 15 September 2014 .

^ Switzer, John (11 August 2014).

"Do Catholics believe in the Rapture?" .

US Catholic . Retrieved September 10, 2016 .

^ Fr. Jonathan (December 23, 2011).

"Ask an Anglican: The End of the World" .

The Conciliar Anglican . Archived from the original on July 30, 2016 . Retrieved September 10, 2016 .

^ Rossing, Barbara (June 4, 2013).

"End-times" .

Liveing Lutheran . Retrieved September 10, 2016 .

^ Matthew 24:34 ^ Matthew 23:36 ^ Matthew 24:15 ^ Matthew 24:29 ^ Smith, Uriah, Daniel and Revelation , pp. 437–449 ^ Matthew 24:22 ^ Newcomb, Harvey (2003).

Great Apostasy: Being an Account of the Origin, Rise and Progress of Corruption and Tryanny in the Church of Rome . Kessinger Publishing. pp. ix.

ISBN 9780766178847 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Talmage, James E.

(1973).

Jesus the Christ (40th ed.). LDS Church. pp.

745– 757.

OCLC 2012826 .

^ Luke 21:24 ^ "When do the "Times of the Gentiles" End? – Samuel Whitefield" . Archived from the original on 2019-03-25 . Retrieved 2019-03-25 .

Sources [ edit ] Hays, J. Daniel; Duvall, J. Scott; Pate, C. Marvin (2007).

Dictionary of Biblical Prophecy and End Times . Zondervan.

ISBN 978-0-310-25663-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Great Tribulation .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Great Tribulation .

The Great Tribulation: Past or Future by Thomas Ice and Kenneth L. Gentry Jr. (Kregel Publications, 1999) ISBN 0-8254-2901-3 Four Views on the Book of Revelation by Kenneth L. Gentry Jr., Sam Hamstra Jr., C. Marvin Pate and Robert L. Thomas (Zondervan, 1998) ISBN 0-310-21080-1 Great Prophecies of the Bible by Ralph Woodrow (Ralph Woodrow Evangelistic Association, 1971) ISBN 0-916938-02-6 v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qxlsv
Cached time: 20250814215924
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.626 seconds
Real time usage: 0.813 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2722/1000000
Revision size: 15866/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 197626/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3825/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82338/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.373/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15158625/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  626.681      1 -total
 21.42%  134.249      1 Template:Reflist
 14.44%   90.465      2 Template:Langx
 13.74%   86.110      6 Template:Cite_web
 12.76%   79.988      7 Template:Navbox
 10.94%   68.588      1 Template:Christian_Eschatology
 10.50%   65.829      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.91%   62.111      1 Template:Short_description
  7.63%   47.814      1 Template:Christian_theology
  7.32%   45.884      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31394:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215924 and revision id 1301384773. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Tribulation&oldid=1301384773 " Categories : Biblical phrases Book of Revelation Christian eschatology Christian terminology Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Great Tribulation 25 languages Add topic

