Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Monastic life 1.3 Mystical bilocation 2 Written works 3 Reaction 4 Death and legacy Toggle Death and legacy subsection 4.1 Incorruptible body 4.2 Sainthood process 4.3 In popular culture 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Mary of Jesus of Ágreda 17 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish nun (1602–1665) Venerable Mary of Jesus of Ágreda OIC Virgin Born 2 April 1602 Ágreda , Soria , Spain Died 24 May 1665 (1665-05-24) (aged 63) [ 1 ] Ágreda, Soria, Spain Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Mary of Jesus of Ágreda , OIC , also known as the Abbess of Ágreda ( Spanish : María de Jesús de Ágreda ; born María Coronel y de Arana ; 2 April 1602 – 24 May 1665), was an abbess and spiritual writer. She is best known for her extensive correspondence with King Philip IV of Spain and her reports of bilocation between Spain and New Spain . She was a noted mystic of her era.

A member of the Conceptionists , Mary of Jesus wrote 14 books, including a series of revelations about the life of the Blessed Virgin Mary . Her bilocation activity is said to have occurred between her cloistered monastery in rural Spain and the Jumano Indians of central New Mexico and West Texas, as well as Tucson , and inspired many Franciscan missionaries in the New World . In popular culture since the 17th century, she has been dubbed the "Lady in Blue" and the "Blue Nun" , after the color of her order's habit.

Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] She was born María Coronel y de Arana , the daughter of Francisco Coronel and Catalina de Arana, in Ágreda , a town located in the Province of Soria . The couple had 11 children, of whom only four survived into adulthood: Francisco, José, María and Jerónima. The family had close ties with the Franciscan friars of the Friary of San Julián, which lay on the outskirts of the town. Either the mother would go to the friary with her children for Mass and confession , or the friars would visit the family home. Nonetheless, Mary later recalled that, as a very young child, she felt her parents were very hard on her.

Mary of Jesus' biographer and contemporary, the bishop José Jiménez y Samaniego, was a longtime friend of the Coronel family, and wrote that even as a young girl, she had ecstasies and visions in which she felt that God was instructing her about the sinfulness of the world.

[ 2 ] At the age of four, she was confirmed by Bishop Diego de Yepes , the biographer and last confessor of Teresa of Avila , who was reportedly impressed with the child's spiritual acumen.

[ 3 ] When Mary of Jesus was twelve, she made the decision to enter a monastery, having decided upon that of the Discalced Carmelite nuns in Tarazona . As her parents prepared to accompany her there, Catalina de Arana had a vision that she was to turn the family home into a monastery in which both she and her daughters were to commit their lives as nuns. While the young María was agreeable to this arrangement, her father refused to go along with it. In this he was supported by his brother, Medel, as well as by their neighbors, who all considered this arrangement a violation of their marriage vows. His resistance lasted for three years, until in 1618, then considered an older man in his early fifties, he (and later his brother) entered the Franciscan Friary of San Antonio in Nalda as a lay brother . Her brothers, who had already become friars, continued their studies toward the Catholic priesthood in Burgos . She and her mother entered the convent together, January, 1619.

Monastic life [ edit ] A view of the Monastery of the Immaculate Conception founded by the Venerable María de Jesús de Ágreda with a statue of her in front.

Catalina and her daughters then converted their family home into the Monastery of the Immaculate Conception , to be a part of the Order of the Immaculate Conception (Conceptionists) . The choice of this Order was a part of the groundswell of devotion to the Immaculate Conception of Mary which strongly marked Spanish spirituality of that period. They began this endeavor as part of the Discalced—or reformed—branch of the Order. Unfortunately, there were no monasteries of this branch in the region, so three nuns of the original Calced branch were brought from their monastery in Burgos to serve as the abbess of the community and to train them in the life of the Order. Mary of Jesus was 16 when she and her mother and sister took the religious habit of the Order and she was given the religious name by which she is now known. She felt, though, that she had to make up for her years of laxity during the period of contention between her parents and the delay in the foundation of the monastery resulting from it.

As other women soon joined the community, the monastery was rebuilt (and completed in 1633), although when reconstruction began the community's coffers contained 24 reales (approximately 2.5 Spanish dollars at the time), supplemented by a donation of 100 reales from devotees and many other gifts and hours of voluntary labor. Once she had made her religious profession in 1620, Mary of Jesus began to experience a long period of illness and temptations. After her mother's death, which her fellow nuns elected her, now twenty-five years old, as their abbess.

[ 4 ] Though rules required the abbess to be changed every three years, Mary remained effectively in charge of the monastery until her death, except for a three-year sabbatical in her fifties.

[ 5 ] Throughout her life, Mary of Jesus was inclined to the "internal prayer". Like her countrywoman Teresa of Avila a generation earlier, these prayerful experiences led to religious ecstasies, including reported accounts of levitation . As this form of prayer was practiced frequently among women, the Inquisition kept a watchful eye on those who advocated the practice.

Mystical bilocation [ edit ] Apparition of the Virgin by Sister María de Jesús de Ágreda , Mexican School, 18th century Between 1620 and 1623, Mary of Jesus reported that she was often "transported by the aid of the angels" to settlements of a people called Jumanos. The Jumano Indians of New Spain (what is today Texas and New Mexico ) had long been requesting missionaries, possibly hoping for protection from the Apaches . Eventually a mission led by the Franciscan Friar Juan de Salas visited them in 1629.

[ 6 ] The abbess reported further but less frequent visits afterwards, all while she physically remained in the monastery at Ágreda. They thus are considered bilocations , an event where a person is, or seems to be, in two places at the same time.

Before sending the friars, Father Alonso de Benavides , Custodian of New Mexico, asked the natives why they were so eager to be baptized. They said they had been visited by a Lady in Blue who had told them to ask the fathers for help, pointing to a painting of a nun in a blue habit and saying she was dressed like that but was a beautiful young girl.

[ 7 ] The Jumanos visiting Isleta indicated that the Lady in Blue had visited them in the area now known as the Salinas National Monument , south of modern-day Mountainair, New Mexico , about 65 miles (104.6 km) south of Albuquerque . At the same time, Fray Estéban de Perea brought Benavides an inquiry from Sor María's confessor in Spain asking whether there was any evidence that she had visited the Jumanos.

As reports of Mary's mystical excursions to the New World proliferated, the Inquisition took notice, although she was not proceeded against with severity, perhaps because of her long written relationship with the Spanish king.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Accounts of Mary's mystical apparitions in the American Southwest , as well as inspiring passages in Mystical City of God , so stirred 17th- and 18th-century missionaries that they credited her in their own life's work, making her an integral part of the colonial history of the United States.

[ 10 ] Written works [ edit ] The title page of the Mistica Ciudad de Dios, Vida de la Virgen María , a work written by the Venerable María de Jesús de Ágreda and published in 1722 María de Ágreda's best known single work is the Mystical City of God (Spanish: Mistica Ciudad de Dios, Vida de la Virgen María ) , consisting of eight books (six volumes). This related her revelations about the terrestrial and heavenly life, reportedly received directly from the Blessed Virgin Mary . The books include information about the relationship of the 'Blessed Virgin' with the Triune God , as well as the doings and Mysteries performed by Jesus. The narrative contains extensive details and covers the New Testament time line. It also relates advice given by the Holy Mother on how to acquire true sanctity.

[ 11 ] The Mystical City of God , the biography of Mary , is now frequently studied in college and university programs of Spanish language and culture, for its contribution to Baroque literature.

[ 8 ] Written in elegant Spanish, it relates both terrestrial and spiritual details. These included the way the earth looks from the space (contained in her unpublished 17th Century "Tratado de rendondez de la Tierra"); the Immaculate Conception of Virgin Mary, the Assumption of Mary , the duties of Michael the Archangel and Gabriel the Archangel ; and meticulous detail on the childhood of Jesus . Other details that Mary related concerned Christ's Passion , Resurrection and Ascension .

German philosopher and theologian Joseph Görres , while expressing his admiration for the wonderful depth of its speculations, finds that the style is in the bad taste of the period, pompous and strained, and very wearisome in the prolixity of the moral applications appended to each chapter.

[ 4 ] In addition to her 14 published works, Mary of Jesus also served as the spiritual (and sometimes political) advisor to King Philip IV of Spain , at his request and for more than 22 years. Their surviving correspondence includes over 600 letters.

[ 12 ] Reaction [ edit ] The Mystical City of God was condemned in Rome, 4 August, 1681, by the Congregation of the Inquisition, and Pope Innocent XI had forbidden the reading of it, but, at the instance of Charles II of Spain , suspended execution of the decree for Spain. The book did not attract much attention outside of Spain until a Recollect friar, translated and published the first part of it, at Marseilles in 1696. This resulted in its being referred to a commission of the Sorbonne, which also condemned it in July 1696.

[ 4 ] Spanish cardinal José Saenz d'Aguirre sought to have the censure annulled since he considered the judgment of the Sorbonne based on a faulty translation. Investigations of the book were made in 1729, under Pope Benedict XIII , when her canonization was again urged. In 1748, Pope Benedict XIV , while conceding that the book had received the approbation of the Universities of Salamanca, Alcalá, Toulouse, and Louvain, asked the General of the Franciscans to  investigate the authenticity of the writings, as it was alleged that her confessors had tampered with the text.

[ 4 ] Discussion continued for and against. German Church historian and canonist, Joseph Hergenröther said that the condemnation of 1681 was because its publication in 1670 ignored Pope Urban VIII 's decree of 1625 in the papal bull Sanctissimus Dominus Noster that required a bishop’s approval for the publication of private revelations; or because it contained apocryphal stories. It was also suggested that those who followed the philosophical approach of Thomas Aquinas (mainly the Dominicans and Carmelites ) objected to the views of those who followed Duns Scotus (mainly Franciscans) being presented as Divine revelation.

[ 4 ] Theologian Eusebius Amort wrote a treatise on mysticism, De Revelationibus et Visionibus, etc.

(2 vols, Augsburg 1744) directed against the "Mystic City of God,"; it brought him into conflict with several of her Franciscan defenders.

[ 13 ] The suspension of the Decree of Innocent XI, condemning the book, was made operative only in Spain, and although Charles II asked to have the permission, to read it extended to the whole of Christendom, Pope Alexander VIII not only refused the petition, but confirmed the Brief of his predecessor. The King made the same request to Pope Innocent XII , who did nothing, however, except to institute a commission to examine the reasons raised by the Spanish Court. Her works had been placed on the Index, but the Franciscans were assured that that was a mistake of the printer, as no condemnation appeared there.

[ 4 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] Less than ten years after her death, Mary of Jesus was declared Venerable by Pope Clement X , in honor of her "heroic life of virtue". Although the process of beatification was opened in 1673, it has not as yet been completed.

Lying below the blue recumbent statue is the incorrupt body of the Venerable María de Jesús de Ágreda in the Church of the Conceptionists Convent in Ágreda , Spain .

The tradition of the apostle St James and the shrine of El Pilar , reputed to be the first church dedicated to Mary, was given by Our Lady in an apparition to Sister Mary Agreda recorded in The Mystical City of God , and is credited with instigating the rebuilding of the fire-damaged Cathedral Basilica in Zaragoza in the Baroque style in 1681 by Charles II, King of Spain, completed and rededicated in 1686.

Incorruptible body [ edit ] When Mary of Jesus's casket was opened in 1909, a cursory scientific examination was performed on the 17th century abbess's body. In 1989, a Spanish physician named Andreas Medina participated in another examination of the remains and told investigative journalist Javier Sierra in 1991: "What most surprised me about that case is that when we compared the state of the body, as it was described in the medical report from 1909, with how it appeared in 1989, we realized it had absolutely not deteriorated at all in the last eighty years." [ 14 ] Investigators took photographs and other evidence before re-sealing her casket, which remains on display in the monastery church. Some consider that incorruptibility , that is, lack of normal rot and decay after death, further evidence of sanctity.

Sainthood process [ edit ] Her cause was formally opened on 28 January 1673, granting her the title of Servant of God .

[ 15 ] The abbess is now considered Venerable . After the 400th anniversary of her birth in 2002, several groups (including The Spanish Mariology Society, The Society of Our Lady of the Most Holy Trinity, The Knights of Columbus, The American Council for the Mystical City of God and The Working Group for the Beatification of Sister Maria de Jesus de Agreda) renewed attempts to move her beatification process forward.

[ 16 ] In popular culture [ edit ] San Angelo, Texas , credits the abbess as a pioneering force behind the establishment of early Texas missions.

[ 17 ] Jumano Native Americans reminisce about her role in their survival, and her possible connection to the legend of Texas's state flower, the bluebonnet.

[ 18 ] She is featured in a work of fiction, The Lady in Blue ("La Dama Azul"), by Javier Sierra (Atria Books, 2005/07, ISBN 1-4165-3223-4 ), as well as in the English biography Maria of Agreda: Mystical Lady in Blue ( University of New Mexico Press, 2009). She also served as the inspiration for the novel Blue Water Woman by Ken Farmer (Timber Creek Press, 2016, ISBN 978-0-9971290-8-3 ), book #7 of The Nations series.

In his memoirs , the 18th-century Italian adventurer Giacomo Casanova describes reading the Mystical City of God during his imprisonment in the Venetian prison I Piombi .

[ 19 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Sister María de Jesús de Agreda" .

CatholicSaints.Info . 2009-12-26 . Retrieved 2020-01-16 .

^ Ximénez Samaniego, José.

Life of Venerable Sister, Mary of Jesús—D. Ágreda: Poor Clare Nun , Translated by Ubaldus da Rieti (Keller-Crescent Printing and Engraving, 1910) ^ Peña García, Manuel.

Sor María de Jesús de Ágreda (El Burgo de Osma, 1997) ^ a b c d e f Campbell, Thomas. "Maria de Agreda." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 1 July 2023 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Fedewa, Marilyn H. (2009).

Maria of Agreda: Mystical Lady in Blue . University of New Mexico Press.

^ Plocheck, Robert (2005).

"Franciscan Missionaries in Texas before 1690" .

Texas Almanac . Texas State Historical Association . Retrieved 2012-07-22 .

^ Abernethy, Francis Edward (1 July 1994).

Legendary Ladies of Texas . University of North Texas Press. pp. 9ff.

ISBN 978-0-929398-75-4 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

^ a b Colahan, Clark A.

The Visions of Sor Maria de Agreda: Writing Knowledge and Power (University of Arizona Press, 1994) ^ 'The Blue Nun - María Jesus de Ágreda Mystical Missionary to the Indians' by Jay W. Sharp ^ Palou, Francisco.

Life and Apostolic Labors of the Venerable Father Junípero Serra , Translated by C. Scott Williams (Pasadena, CA: George Wharton James , 1913) ^ (Impresion from original 17th Century autograph): SOR MARIA DE JESUS DE AGREDA, MISTICA CIUDAD DE DIOS, VIDA DE MARIA, Texto conforme al autógrafo original, Impresión: Mexico D.F 1984 ^ María de Jesús de Ágreda: Correspondencia Con Felipe IV, Religión y Razón de Estado , with Introduction and Notes by Consolación Baranda (Madrid: Editorial Castalia, 1991) ^ Shahan, Thomas. "Eusebius Amort." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 5 July 2023 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ O'Brien, Christopher, Enter the Valley (St. Martin's Paperbacks, 1999) ^ Index ac status causarum beatificationis servorum dei et canonizationis beatorum (in Latin). Typis polyglottis vaticanis. January 1953. p. 146.

^ cambridgeconnections.net, Marilyn H Fedewa.

"The Beatification of Sor Maria Goes to Rome" .

www.cambridgeconnections.net . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

^ Flippin, Perry. "Pageant to portray nun's paranormal story," GoSanAngelo , July 16, 2007 ^ "Jumanos Still Revere Lady in Blue," Tradicion Revista , December 2008, Vol. XII, No.2 ^ Casanova de Seingalt, Jacques .

"Volume 2, Chapter XXVI: To Paris and Prison – Under the Leads" .

The memoirs of Jacques Casanova de Seingalt, 1725–1798 . Translated by Machen, Arthur . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Maria de Agreda ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Bibliography [ edit ] Henry Gardiner Adams, ed. (1857). " Agreda, Marie d' ".

A Cyclopaedia of Female Biography : 18.

Wikidata Q115393166 .

Life of Venerable Mary of Ágreda , by James A. Carrico, Emmett J. Culligan, 1962.

The Visions of Sor Maria de Agreda: Writing Knowledge and Power , by Clark A. Colahan, University of Arizona Press, 1994.

ISBN 0-8165-1419-4 Maria of Agreda: Mystical Lady in Blue , by Marilyn H. Fedewa, University of New Mexico Press, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-8263-4643-8 Quill and Cross in the Borderlands: Sor María de Ágreda and the Lady in Blue, 1628 to the Present.

By Anna M. Nogar. 2018. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.

ISBN 9780268102135 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Agreda, Maria Fernandez Coronel, Abbess Of ".

María de Jesús de Ágreda | Official home page of her abbey in Spain (English and Spanish) Online version of "The Mystical City of God" Online unabridged versions of the complete "Mystical City of God" - St. Joseph Publications (English and Spanish) Abridged and 4-Volume Works of María de Ágreda in archive.org A detailed account of Ágreda's (also known as The Blue Nun) appearances in 17th century America Maria de Agreda Delegation Visits UNM Project Continua: Biography of Mary of Ágreda Works by Mary of Jesus of Ágreda at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Chile Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mary_of_Jesus_of_Ágreda&oldid=1303985182 " Categories : 1602 births 1665 deaths People from the Province of Soria Palmarian saints Conversos Conceptionist nuns Franciscan mystics Franciscan writers 17th-century Spanish nuns 17th-century Spanish women writers Christian miracle workers Spanish spiritual writers Spanish Roman Catholic writers Spanish venerated Catholics Spanish women non-fiction writers 17th-century venerated Christians 17th-century Christian mystics Incorrupt saints Marian visionaries Angelic visionaries Spanish Christian mystics Spanish people of Jewish descent Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 07:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mary of Jesus of Ágreda 17 languages Add topic

