Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Nickname 3 Varsity sports Toggle Varsity sports subsection 3.1 Artistic swimming 3.2 Baseball 3.3 Women's golf 3.4 Men's soccer 3.5 Women's soccer 3.6 Softball 3.7 Men's track and field 3.8 Women's track and field 4 Club sports 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Wheaton Lyons Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia College sports teams This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wheaton Lyons" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Wheaton Lyons" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Athletic teams representing Wheaton College Wheaton Lyons College Wheaton College Conference NEWMAC NCAA Division III Athletic director Gavin Viano Location Norton, Massachusetts Varsity teams 21 (9 men's 12 women's) Basketball arena Emerson Gymnasium Baseball stadium Sidell Stadium Softball stadium Clark Softball Field Soccer field Keefe Field (men's) Mirrione Stadium (women's) Aquatics center Balfour Natatorium Lacrosse field Nordin Field Tennis venue Clark Tennis Courts Outdoor track and field venue Beard Field House (indoor) Mascot Roary the Lyon [ 1 ] Nickname Lyons Colors Blue and white [ 2 ] Website wheatoncollegelyons .com The Wheaton Lyons represents Massachusetts' Wheaton College and fields 21 varsity intercollegiate teams, 9 for men and 12 for women, in addition to 14 club sports programs and a variety of intramural activities. The school's teams play within the NCAA Division III and in the New England Women's and Men's Athletic Conference (NEWMAC).

Background [ edit ] The Wheaton Lyons finished in the top 15% of the NACDA Directors' Cup in 2013–14, highlighted by women's track and field, which placed fourth in the NCAA indoor championship and tied for sixth at the outdoor championship . Also contributing to Wheaton's point total was men's soccer, women's lacrosse and softball. Men's soccer and women's lacrosse both won the New England Women’s and Men’s Athletic Conference (NEWMAC) championship and advanced to the NCAA tournament second round, while softball earned an at-large bid to the NCAA tournament after a 30-win season.

Wheaton has found success in a number of its athletic programs, starting in 1983, when field hockey became the first Wheaton team to make an NCAA tournament. In 1986, women's lacrosse became the first Wheaton team to advance to an NCAA Final Four. Eight years later, women's basketball made its first Final Four, followed by the 1997 softball team finishing third at the national tournament in Eau Claire, Wisconsin . The following fall, men's soccer became the first men's team to make the NCAA tournament, followed by volleyball advancing to the NCAA Sweet Sixteen.

In addition, men's and women's cross-country, women's lacrosse, men's and women's swimming and diving and women's tennis all have competed in the NCAA post-season. Overall, Wheaton has won eight NCAA National Championships, 17 ECAC championships and 101 combined NEWMAC regular season and tournament titles.

Nickname [ edit ] Wheaton's mascot is a Lyon, named after founding principal Mary Lyon which can be traced back to the early 1980s.

[ 3 ] On October 14, 2016, the Wheaton College Athletic Department announced the first-ever mascot name for the Lyon... Roary. Hundreds of potential names were submitted as the Mascot Naming Committee narrowed the searched down to three names: Roary, Lee-O and Wheat T. The Wheaton College community voted for their favorite name during a span of two weeks and after votes were tabulated, Roary the Lyon was officially unveiled during Fall Fest 2016.

[ 4 ] Varsity sports [ edit ] Wheaton College Varsity programs include the 11 men's teams and 13 women's teams, such as follows: Wheaton Lyons women's basketball team (in blue) v the WPI Engineers Men's sports Women's sports Baseball Artistic swimming Basketball Basketball Cross country Cross country Fencing Fencing Lacrosse Field hockey Soccer Lacrosse Swimming Soccer Tennis Softball Track and field 1 Swimming Volleyball Tennis Water polo Track and field 1 Volleyball Water polo 1 – includes both indoor and outdoor Artistic swimming [ edit ] Wheaton has also had two synchronized swimmers named collegiate swimmer of the year. Gina Lighthall '99 in 1999 and Christiana Butera '12 in 2012. Butera was also member of the U.S. National Synchronized Swimming Team during the summer of 2011.

Baseball [ edit ] The last varsity team established at Wheaton was in 1997 in the form of Baseball. The Baseball team also achieved success with the only team sport at Wheaton to advance to a national championship game, which it has done twice (2006 and 2012) in addition to one additional Division III world series (2017). Baseball has also won 14 of the 19 NEWMAC championships in conference history.

Two alums have been in the Major League Baseball (MLB) teams with one being drafted in to the MLB.

Chris Denorfia '02 was a 19th round pick in the 2002 Major League Baseball amateur draft by the Cincinnati Reds . Denorfia spent parts of 10 years roaming the outfield for five Major League teams, most recently as a part of the 2015 Chicago Cubs . In the summer of 2014, Mike Gibbons was signed to a professional baseball contract by the New York Mets , making him Wheaton's first student-athlete to sign with a professional team before using all four years of eligibility.

Women's golf [ edit ] Deborah Simourian finished in a 72-hole tie for the AIAW individual collegiate golf championship in 1975 before losing a 3-hole playoff.

[ 5 ] Men's soccer [ edit ] Men's soccer has been to one national semifinal (2003) and two national quarterfinals (2001, 2003) in the NCAA Division III men's soccer championship .

One alum has been drafted into Major League Soccer . Jim Maganello '99 was a second round pick of the NY/NJ Metrostars in the 1999 Major League Soccer draft . In addition, Dan Antoniuk put together a long career in professional soccer, playing with teams like the Portland Timbers and Montreal Impact .

Women's soccer [ edit ] Women's soccer advanced to 13 consecutive NCAA tournaments (2000–2012), which was the longest streak in the New England region of Division III women's soccer at that time. During that stretch, the women advanced to one national semifinal (2004) and 3 national quarterfinals (2002, 2003 and 2004).

Softball [ edit ] Softball has been to 3 NCAA Division III championship rounds, finishing third twice (1997, 2001) and fifth once (2004).

Men's track and field [ edit ] Men's track and field also has been successful, finishing in the top 10 of the NCAA Division III indoor championship seven times, in addition to four top-10 NCAA Division III outdoor championship finishes.

A number of track and field athletes have gone on to professionally train at the World Athletics Center.

[ 6 ] Women's track and field [ edit ] Wheaton's greatest athletic success has been on the track, as the women's track and field program has claimed 8 NCAA Division III National Championships and finished in the top 3 at the NCAA championships 6 other times (twice in indoor and four times in outdoor). Starting in 1999, the women's indoor team won five consecutive titles, while the outdoor team won three straight times from 2001–2003.

Individually, Wheaton has more than 375 all-American performances and 64 individual national championship accolades in school history. Highlighting that list is Amber James '04, who was pivotal during Wheaton's run of winning six consecutive NCAA indoor and outdoor national championships from 2001–03. James, a 17-time national champion and 24-time all-American, was recognized by the NCAA as the greatest female athlete in the 25-year history of the Division III indoor track & field championship in 2009. In addition, she was selected to the U.S. Track & Field and Cross Country Coaches Association (USTFCCCA) Division III Silver Anniversary Team, which commemorated the 25th anniversary of women competing in NCAA outdoor track & field championships. She served as the event representative for the 400-meter dash.

Club sports [ edit ] Wheaton club sports include ice hockey (men's and women's), rugby union (m/w).

References [ edit ] ^ " "Y" The Lyons?" .

Wheatoncollegelyons.com . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ "HOME OF THE WHEATON COLLEGE LYONS" . Retrieved April 23, 2024 .

^ " "Y" The Lyons?" .

Wheatoncollegelyons.com .

^ " "Y" The Lyons?" .

Wheatoncollegelyons.com .

^ "Miss Barrows (sic), Ariz. State Golf Victors" .

The New York Times . New York. June 22, 1975 . Retrieved 2017-02-27 .

^ "Best value" .

Wheaton College Massachusetts . Retrieved 2021-10-16 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e New England Women's and Men's Athletic Conference Current full members Babson Beavers Clark Cougars Coast Guard Bears Emerson Lions MIT Engineers Mount Holyoke Lyons Salve Regina Seahawks Smith Pioneers Springfield Pride Wellesley Blue Wheaton Lyons WPI Engineers Current affiliate members Football Merchant Marine Mariners Norwich Cadets SUNY Maritime Privateers Women's rowing Simmons Sharks Former full member Brandeis Judges Former affiliate member Catholic Cardinals Maine Maritime Mariners Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers Tournaments Basketball v t e Sports teams based in Massachusetts Australian football USAFL Boston Demons Baseball MLB Boston Red Sox IL Worcester Red Sox FL Brockton Rox CCBL Bourne Braves Brewster Whitecaps Chatham Anglers Cotuit Kettleers Falmouth Commodores Harwich Mariners Hyannis Harbor Hawks Orleans Firebirds Wareham Gatemen Yarmouth–Dennis Red Sox FCBL Pittsfield Suns Westfield Starfires Worcester Bravehearts NECBL Martha's Vineyard Sharks North Adams SteepleCats North Shore Navigators Valley Blue Sox Basketball NBA Boston Celtics BIG3 Boston Ball Hogs Esports CDL Boston Breach OWL Boston Uprising Football NFL New England Patriots IFL Massachusetts Pirates WFA Boston Renegades Hockey NHL Boston Bruins PWHL Boston Fleet AHL Springfield Thunderbirds ECHL Worcester Railers NAHL Northeast Generals Lacrosse WPLL New England Command UWLX Boston Storm PLL Boston Cannons WLL Boston Guard Roller derby WFTDA Bay State Brawlers Roller Derby Boston Roller Derby MRDA Pioneer Valley Roller Derby Rugby league NARL Boston Bears Rugby union MLR New England Free Jacks NERFU Boston RFC Boston Ironsides RFC Boston Irish Wolfhounds Boston Maccabi Rugby Charles River Rats Mystic River Old Gold Rugby South Shore Anchors Worcester RFC WER Boston Banshees Soccer MLS New England Revolution NWSL Boston Legacy FC (2026) MLSNP New England Revolution II USL2 Black Rock FC Boston Bolts Boston City FC Western Mass Pioneers NPSL Valeo FC UWS New England Mutiny Ultimate AUDL Boston Glory College athletics NCAA Division I Bentley Falcons Boston College Eagles Boston University Terriers Harvard Crimson Holy Cross Crusaders Merrimack Warriors Northeastern Huskies Stonehill Skyhawks UMass Minutemen and Minutewomen UMass Lowell River Hawks NCAA Division II American International Yellow Jackets Assumption Greyhounds Bentley Falcons NCAA Division III Amherst Mammoths Anna Maria Amcats Babson Beavers Brandeis Judges Bridgewater State Bears Clark Cougars Curry Colonels Dean Bulldogs Eastern Nazarene Lions Elms Blazers Emerson Lions Emmanuel Saints Endicott Gulls Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams Gordon Fighting Scots Lasell Lasers Lesley Lynx Mount Holyoke Lyons MCLA Trailblazers Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers MIT Engineers Nichols Bison Regis Pride Salem State Vikings Simmons Sharks Smith Pioneers Springfield Pride Suffolk Rams Tufts Jumbos UMass Boston Beacons UMass Dartmouth Corsairs Wellesley Blue Wentworth Leopards Western New England Golden Bears Westfield State Owls Wheaton Lyons Williams Ephs WPI Engineers Worcester State Lancers NAIA Fisher Falcons USCAA Bay Path Wildcats Hampshire Black Sheep NJCAA Division II Massasoit Warriors NJCAA Division III Benjamin Franklin Shockers Bristol Bayhawks Bunker Hill Bulldogs Holyoke Cougars Massachusetts Bay Buccaneers Northern Essex Knights Quinsigamond Chiefs Roxbury Tigers Springfield Technical Rams Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wheaton_Lyons&oldid=1285386415 " Category : Wheaton Lyons Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 12:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wheaton Lyons Add languages Add topic

