Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Container Port Operators 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Container port 21 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Facility handling shipping containers Port of Rotterdam is the largest container port in Europe Intermodal terminal in Garden City, Georgia at the Port of Savannah .

Shanghai Port is the world's busiest maritime container port A container port , container terminal , or intermodal terminal is a facility where cargo containers are transshipped between different transport vehicles, for onward transportation . The transshipment may be between container ships and land vehicles, for example trains or trucks , in which case the terminal is described as a maritime container port . Alternatively, the transshipment may be between land vehicles, typically between train and truck, in which case the terminal is described as an inland container port .

In November 1932, the first inland container port in the world was opened by the Pennsylvania Railroad company in Enola, Pennsylvania .

[ 1 ] Port Newark-Elizabeth on the Newark Bay in the Port of New York and New Jersey is considered the world's first maritime container port. On April 26, 1956, the Ideal X was rigged for an experiment to use standardized cargo containers that were stacked and then unloaded to a compatible truck chassis at Port Newark. The concept had been developed by the McLean Trucking Company. On August 15, 1962, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey opened the world’s first container port, Elizabeth Marine Terminal.

[ 2 ] Maritime container ports tend to be part of a larger port , and the biggest maritime container ports can be found situated around major harbours . Inland container ports tend to be located in or near major cities, with good rail connections to maritime container ports.

It is common for cargo that arrives to a container port in a single ship to be distributed over several modes of transportation for delivery to inland customers. According to a manager from the Port of Rotterdam , it may be fairly typical way for the cargo of a large 18,000 TEU container ship to be distributed over  19 container trains (74 TEU each), 32 barges (97 TEU each) and 1,560 trucks (1.6 TEU each, on average).

[ 3 ] The further container terminal, in April 2015, such APM Terminal Maasvlakte II, that adapts the advanced technology of remotely-controlled STS gantry cranes and conceptions of sustainability , renewable energy , and zero carbon dioxide emission .

[ 4 ] Both maritime and inland container ports usually provide storage facilities for both loaded and empty containers. Loaded containers are stored for relatively short periods, whilst waiting for onward transportation, whilst unloaded containers may be stored for longer periods awaiting their next use. Containers are normally stacked for storage, and the resulting stores are known as container stacks.

In recent years methodological advances regarding container port operations have considerably improved, such as container port design process . For a detailed description and a comprehensive list of references see, e.g., the operations research literature.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Container Port Operators [ edit ] This is a list of the world's top 10 largest container port operators in 2024 according to Lloyd's List .

[ 7 ] # Port Operator Country 1 PSA International Singapore 2 China Merchants Port Holdings (China Merchants Port and 49% of Terminal Link) China 3 COSCO Shipping Ports China 4 APM Terminals Netherlands 5 DP World United Arab Emirates 6 Hutchison Port Holdings Hong Kong 7 MSC (Terminal Investment Limited and Africa Global Logistics) Switzerland 8 International Container Terminal Services Philippines 9 CMA CGM (CMA Terminals Holding and 51% of Terminal Link) France 10 Yıldırım Holding (Yilport) Turkey See also [ edit ] Container port design process Containerization Container on barge Container ship Dock (maritime) List of container ports List of largest container shipping companies Warehouse References [ edit ] ^ Krzysztof Lewandowski (2014).

"Czechoslovak activity to prepare European norms for containers before the Second World War" (PDF) .

Acta Logistica .

1 (4): 1– 7.

doi : 10.22306/al.v1i4.25 .

ISSN 1339-5629 .

^ "History" . Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . Retrieved 2014-12-23 .

^ Port of Rotterdam senior business manager Arwin Stehouwer, quoted in Rail port shuttles growing trend in Europe , Rail Express , July 24, 2015 ^ "APM Opens Most Advanced Container Terminal" . Retrieved 2016-09-21 .

^ Dirk Steenken; Stefan Voß; Robert Stahlbock (1 January 2004). "Container terminal operation and operations research - a classification and literature review".

OR Spectrum .

26 (1). Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag: 3– 49.

doi : 10.1007/s00291-003-0157-z .

S2CID 18626905 .

^ Robert Stahlbock; Stefan Voß (1 January 2007). "Operations research at container terminals: a literature update".

OR Spectrum .

30 (1). Spring-Verlag: 1– 52.

doi : 10.1007/s00291-007-0100-9 .

S2CID 62878597 .

^ "Top 10 box port operators 2024" .

Lloyd's List . 2024-12-02 . Retrieved 2025-03-17 .

External links [ edit ] Destiny of a Maritime Nation , a 2018 documentary by Channel NewsAsia , discusses Singapore 's 1960s shift to container traffic and interviews port workers present at the time.  (Sequence covering containerization begins near time index 28:40) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Container terminals .

v t e Intermodal containers Overview Containerization Intermodal freight transport Bureau International des Containers ISO 6346 (BIC code) Twenty-foot equivalent unit Transport Chassis Container ship Double-stack Drayage Flatcar Well car Handling Container port Container crane Reach stacker Rubber tyred gantry crane Sidelifter Straddle carrier Terminal tractor Twistlock Container spreader Types Refrigerated container SECU Tank container Flat rack container Other The Box BBC Box Container (board game) Container Shipping Information Service Shipping container architecture Sun Modular Datacenter Transport portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Container_port&oldid=1281055697 " Categories : Water transport Container terminals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 00:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Container port 21 languages Add topic

