Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Research interests 3 Bibliography 4 References Toggle the table of contents Patricia Owens (academic) 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political scientist Patricia Owens Born 1975 (age 49–50) Nationality British-Irish Alma mater Bristol University University of Cambridge Aberystwyth University Patricia Owens is a British-Irish academic, author and professor. She is a Tutorial Fellow at Somerville College, Oxford and a professor of International Relations at University of Oxford .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] She is best known for her work on the history and theory of counterinsurgency warfare, women and the history of international thought , the history of social and political thought, and for her earlier work on war and international relations in the thought of the German-American political theorist Hannah Arendt .

[ 3 ] Owens' book, Economy of Force: Counterinsurgency and the Historical Rise of the Social won the 2016 Susan Strange Prize for the Best Book in international studies and the 2016 International Studies Association Theory Section Best Book Award.

[ 4 ] Education [ edit ] Owens was born in London to Irish immigrant parents in 1975.

[ 3 ] After completing a degree in Politics from Bristol University , she received her MPhil in International Relations from the University of Cambridge in 1998. Subsequently, she became the Jane Eliza Proctor Research Fellow in Politics department at the Princeton University before completing her PhD at Aberystwyth University in 2003.

[ 5 ] During her PhD she was a visiting scholar at UC-Berkeley on an SSRC research fellowship. Owens was a pre-doctoral research fellow at Princeton University and a post-doctoral research fellow at the University of Southern California .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Career [ edit ] In 2004, she became the Seton-Watson Research Fellow in International Relations at Oriel College, Oxford and part of the Oxford-Leverhulme Programme on the Changing Character of War.

[ 8 ] In 2007, she moved to Queen Mary University of London as a senior lecturer in International Relations and taught there until 2011. Simultaneously, in 2010, she was a visiting professor at UCLA. In 2011, she moved to the University of Sussex. From 2012 to 2013, she was a Fellow of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study , Harvard.

[ 9 ] She became a Professor of International Relations in 2015.

[ 6 ] and was Head of the Department of International Relations between 2017 and 2019. In 2020, she was made a Tutorial Fellow at Somerville College, Oxford and a Professor International Relations at Oxford .

Owens published her first book, Between War and Politics: International Relations and the Thought of Hannah Arendt in 2007.

[ 10 ] In 2015, she published her second book, Economy of Force: Counterinsurgency and the Historical Rise of the Social , a new history of theory of counterinsurgency/armed social work. It won the 2016 Susan Strange Prize for the Best Book in international studies, the 2016 International Studies Association Theory Section Best Book Award, [ 11 ] and was Runner up for the 2016 Francesco Guicciardini Prize for Best Book in Historical International Relations.

[ 12 ] She is a longtime co-editor of the textbook, The Globalization of World Politics: an Introduction to International Relations , published by Oxford, and currently in its seventh edition.

[ 13 ] She was also co-editor of European Journal of International Relations between 2013 and 2017.

Research interests [ edit ] Owens is best known for her work on the history and theory of counterinsurgency warfare, women and the history of international thought , the history of social and political thought, and for her earlier work on war and international relations in the thought of the German-American political theorist Hannah Arendt.

[ 14 ] From 2018 until 2022, she will be the Principal Investigator on a Leverhulme Research Project, Women and the History of International Thought, which rewrites the intellectual and disciplinary history of International Relations.

[ 15 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Economy of Force: Counterinsurgency and the Historical Rise of the Social (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), Studies in International Relations series.

Between War and Politics: International Relations and the Thought of Hannah Arendt (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007) Women's International Thought: A New History (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2021). Editor with Katharina Rietzler Women's International Thought: Toward a New Canon (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming). Editor with Katharina Rietzler, Kimberly Hutchings, Sarah C. Dunstan 'Women Thinkers and the Canon of International Thought: Recovery, Rejection, and Reconstitution', American Political Science Review , 2021. With Kimberly Hutchings 'Women and the History of International Thought', International Studies Quarterly , Vol.62, no.3 (2018), pp. 467–481 Method or Madness: Sociolatry in International Thought, Review of International Studies , Vol.41, no.4 (2015) pp. 655–674 From Bismarck to Petraeus: The Question of the Social and the Social Question in Counterinsurgency, European Journal of International Relations , 19(1) (2013) pp. 135–157 The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations (8th edition) (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020). Editor with John Baylis and Steve Smith.

The Globalization of World Politics: International 3rd Edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020). Editor with Baylis and Smith. The ‘international’ adaptation of GWP Reclaiming “Bare Life”? Against Agamben on Refugees, International Relations , Vol.23, no.4 (2009) pp. 567–82 References [ edit ] ^ "Patricia Owens - Google Scholar" .

^ "INTERNATIONAL THEORY BOOK AWARD" .

^ a b "Interview – Patricia Owens" .

^ "Home-ology; Being a Comment On Patriarchs and Patriarchy in Economy of Force" .

^ "The Humanitarian Condition: US Public Spheres and the 1999 War over Kosovo" .

^ a b "Prof Patricia Owens" .

^ "Global Governance" .

^ "Dr P. Owens Receives Teaching Excellence Award" .

^ "Patricia Owens" .

^ "Between War and Politics: International Relations and the Thought of Hannah Arendt" .

^ "INTERNATIONAL THEORY BOOK AWARD" .

^ "Home-ology; Being a Comment On Patriarchs and Patriarchy in Economy of Force" .

^ "The Globalization of World Politics: an Introduction to International Relations" .

^ "When War is Oikonomia by Other Means" .

^ "Keynote Speakers" .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patricia_Owens_(academic)&oldid=1274992498 " Categories : 1975 births Living people International relations scholars Academics of the University of Sussex Alumni of Aberystwyth University Fellows of Somerville College, Oxford Women political scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 13:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patricia Owens (academic) 1 language Add topic

