Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subzones 2 Types 3 Sediment accumulation 4 Economic significance 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Continental margin 27 languages العربية Български Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Zone of the ocean floor that separates the thin oceanic crust from thick continental crust Profile illustrating the shelf, slope and rise A continental margin is the outer edge of continental crust abutting oceanic crust under coastal waters . The continental margin consists of three different features: the continental rise , the continental slope , and the continental shelf .

[ 1 ] It is one of the three major zones of the ocean floor , the other two being deep-ocean basins and mid-ocean ridges . Continental margins constitute about 28% of the oceanic area.

[ 2 ] Subzones [ edit ] The continental slope of Australia , which is proximate to the coasts of Newcastle and Sydney (bottom left) The continental shelf is the relatively shallow water area found in proximity to continents; it is the portion of the continental margin that transitions from the shore out towards the ocean. Continental shelves are believed to make up 7% of the sea floor.

[ 3 ] The width of continental shelves worldwide varies in the range of 0.03–1500 km .

[ 4 ] The continental shelf is generally flat, and ends at the shelf break , where there is a drastic increase in slope angle: The mean angle of continental shelves worldwide is 0 ° 07′, and typically steeper closer to the coastline than it is near the shelf break.

[ 5 ] At the shelf break begins the continental slope, which can be 1–5 km above the deep-ocean floor. The continental slope often exhibits features called submarine canyons .

[ 4 ] Submarine canyons often cut into the continental shelves deeply, with near-vertical sides, and continue to cut the morphology to the abyssal plain .

[ 5 ] These canyons are often V-shaped and can sometimes enlarge onto the continental shelf. At the base of the continental slope, there is a sudden decrease in slope angle, and the sea floor begins to level out towards the abyssal plain. This portion of the seafloor is called the continental rise , and marks the outermost zone of the continental margin.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] There are two types of continental margins: active and passive margins.

[ 1 ] Active margins are typically associated with lithospheric plate boundaries. These active margins can be convergent or transform margins, and are also places of high tectonic activity, including volcanoes and earthquakes . The West Coast of North America and South America are active margins.

[ 4 ] Active continental margins are typically narrow from coast to shelf break, with steep descents into trenches .

[ 4 ] Convergent active margins occur where oceanic plates meet continental plates. The denser oceanic crust of one plate subducts below the less dense continental crust of another plate. Convergent active margins are the most common type of active margin. Transform active margins are rarer and occur when an oceanic plate and a continental plate are moving parallel to each other in opposite directions. These transform margins are often characterized by many offshore faults , which causes a high degree of relief offshore, marked by islands , shallow banks, and deep basins . This is known as the continental borderland .

[ 1 ] Passive margins are often located in the interior of lithospheric plates, away from the plate boundaries, and lack major tectonic activity. They often face mid-ocean ridges .

[ 3 ] From this comes a wide variety of features, such as low-relief land extending miles away from the beach, long river systems, and piles of sediment accumulating on the continental shelf.

[ 6 ] The East Coast of the United States is an example of a passive margin. These margins are much wider and less steep than active margins.

Sediment accumulation [ edit ] See also: Coastal morphodynamics As continental crust weathers and erodes, it degrades into mainly sands and clays . Many of these particles end up in streams and rivers that then dump into the ocean. Of all the sediment in the stream load, 80% is then trapped and dispersed on continental margins.

[ 3 ] While modern river sediment is often still preserved closer to shore, continental shelves show high levels of glacial and relict sediments, deposited when sea level was lower.

[ 3 ] Often found on passive margins are several kilometres of sediment, consisting of terrigenous and carbonate ( biogenous ) deposits. These sediment reservoirs are often useful in the study of paleoceanography and the original formation of ocean basins.

[ 3 ] These deposits are often not well preserved on active margin shelves due to tectonic activity.

[ 4 ] Economic significance [ edit ] The continental shelf is the most economically valuable part of the ocean. It often is the most productive portion of the continental margin, as well as the most studied portion, due to its relatively shallow, accessible depths.

[ 4 ] Due to the rise of offshore drilling , mining, and the limitations of fisheries off the continental shelf, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) was established. The edge of the continental margin is one criterion for the boundary of the internationally recognized claims to underwater resources by countries in the definition of the " continental shelf " by the UNCLOS (although in the UN definition the "legal continental shelf" may extend beyond the geomorphological continental shelf and vice versa).

[ 2 ] Such resources include fishing grounds, oil and gas accumulations, sand, gravel, and some heavy minerals in the shallower areas of the margin. Metallic mineral resources are thought to also be associated with certain active margins, and of great value.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Continent-ocean boundary Convergent boundary Passive margin References [ edit ] ^ a b c d V., Thurman, Harold (2014-01-01).

Essentials of Oceanography . Pearson.

ISBN 9780321668127 .

OCLC 815043823 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Cook, P.J.; Carleton, Chris (2000).

Continental shelf limits : the scientific and legal interface . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-511782-4 .

^ a b c d e f Board., National Research Council (U.S.). Ocean Sciences (1979-01-01).

Continental margins: geological and geophysical research needs and problems . National Academy of Sciences.

ISBN 0309027934 .

^ a b c d e f Grotzinger, Jordan (2007).

Understanding Earth . W H Freeman. pp.

491 –496.

ISBN 978-0716766827 .

^ a b Gulicher, Andre (1958).

Coastal and Submarine Morphology . Great Britain: Butler & Tanner Ltd. pp.

205– 215.

^ "Active and passive continental margins" . Archived from the original on 2022-02-10 . Retrieved 2019-11-13 .

External links [ edit ] Map showing the locations of active and passive continental margins and the eight ocean regions v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continental_margin&oldid=1299625930 " Categories : Coastal geography Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Continental margin 27 languages Add topic

