Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Antiquity 2 Middle Ages 3 Age of exploration 4 Modern maps 5 Notes 6 See also 7 References 8 Literature 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cartography of Asia 2 languages العربية Ελληνικά Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of the cartography of Asia The cartography of Asia can refer to the representation of Asia on a map , or to depictions of the world by cartographers from Asia. Depictions of portions of Asia have existed on maps as early as the 6th century BCE, with maps being drafted to depict the Babylonian , Hellenistic Greek , and Han dynasty empires.

During the Middle Ages , Muslim geographers drew maps with more accurate depictions of Southern , Western , and Central Asia , and European maps began to more frequently represent Asia's landmass.

Chinese geography from this period includes more detailed portrayals of the Indian Ocean , Arabian Peninsula , and East Africa . European maps of Asia would become much more accurate during the European Age of Discovery , starting in the 15th century.

Modern maps of Asia make use of digitization , photographic surveys, and satellite imagery .

Map from Mahmud al-Kashgari 's Diwanu Lughat at-Turk , showing the 11th century distribution of Turkic tribes.

Abraham Ortelius, Asiae Nova Descriptio , 1595 Map of Asia, ca. 1719 Antiquity [ edit ] Babylon in Southwest Asia is at the center of the very earliest world maps , beginning with the Babylonian world map in the 6th century BCE; it is a clay tablet 'localized' world map of Babylon , rivers, encircling ocean, and terrain, surrounded by 'islands' in a 7-star format. In classical Greek geography , "Asia" is one of three major landmasses, besides Europe and Libya . Asia is given higher resolution in Hellenistic geography, in particular on Ptolemy world map .

Cartography of India begins with early charts for navigation [ 1 ] and constructional plans for buildings.

[ 2 ] Chinese geography from the 2nd century BC ( Han dynasty ) becomes aware of Turkestan , where Hellenistic Greek and Han Chinese spheres of influence overlap.

Middle Ages [ edit ] In medieval T and O maps , Asia makes for half the world's landmass, with Africa and Europe accounting for a quarter each. With the High Middle Ages , Southwest and Central Asia receive better resolution in Muslim geography , and the 11th century map by Mahmud al-Kashgari is the first world map drawn from a Central Asian point of view. In the same period, European explorers of the Silk Road like William Rubruck and Marco Polo increase geographical knowledge of Asia in the west, in particular establishing that the Caspian Sea is not connected to the northern ocean.

Chinese exploration by medieval times extends Chinese geographical knowledge to the Indian Ocean, the Arabian peninsula and East Africa as well as Southeast Asia.

Age of exploration [ edit ] Further information: Age  of Discovery European maps of Asia become much more detailed from the 15th century, the 1459 Fra Mauro map showing a reasonable complete picture, including correctly placed Korea and Japan.

Modern maps [ edit ] Modern map making techniques in Asia, like other parts of the world, employ digitization , photographic surveys and printing .

[ 3 ] Satellite imageries , aerial photographs and video surveying techniques  are also used.

[ 3 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sircar, page 330 ^ Gole 1990 ^ a b Indian Express (1999).

Modern map-making techniques on display . Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Ltd.

[ permanent dead link ] See also [ edit ] Geography of Asia Muslim geography Chinese geography Chinese exploration Cartography of India History of cartography History of geography Exploration of Asia Cartography of Europe Cartography of Africa Boundaries between continents References [ edit ] Gole, Susan (1990). "Size as a measure of importance in Indian cartography".

Imago Mundi .

42 (1): 99– 105.

doi : 10.1080/03085699008592695 .

Sircar, D.C.C. (1990).

Studies in the Geography of Ancient and Medieval India . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.

ISBN 81-208-0690-5 .

Literature [ edit ] Harley and Woodward (eds.), The History of Cartography. Vol. 2. bk 2, Cartography in Traditional East and Southeast Asian Societies, University of Chicago Press (1994), ISBN 978-0-226-31637-6 .

Kenneth Nebenzahl, Mapping the Silk Road and Beyond, ISBN 0-7148-4409-8 .

External links [ edit ] Historical maps of Asia , Alabama Maps project of the Cartographic Research Laboratory, University of Alabama.

Asia Historical Maps , Perry–Castañeda Library Map Collection, University of Texas, Austin.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Atlas of Asia .

v t e Cartography topics History Early world maps Medieval Islamic cartography Early modern Iberian cartography Early modern Netherlandish cartography By area By continent Africa Asia Europe Latin America By country China France India Israel Jamaica New Zealand Palestine Sri Lanka Switzerland Ukraine United States By city Dublin Jerusalem New York York Individual maps Ancient age Ptolemy's world map Soleto Map (Sec. V BC) Middle age Tabula Rogeriana (1154) Catalan Atlas (1375) Early Modern age Map of Juan de la Cosa (1500) Cantino planisphere (1502) Cosmographia (Sebastian Münster) (1544) Contemporary age Cassini map See also Compass rose Points of the compass v t e Atlas Cartography Geography Geovisualization Map Map projection Topography Early world maps History of cartography List of cartographers Animated mapping Cartogram Choropleth map Geological map Linguistic map Nautical chart Pictorial map Thematic map Topographic map Weather map Category:Maps Portal:Atlas v t e Cartography of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartography_of_Asia&oldid=1232134224 " Categories : Maps of Asia Geography of Asia Cartography Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 2 July 2024, at 03:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cartography of Asia 2 languages Add topic

