Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Plymouth Colony 1.2 Wessagusett Colony 1.3 Cape Ann settlement 1.4 Legal formation of the colony 1.5 Colonial history 1.6 Confrontation with England 1.6.1 Revocation of the charter 1.7 Unifications and restoration 2 Life Toggle Life subsection 2.1 Marriage and family life 3 Government Toggle Government subsection 3.1 Laws and judiciary 3.2 Notable criminal prosecutions 3.3 New England Confederation 4 Economy and trade 5 Demographics 6 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 6.1 Boundaries 6.2 Timeline of settlement 7 Notable people 8 Presidential Legacy 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 11.1 Online primary sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Massachusetts Bay Colony 31 languages العربية Беларуская Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1630–1691 English colony in North America Not to be confused with Province of Massachusetts Bay .

Massachusetts Bay Colony 1628–1691 Part of Dominion of New England , 1686–1689 Flag Colonial seal Map of the Massachusetts Bay Colony around 1690 Status Disestablished Capital Salem , Charlestown , Boston Common languages English, Massachusett , Mi'kmaq Religion Congregationalism ( official ) [ 1 ] Puritanism Government Self-governing colony Governor • 1629–1631 John Endecott (first) • 1679–1692 Simon Bradstreet (last) Legislature Great and General Court or Assembly of Massachusetts Bay • Upper House ( de facto ) Council of Assistants • Lower House ( de facto ) Assembly Historical era British colonization of the Americas Puritan migration to New England (1620–1640) • Council for New England land grant 1628 • Charter issued 1629 • New England Confederation formed 1643 • Revocation of the Royal Charter 1684 • Dominion of New England established 1686 • Dominion dissolved 1689 • Massachusetts Charter for the Province of Massachusetts Bay 1691 • Disestablished, reorganized as the Province of Massachusetts Bay 1691 Currency Pound sterling Succeeded by Dominion of New England Province of Massachusetts Bay Today part of Massachusetts Maine New Hampshire The Massachusetts Bay Colony (1628–1691), more formally the Colony of Massachusetts Bay , was an English settlement on the east coast of North America around Massachusetts Bay , one of the several colonies later reorganized as the Province of Massachusetts Bay . The lands of the settlement were in southern New England , with initial settlements on two natural harbors and surrounding land about 15.4 miles (24.8 km) apart—the areas around Salem and Boston , north of the previously established Plymouth Colony . The territory nominally administered by the Massachusetts Bay Colony covered much of central New England, including portions of Massachusetts , Maine , New Hampshire , and Connecticut .

The Massachusetts Bay Colony was founded by the owners of the Massachusetts Bay Company , including investors in the failed Dorchester Company , which had established a short-lived settlement on Cape Ann in 1623. The colony began in 1628 and was the company's second attempt at colonization. It was successful, with about 20,000 people migrating to New England in the 1630s. The population was strongly Puritan and was governed largely by a small group of leaders strongly influenced by Puritan teachings. It was the first slave-holding colony in New England, and its governors were elected by an electorate limited to freemen who had been formally admitted to the local church. As a consequence, the colonial leadership showed little tolerance for other religious views, including Anglican , Quaker , [ 2 ] and Baptist theologies.

The colonists had good relationships with the local Native Americans ; however, they did join their neighbor colonies in the Pequot War (1636–1638) and King Philip's War (1675–1678). After that, most of the Indians in southern New England made peace treaties with the colonists or were sold into slavery after King Philip's War (apart from the Pequot tribe, whose survivors were largely absorbed into the Narragansett and Mohegan tribes following the Pequot War).

[ 3 ] The Massachusetts Bay Colony was economically successful, trading with England, Mexico, and the West Indies. In addition to barter, transactions were done in English pounds, Spanish " pieces of eight ", and wampum in the 1640s. In 1652, a currency shortage prompted the colony to authorize silversmith John Hull to issue coinage, now known as the oak tree, willow tree, and pine tree shillings .

Political differences with England after the English Restoration led to the revocation of the colonial charter in 1684.

King James II established the Dominion of New England in 1686 to bring all of the New England colonies under firmer crown control. The Dominion collapsed after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 deposed James, and the Massachusetts Bay Colony reverted to rule under its revoked charter until 1691, when a new charter was issued for the Province of Massachusetts Bay. This new province combined the Massachusetts Bay territories with those of the Plymouth Colony and proprietary holdings on Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard . Sir William Phips arrived in 1692 bearing the charter and formally took charge of the new province, when the colony, beginning in Salem Village , was coming to grips with the witch trials crises.

History [ edit ] Map depicting tribal distribution in southern New England, c.

1600 ; the political boundaries shown are modern Before the arrival of European colonists on the eastern shore of New England, the area around Massachusetts Bay was the territory of several Algonquian-speaking peoples, including the Massachusetts , Nausets , and Wampanoags . The Pennacooks occupied the Merrimack River valley to the north, and the Nipmucs , Pocumtucs , and Mahicans occupied the western lands of Massachusetts, although some of those tribes were under tribute to the Mohawks , who were expanding aggressively from upstate New York.

[ 4 ] The total Indigenous population in 1620 has been estimated to be 7,000.

[ 5 ] This number was significantly larger as late as 1616; in later years, contemporaneous chroniclers interviewed Indigenous people who described a major pestilence which killed as many as two-thirds of the population. The land-use patterns of the Indigenous people included plots cleared for agricultural purposes and woodland territories for hunting game. Land divisions among the tribes were well understood.

[ 5 ] During the early 17th century, several European explorers charted the area, including Samuel de Champlain and John Smith .

[ 6 ] Plans began in 1606 for the first permanent British settlements on the east coast of North America. On April 10, 1606, King James I of England granted a charter forming two joint-stock companies.

[ 7 ] Neither of these corporations was given a name by this charter, but the territories were named as the "first Colony" and "second Colony", over which they were respectively authorized to settle and to govern. Under this charter, the "first Colony" and the "second Colony" were to be ruled by a Council composed of 13 individuals in each colony. The charter provided for an additional council of 13 persons named "Council of Virginia" which had overarching responsibility for the combined enterprise.

[ 8 ] The "first Colony" ranged from the 34th- to 41st-degree latitude north; the "second Colony" ranged from the 38th- to 45th-degree latitude. (The "first Colony" and the "second Colony" overlapped. The 1629 charter of King Charles I asserted that the second Colony ranged from 40th to 48th degrees north latitude, which reduced the overlap.) Investors from London were appointed to govern over any settlements in the "first Colony"; investors from the "Town of Plimouth in the County of Devon " were appointed to govern over any settlements in the "second Colony". The London Company proceeded to establish Jamestown .

[ 9 ] The Plymouth Company under the guidance of Sir Ferdinando Gorges covered the more northern area, including New England , and established the Sagadahoc Colony in 1607 in Maine .

[ 10 ] The experience proved exceptionally difficult for the 120 settlers, however, and the surviving colonists abandoned the colony after only one year.

[ 11 ] Gorges noted that "there was no more speech of settling plantations in those parts" for a number of years.

[ 12 ] English ships continued to come to the New England area for fishing and trade with the Indigenous population.

[ 13 ] Plymouth Colony [ edit ] Main article: Plymouth Colony In December 1620, a group of English religious Separatists , later referred to as " the Pilgrims ", established Plymouth Colony just to the south of Massachusetts Bay, seeking to preserve their cultural identity and attain religious freedom.

[ 14 ] Plymouth's colonists faced great hardships and earned few profits for their investors, who sold their interests to them in 1627.

[ 15 ] Edward Winslow and William Bradford were two of the colony's leaders and were likely the authors of a work published in England in 1622 called Mourt's Relation . This book in some ways resembles a promotional tract intended to encourage further immigration.

[ 16 ] Plymouth Colony would remain separate from Massachusetts Bay Colony until the creation of the Province of Massachusetts Bay .

Wessagusett Colony [ edit ] Main article: Wessagusset Colony There were other attempts at colonies more closely tied to England in 1623 and 1624 at Weymouth, Massachusetts .

Thomas Weston's Wessagusset Colony failed in under a year. An effort by Robert Gorges to establish an overarching civil and religious colonial structure for New England based in the same location likewise failed and most of the settlers left.

[ 17 ] Those families who remained after the departure of Gorges formed a permanent settlement [ 18 ] [ 19 ] the oldest in what would become Massachusetts Bay Colony.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Cape Ann settlement [ edit ] Main article: Cape Ann In 1623, the Plymouth Council for New England , the successor to the Plymouth Company, established a small fishing village at Cape Ann under the supervision of the Dorchester Company, with Thomas Gardner as its overseer. This company was originally organized through the efforts of Puritan minister John White (1575–1648) of Dorchester , in the English county of Dorset . White has been called "the father of the Massachusetts Colony" because of his influence in establishing this settlement, even though he never emigrated.

[ 22 ] The Cape Ann settlement was not profitable, and the financial backers of the Dorchester Company terminated their support by the end of 1625. Their settlement was abandoned at present-day Gloucester , but a few settlers remained in the area, including Roger Conant , establishing a settlement a little further south at what is now Salem , near the village of the Naumkeag tribe .

[ 23 ] Legal formation of the colony [ edit ] Archbishop William Laud was a favorite advisor of King Charles I and a dedicated Anglican , and he sought to suppress the religious practices of Puritans and other nonconforming beliefs in England. The persecution of many Puritans in the 1620s led them to believe that religious reform would not be possible while Charles was king, and many decided to seek a new life in the New World.

[ 24 ] John White continued to seek funding for a colony. On 19 March 1628 [ O.S.

1627], [ 25 ] the Council for New England issued a land grant to a new group of investors that included a few from the Dorchester Company. The land grant was for territory between the Charles River and Merrimack River that extended from "the Atlantick and westerne sea and ocean on the east parte, to the South sea on the west parte".

[ 26 ] The company to whom the grant was sold was styled "The New England Company for a Plantation in Massachusetts Bay".

[ 27 ] The company elected Matthew Cradock as its first governor and immediately began organizing provisions and recruiting settlers.

The company sent approximately 100 new settlers with provisions to join Conant in 1628, led by Governor's Assistant John Endecott , one of the grantees.

[ 28 ] The next year, Naumkeag was renamed Salem and fortified by another 300 settlers led by Rev.

Francis Higginson , one of the first ministers of the settlement.

[ 29 ] The first winters were difficult, with colonists struggling against starvation and disease, resulting in numerous deaths.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The company leaders sought a royal charter for the colony because they were concerned about the legality of conflicting land claims given to several companies (including the New England Company) for the little-known territories of the New World, and because of the increasing number of Puritans who wanted to join them. Charles granted the new charter on 4 March 1629 [O.S. 1628], [ 25 ] [ 32 ] superseding the land grant and establishing a legal basis for the new English colony at Massachusetts, appointing Endecott as governor. It was not apparent whether Charles knew that the company was meant to support the Puritan emigration, and he was likely left to assume that it was purely for business purposes, as was the custom. The charter omitted a significant clause: the location for the annual stockholders' meeting. Charles dissolved Parliament in 1629, whereupon the company's directors met to consider the possibility of moving the company's seat of governance to the colony. This was followed later that year by the Cambridge Agreement , in which a group of investors agreed to emigrate and work to buy out others who would not emigrate.

The Massachusetts Bay Colony became the first English chartered colony whose board of governors did not reside in England. This independence helped the settlers to maintain their Puritan religious practices without interference from the king, Archbishop Laud, or the Anglican Church of England . The charter remained in force for 55 years; Charles II revoked it in 1684.

[ 33 ] Parliament passed legislation collectively called the Navigation Acts which attempted to prevent the colonists from trading with any nation other than England. Colonial resistance to those acts led King Charles to revoke the Massachusetts charter and consolidate all the colonies in New England, New York, and New Jersey into the Dominion of New England .

Territory claimed but never administered by the colonial government extended theoretically as far west as the Pacific Ocean. The Dutch colony of New Netherland disputed many of its territorial claims, arguing that they held rights to land beyond Rhode Island up to the western side of Cape Cod, under the jurisdiction of Plymouth Colony at the time.

Colonial history [ edit ] John Winthrop , who led the first large wave of colonists from England in 1630 and served as governor for 12 of the colony's first 20 years A flotilla of ships sailed from England beginning in April 1630, sometimes known as the Winthrop Fleet . They began arriving at Salem in June and carried more than 700 colonists, Governor John Winthrop , and the colonial charter.

[ 34 ] Winthrop delivered his famous sermon " City upon a Hill " either before or during the voyage.

[ 35 ] Over the next ten years, about 20,000 Puritans emigrated from England to Massachusetts and the neighboring colonies during the Great Migration .

[ 36 ] Many ministers reacted to the repressive religious policies of England, making the trip with their congregations, among whom were John Cotton , Roger Williams , Thomas Hooker , and others. Religious divisions and the need for additional land prompted a number of new settlements that resulted in Connecticut Colony (by Hooker) and the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations (by Williams and others). Minister John Wheelwright was banished after the Antinomian controversy (like Anne Hutchinson ), and he moved north to found Exeter, New Hampshire .

This is the site of the "Great House" near the corner of New Rutherford Avenue and Chelsea Avenue, Charlestown, Massachusetts. It was the home of John Winthrop and also served as the first seat of government in the colony.

The advent of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms in 1639 brought a halt to major migration, and a significant number of men returned to England to fight in the war. Massachusetts authorities were sympathetic to the Parliamentary cause and had generally positive relationships with the governments of the English Commonwealth and the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell . The colony's economy began to diversify in the 1640s, as the fur trading, lumber, and fishing industries found markets in Europe and the West Indies, and the colony's shipbuilding industry developed. The growth of a generation of people born in the colony and the rise of a merchant class began to slowly change the political and cultural landscape of the colony, even though its governance continued to be dominated by relatively conservative Puritans.

Colonial support for the Commonwealth created tension after the throne was restored to Charles II in 1660. Charles sought to extend royal influence over the colonies, which Massachusetts resisted along with the other colonies. For example, the Massachusetts Bay colony repeatedly refused requests by Charles and his agents to allow the Church of England to become established, and the New England colonies generally resisted the Navigation Acts , laws that restricted colonial trade to England alone.

The New England colonies were ravaged by King Philip's War (1675–76), when the Indigenous peoples of southern New England rose up against the colonists and were decisively defeated, although at great cost in life to all concerned. The Massachusetts frontier was particularly hard hit: several communities in the Connecticut and Swift River valleys were abandoned. By the end of the war, most of the Indigenous population of southern New England made peace treaties with the colonists.

Confrontation with England [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Massachusetts Bay Colony" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) England had difficulty enforcing its laws and regulations in the Massachusetts Bay colony, as it was a joint-stock colony which was unlike the royal colonies and proprietary colonies that the English crown administered. Massachusetts Bay was largely self-governing with its own house of deputies, governor, and other self-appointed officers. The colony also did not keep its headquarters and oversight in London but moved them to the colony. The Massachusetts Bay colonists viewed themselves as something apart from their "mother country" of England because of this tradition of self-rule, coupled with the theocratic nature of New England Puritan society. The Puritan founders of Massachusetts and Plymouth saw themselves as having been divinely given their lands in the New World with a duty to implement and observe religious law.

[ 37 ] English colonists took control of New Netherland in 1664, and the crown sent royal commissioners to New England from the new Province of New York to investigate the status of the government and legal system of the colonies. These commissioners were to bring the New England colonies into a stronger connection with England, including allowing the crown to nominate the governor of the colony. The New England colonists refused, claiming that the King had no right to "supervise" Massachusetts Bay's laws and courts, [ 38 ] and saying that they ought to continue as they were so long as they remained within the legal rights and privileges of their charter. The Commissioners asked that the colony pay its obligated 20 percent of all gold and silver found in New England, but the colonists responded that they were "not obligated to the king but by civility".

[ 38 ] Massachusetts Bay Governors John Leverett (left) and Simon Bradstreet (right). Leverett was of the more hard-line autonomist faction of New England Puritans and Bradstreet the more moderate and reform-oriented group.

[ 39 ] Massachusetts Bay extended the right to vote only to Puritans, but the population of the colony was increasing and the non-Puritan population was growing along with it; thus, tensions and conflicts were growing concerning the future direction of the colony. Many wealthy merchants and colonists wished to expand their economic base and commercial interests and saw the conservative Puritan leadership as thwarting that. Even in Puritan society, the younger generation wished to liberalize society in a way that would help with commerce. Those who wanted Massachusetts Bay and New England to be a place for religious observance and theocracy were most hostile to any change in governance. The Crown learned of these divisions and sought to include non-Puritans in the leadership in the hope of managing the colony.

[ 40 ] The charges of insubordination against the colony included denying the crown's authority to legislate in New England, asserting that Massachusetts Bay was governing in the Province of New Hampshire and Maine , and denying freedom of conscience. However, chief among the colonists' transgressions were the coining of money ( the pine tree shilling ) and their violations of the Navigation Acts , which had been passed by Parliament to regulate trade within the English colonial empire. These regulations determined whom the colonies could trade with and how trade could be conducted, and New England merchants were flaunting them by trading directly with European powers. This infuriated many English merchants, commercial societies, and Royal committees who petitioned the King for action, claiming that the New England colonists were hurting their trade. The Lords of Trade's complaints were so serious that the King sent Edward Randolph to Boston in an attempt to rein in and regulate the colony. When he arrived in Boston, he found a colonial government that refused to give in to the royal demands.

Randolph reported to London that the General Court of Massachusetts Bay claimed that the King had no right to interfere with their commercial dealings. In response, Randolph asked the crown to cut off all trade to and from the colony and asked that further regulations be put in place. The crown did not wish to enforce such a harsh measure and risk alienating the moderate members of New England society who supported England, so the British offered conciliatory measures if Massachusetts Bay followed the law. Massachusetts Bay refused, and the Lords of Trade became wary of the colony's charter; they petitioned the crown to either revoke it or amend it. Randolph was made head of Customs and Surveyor General of New England, with his office in Boston. Despite this increased pressure, the General Court established laws that allowed merchants to circumvent Randolph's authority. Adding to Randolph's frustration was his reliance on the Admiralty Court to rule on the laws that he was attempting to enforce. The moderate faction of the General Court was supportive of Randolph and the changes that the crown wished to make, but the conservatives remained too powerful and blocked any attempt to side with England. However, as the tensions mounted between the crown and Massachusetts Bay, and threats mounted of legal action against the colony, the General Court did pass laws that acknowledged certain English admiralty laws while still making allowance for self-governance.

[ 41 ] Revocation of the charter [ edit ] Two delegates from Massachusetts Bay were sent to London to meet with the Lords of Trade when the crown threatened the colony with a quo warranto . The Lords demanded a supplementary charter to alleviate problems, but the delegates were under orders that they could not negotiate any change with the Charter and this enraged the Lords. The quo warranto was issued immediately. The King feared that this would stir problems within the colony and attempted to reassure the colonists that their private interests would not be infringed upon. The declaration did create problems, however, and the confrontations increased between the moderates and conservatives. The moderates controlled the office of the Governor and the Council of Assistants, and the conservatives controlled the Assembly of Deputies. This political turmoil ended in a compromise with the deputies voting to allow the delegates in London to negotiate and defend the colonial charter.

[ 42 ] When the warrant arrived in Boston, the General Court voted on what course the colony should take. The two options were to immediately submit to royal authority and dismantle their government or to wait for the crown to revoke their charter and install a new governmental system. The General Court decided to wait out the crown. They lacked a legal basis to continue their government, yet it remained intact until its official revocation in 1686.

[ 43 ] Unifications and restoration [ edit ] Further information: Dominion of New England and Province of Massachusetts Bay Dominion of New England in 1688 James II of England united Massachusetts with the other New England colonies in the Dominion of New England in 1686. The dominion was governed by Sir Edmund Andros without any local representation beyond his own hand-picked councillors, and it was extremely unpopular throughout New England. Massachusetts authorities arrested Andros in April 1689 after the 1688 Glorious Revolution in England, and they re-established government under the forms of the vacated charter. However, dissenters from the Puritan rule argued that the government lacked a proper constitutional foundation, and some of its actions were resisted on that basis.

King William III issued a charter in 1691, despite efforts by Massachusetts agents to revive the old colonial charter. It was chiefly negotiated by Increase Mather in his role as the colony's ambassador-extraordinary, [ 44 ] unifying Massachusetts Bay with Plymouth Colony , Martha's Vineyard , Nantucket , and territories that roughly encompass Maine , New Brunswick , and Nova Scotia to form the Province of Massachusetts Bay . This new charter additionally extended voting rights to non-Puritans, an outcome that Mather had tried to avoid.

[ 45 ] Life [ edit ] Constructed in 1641, the Fairbanks House is a First Period home with clapboard siding Life could be quite difficult in the early years of the colony. Many colonists lived in fairly crude structures, including dugouts , wigwams , and dirt-floor huts made using wattle and daub construction. Construction improved in later years, and houses began to be sheathed in clapboard , with thatch or plank roofs and wooden chimneys.

[ 46 ] Wealthier individuals would extend their house by adding a lean-to on the back, which allowed a larger kitchen (possibly with a brick or stone chimney including an oven), additional rooms, and a sleeping loft. These houses were the precursors to what is now called the saltbox style of architecture.

[ 47 ] Interiors became more elaborate in later years, with plaster walls, wainscoting , and potentially expensive turned woodwork in the most expensive homes.

[ 48 ] Colonists arriving after the first wave found that the early towns did not have room for them. Seeking land of their own, groups of families would petition the government for land on which to establish a new town; the government would typically allow the group's leaders to select the land. These grants were typically about 40 square miles (10,000 ha), and were located sufficiently near other towns to facilitate defense and social support. The group leaders would also be responsible for acquiring native title to the lands that they selected.

[ 49 ] By this means, the colony expanded into the interior, spawning settlements in adjacent territories as well.

[ 50 ] Salem Common was established as a village green in 1667 The land within a town would be divided by communal agreement, usually allocating by methods that originated in England. Outside a town center, land would be allocated for farming, some of which might be held communally. Farmers with large plots of land might build a house near their properties on the outskirts of the town.

[ 51 ] A town center that was well laid out would be fairly compact, with a tavern, school, possibly some small shops, and a meeting house that was used for civic and religious functions.

[ 48 ] The meeting house would be the center of the town's political and religious life. Church services might be held for several hours on Wednesday and all day Sunday. Puritans did not observe annual holidays, especially Christmas , which they said had pagan roots. Annual town meetings would be held at the meeting house, generally in May, to elect the town's representatives to the general court and to transact other community business. Towns often had a village green , used for outdoor celebrations and activities such as military exercises of the town's trainband or militia .

Marriage and family life [ edit ] Many of the early colonists who migrated from England came with some or all of their family.

[ 52 ] It was expected that individuals would marry fairly young and begin producing offspring. Infant mortality rates were comparatively low, as were instances of childhood death.

[ 53 ] Men who lost their wives often remarried fairly quickly, especially if they had children needing care. Older widows would also sometimes marry for financial security. It was also normal for older widowed parents to live with one of their children. Due to the Puritan perception of marriage as a civil union, divorce did sometimes occur and could be pursued by both genders.

[ 54 ] Sexual activity was expected to be confined to marriage. Sex outside of marriage was considered fornication if neither partner was married, and adultery if one or both were married to someone else. Fornication was generally punished by fines and pressure to marry; a woman who gave birth to an illegitimate child could also be fined. Adultery and rape were more serious crimes, and both were punishable by death. Rape, however, required more than one witness, and was therefore rarely prosecuted. Sexual activity between men was called sodomy , and was also punishable by death.

[ 55 ] Within the marriage, the husband was typically responsible for supplying the family's financial needs, although it was not uncommon for women to work in the fields and to perform some home labor (for example, spinning thread or weaving cloth) to supplement the family income. Women were almost exclusively responsible for seeing to the welfare of the children.

Children were baptized at the local meeting house within a week of being born. The mother was usually not present because she was still recovering from the birth, and the child's name was usually chosen by the father. Names were propagated within the family, and names would be reused when infants died. If an adult died without issue, his (or her) name could be carried on when the siblings of the deceased named children in his or her memory.

Most children received some form of schooling, something which the colony's founders believed to be important for forming a proper relationship with God. Towns were obligated to provide education for their children, which was usually satisfied by hiring a teacher of some sort. The quality of these instructors varied, from minimally educated local people to Harvard-educated ministers.

Government [ edit ] The structure of the colonial government changed over the lifetime of the charter. The Puritans established a theocratic government limited to church members, although ministers were barred from holding governmental positions.

[ 56 ] Winthrop, Dudley, the Rev. John Cotton, and other leaders sought to prevent dissenting religious views, and many were banished because of differing religious beliefs, including Roger Williams of Salem and Anne Hutchinson of Boston , and unrepentant Quakers and Anabaptists. By the mid-1640s, Massachusetts Bay Colony had grown to more than 20,000 inhabitants.

[ 57 ] The charter granted the general court the authority to elect officers and to make laws for the colony. Its first meeting in North America was held in October 1630, but it was attended by only eight freemen.

[ 58 ] They formed the first council of assistants and voted (contrary to the terms of the charter) that they should elect the governor and deputy from among themselves.

[ 59 ] The general court determined at the next session that it would elect the governor and deputy.

[ 60 ] An additional 116 settlers were admitted to the general court as freemen in 1631, but most of the governing and judicial power remained with the council of assistants.

[ 61 ] They also enacted a law specifying that only those men who "are members of some of the churches" in the colony were eligible to become freemen and gain the vote.

[ 59 ] This restriction was not changed until after the English Restoration.

[ 60 ] The process by which individuals became members of one of the colony's churches involved a detailed questioning by the church elders of their beliefs and religious experiences; as a result, only individuals whose religious views accorded with those of the church leadership were likely to become members and gain the ability to vote in the colony.

[ 62 ] After a protest over the imposition of taxes by a meeting of the council of assistants, the general court ordered each town to send two representatives known as deputies to meet with the court to discuss matters of taxation.

[ 63 ] Questions of governance and representation arose again in 1634 when several deputies demanded to see the charter, which the assistants had kept hidden from public view. The deputies learned of the provisions that the general court should make all laws, and that all freemen should be members of the general court. They then demanded that the charter be enforced to the letter, which Governor Winthrop pointed out was impractical given the growing number of freemen. The parties reached a compromise and agreed that the general court would be made up of two deputies representing each town.

[ 63 ] Dudley was elected governor in 1634, and the general court reserved a large number of powers for itself, including those of taxation, distribution of land, and the admission of freemen.

[ 64 ] A legal case in 1642 brought about the separation of the council of assistants into an upper house of the general court. The case involved a widow's lost pig and had been overturned by the general court, but the assistants voted as a body to veto the general court's act.

[ 65 ] The consequence of the ensuing debate was that the general court voted in 1644 that the council of assistants would sit and deliberate separately from the general court (they had sat together until then), and both bodies must concur for any legislation to be passed. Judicial appeals were to be decided by a joint session, since otherwise the assistants would be in the position to veto attempts to overturn their own decisions.

[ 66 ] The King and the British government held enough power in Massachusetts Bay in the 1630s that Puritans and others were afraid of being sent home if they got word of unorthodox beliefs such as what Roger Williams expounded.

[ 67 ] Laws and judiciary [ edit ] Further information: Massachusetts Body of Liberties During 1641, the colony formally adopted the Massachusetts Body of Liberties , [ 68 ] which Nathaniel Ward compiled.

[ 69 ] This document consisted of 100 civil and criminal laws based upon the social sanctions recorded in the Bible.

[ 70 ] These laws formed the nucleus of colonial legislation until independence and contained some provisions later incorporated into the United States Constitution , such as the ideas of equal protection and double jeopardy .

[ 69 ] Massachusetts Bay was the first colony to formalize laws concerning slavery with provision 91 of the Massachusetts Body of Liberties which developed protections for people unable to perform public service.

[ 71 ] Another law was developed to protect married women, children, and people with mental disabilities from making financial decisions.

[ 71 ] Colonial law differentiated among types of mental disabilities, classifying them as "distracted persons", "idiots", and "lunaticks".

[ 71 ] In 1693, "poor laws" enabled communities to use the estates of people with disabilities to defer the cost of community support of those individuals.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Many of these laws remained until the American Revolution .

[ 71 ] Many behaviors were frowned upon culturally which modern sensibilities might consider relatively trivial actions, and some led to criminal prosecution. These included sleeping during church services, playing cards, and engaging in any number of activities on the Sabbath. Conversely, there were laws which reflected attitudes that are still endorsed by popular sensibilities in the 21st century US, against things such as smoking tobacco, abusing one's mother-in-law, profane dancing, and pulling hair.

[ 74 ] Children, newcomers, and people with disabilities were exempt from punishment for such infractions.

[ 71 ] The colony's council of assistants sat as the final court of appeal and as the principal court for criminal issues of "life, limb, or banishment" and civil issues where the damages exceeded £100.

[ 70 ] Lesser offenses were heard in county courts or by commissioners appointed for hearing minor disputes. The lower courts were also responsible for issuing licenses and for matters such as probate. Juries were authorized to decide questions of both fact and law, although the court could decide if a jury failed to reach a decision.

[ 75 ] Sentences for offenses included fines and corporal punishments such as whipping and sitting in the stocks , with the punishments of banishment from the colony and death by hanging reserved for the most serious offenses.

[ 76 ] Evidence was sometimes based on hearsay and superstition. For example, the "ordeal of touch" was used in 1646 in which someone accused of murder is forced to touch the dead body; if blood appears, the accused is deemed guilty. This was used to convict and execute a woman accused of murdering her newborn child.

[ 77 ] Bodies of individuals hanged for piracy were sometimes gibbeted (publicly displayed) on harbor islands visible to seagoing vessels.

[ 78 ] Notable criminal prosecutions [ edit ] Quaker Mary Dyer was hanged on Boston Common in 1660 One of the first to be executed in the colony was Dorothy Talbye , who was apparently delusional. She was hanged in 1638 for murdering her daughter, as the common law of Massachusetts made no distinction at the time between insanity or mental illness and criminal behavior.

[ 79 ] Midwife Margaret Jones was convicted of being a witch and hanged in 1648 after the condition of patients allegedly worsened in her care.

[ 80 ] The colonial leadership was the most active in New England in the persecution of Quakers . In 1660, English Quaker Mary Dyer was hanged in Boston for repeatedly defying a law banning Quakers from the colony.

[ 81 ] Dyer was one of the four executed Quakers known as the Boston martyrs . Executions ceased in 1661 when King Charles II explicitly forbade Massachusetts from executing anyone for professing Quakerism.

[ 82 ] New England Confederation [ edit ] Main article: New England Confederation In 1643, Massachusetts Bay joined Plymouth Colony , Connecticut Colony , and New Haven Colony in the New England Confederation , a loose coalition organized primarily to coordinate military and administrative matters among the Puritan colonies.

[ 83 ] It was most active in the 1670s during King Philip's War .

[ 84 ] (New Hampshire had not yet been organized as a separate province, and both it and Rhode Island were excluded because they were not Puritan.) [ 85 ] Economy and trade [ edit ] In the 1600s, the colony was highly dependent on imports from England and was supported by the investments of a number of wealthy immigrants. Certain businesses were quick to thrive, notably shipbuilding, fisheries, and the fur and lumber trades. As early as 1632, ships built in the colony began trading with other colonies, England, and foreign ports in Europe. By 1660, the colony's merchant fleet was estimated at 200 ships and, by the end of the century, its shipyards were estimated to turn out several hundred ships annually.

[ 86 ] In the early years, the fleet principally carried fish to destinations from the West Indies to Europe.

[ 87 ] It was common for a merchant to ship dried fish to Portugal or Spain, pick up wine and oil for transport to England, and then carry finished goods from England or elsewhere back to the colony.

[ 88 ] This and other patterns of trade became illegal following the introduction of the Navigation Acts in 1651, turning colonial merchants who continued these trading patterns into de facto smugglers. Many colonial authorities were merchants or were politically dependent on them, and they opposed being required by the crown to collect duties imposed by those acts.

[ 89 ] In 1652, Massachusetts General Court authorized John Hull and Robert Sanderson to begin producing coinage for the colony .

The fur trade only played a modest role in the colony's economy because its rivers did not connect its centers well with the Indians who engaged in fur trapping. Timber began to take on an increasingly important role in the economy, especially for naval purposes, after conflicts between England and the Dutch depleted England's supplies of ship masts.

[ 90 ] The colony's economy depended on the success of its trade, in part because its land was not as suitable for agriculture as that of other colonies such as Virginia , where large plantations could be established. The fishery was important enough that those involved in it were exempted from taxation and military service.

[ 91 ] Larger communities supported craftsmen skilled in providing many of the necessities of 17th century life. Some income-producing activities took place in the home, such as carding , spinning , and weaving of wool and other fibers.

[ 92 ] Goods were transported to local markets over roads that were sometimes little more than widened Indian trails.

[ 93 ] Towns were required to maintain their roads, on penalty of fines, and the colony required special town commissions to lay out roads in a more sensible manner in 1639. Bridges were fairly uncommon, since they were expensive to maintain, and fines were imposed on their owners for the loss of life or goods if they failed. Consequently, most river crossings were made by ferry. Notable exceptions were a bridge across the Mystic River constructed in 1638, and another over the Saugus River , whose upkeep costs were subsidized by the colony.

[ 94 ] The colonial government attempted to regulate the economy in a number of ways. On several occasions, it passed laws regulating wages and prices of economically important goods and services, but most of these initiatives did not last very long.

[ 95 ] The trades of shoe-making and coopering (barrel-making) were authorized to form guilds , making it possible to set price, quality, and expertise levels for their work. The colony set standards governing the use of weights and measures. For example, mill operators were required to weigh grain before and after milling, to ensure that the customer received back what he delivered (minus the miller's percentage).

[ 96 ] The Puritan dislike of ostentation led the colony to also regulate expenditures on what it perceived as luxury items. Items of personal adornment, particularly lace and costly silk outerwear, were frowned about. Attempts to ban these items failed, and the colony resorted to laws restricting their display to those who could demonstrate £200 in assets.

[ 97 ] Demographics [ edit ] Historical population Year Pop.

±% 1630 506 — 1640 8,932 +1665.2% 1650 14,307 +60.2% 1660 20,082 +40.4% 1670 30,000 +49.4% 1680 39,752 +32.5% 1690 49,504 +24.5% Source: 1630–1690; [ 98 ] excluding Province of Maine (1622–1658) Most of the people who arrived during the first 12 years emigrated from two regions of England. Many of the colonists came from the county of Lincolnshire and East Anglia , northeast of London, and a large group also came from Devon , Somerset , and Dorset in the southwest of England. These areas provided the bulk of the migration, although colonists also came from other regions of England.

[ 99 ] The pattern of migration often centered around specific Nonconformist clergy who sought to leave England under threat from Archbishop Laud, who encouraged their flock to accompany them.

[ 100 ] One characteristic unique to the New England colonies (as distinguished from some of the other English colonies) was that most of the immigrants were emigrating for religious and political reasons, rather than economic ones.

[ 101 ] The preponderance of the immigrants were well-to-do gentry and skilled craftsmen. They brought with them apprentices and servants, the latter of whom were sometimes in indentured servitude .

[ 102 ] Few titled nobility emigrated, even though some supported the emigration politically and financially and also acquired land holdings in Massachusetts and other colonies.

[ 103 ] Merchants also represented a significant proportion of the immigrants, often the children of the gentry, and they played an important role in establishing the economy of the colony.

[ 102 ] With the start of the English Civil War in 1642, emigration came to a comparative standstill, and some colonists even returned to England to fight for the Parliamentary cause . In the following years, most of the immigrants came for economic reasons; they were merchants, seamen, and skilled craftsmen. Following the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the colony also saw an influx of French Protestant Huguenots . During the period of the charter colony, small numbers of Scots immigrated, but these were assimilated into the colony.

[ 104 ] The population of Massachusetts remained largely English in character until the 1840s.

[ 105 ] Slavery existed but was not widespread within the colony. Some Indians captured in the Pequot War were enslaved, with those posing the greatest threat being transported to the West Indies and exchanged for goods and slaves.

[ 106 ] Governor John Winthrop owned a few Indian slaves, [ 107 ] and Governor Simon Bradstreet owned two black slaves.

[ 108 ] The Body of Liberties enacted in 1641 included rules governing the treatment and handling of slaves.

[ 109 ] Bradstreet reported in 1680 that the colony had 100 to 120 slaves, but historian Hugh Thomas documents evidence suggesting that there may have been a somewhat larger number.

[ 110 ] Geography [ edit ] See also: Geography of Massachusetts The Massachusetts colony was dominated by its rivers and coastline. Major rivers included the Charles and Merrimack, as well as a portion of the Connecticut River , which has been used to transport furs and timbers to Long Island Sound . Cape Ann juts into the Gulf of Maine , providing harbors for fishermen plying the fishing banks to the east, and Boston's harbor provided secure anchorage for seagoing commercial vessels. Development in Maine was restricted to coastal areas, and large inland areas remained under native control until after King Philip's War, particularly the uplands in what is now Worcester County .

Boundaries [ edit ] See also: Northern boundary of Massachusetts The colonial charter specified that the boundaries were to be from three miles (4.8 km) north of the Merrimack River to three miles south of the southernmost point of the Charles River and thence westward to the "South Sea" (i.e., the Pacific Ocean ).

[ 26 ] At the time, the course of neither of the rivers was known for any significant length, which eventually led to boundary disputes with the colony's neighbors.

[ 111 ] The colony's claims were large, but the practicalities of the time meant that they never actually controlled any land further west than the Connecticut River valley. The colony also claimed additional lands by conquest and purchase, further extending the territory that it administered.

The southeastern boundary with the Plymouth Colony was first surveyed in 1639 and accepted by both colonies in 1640.

[ 112 ] It is known in Massachusetts as the "Old Colony Line", and is still visible as the boundary between Norfolk County to the north and Bristol and Plymouth Counties to the south.

[ 113 ] The northern boundary was originally thought to be roughly parallel to the latitude of the mouth of the Merrimack River, since the river was assumed to flow primarily west. This was found not to be the case and, in 1652, Governor Endicott sent a survey party to locate the northernmost point on the Merrimack. At the point where the Pemigewasset River , the Merrimack's principal tributary, meets the Winnipesaukee River local Indians guided the party to the outlet of Lake Winnipesaukee , incorrectly claiming that as the Merrimack's source. The survey party carved lettering into a rock there (now called Endicott Rock ), and its latitude was taken to be the colony's northern boundary. When extended eastward, this line was found to meet the Atlantic near Casco Bay in present-day Maine.

Following this discovery, the colonial magistrates began proceedings to bring existing settlements under their authority in southern New Hampshire and Maine.

[ 114 ] This extension of the colonial claim conflicted with several proprietary grants owned by the heirs of John Mason and Sir Ferdinando Gorges .

[ 115 ] The Mason heirs pursued their claims in England, and the result was the formation of the Province of New Hampshire in 1679.

[ 116 ] The current boundary between Massachusetts and New Hampshire was not fixed until 1741. In 1678, the colony purchased the claims of the Gorges heirs, gaining control over the territory between the Piscataqua and Kennebec Rivers.

[ 117 ] The colony and later the province and state retained control of Maine until it was granted statehood in 1820.

[ 118 ] The colony performed a survey in 1642 to determine its southern boundary west to the Connecticut River.

[ 119 ] This line, south of the present boundary, was protested by Connecticut, but stood until the 1690s, when Connecticut performed its own survey.

[ 120 ] Most of today's Massachusetts boundaries with its neighbors were fixed in the 18th century.

[ 121 ] The most significant exception was the eastern boundary with Rhode Island, which required extensive litigation, including Supreme Court rulings, before it was finally resolved in 1862.

[ 122 ] Lands which had previously belonged to the Pequots to the southwest were divided after the Pequot War in present-day Rhode Island and eastern Connecticut. Claims were disputed in this area for many years, particularly between Connecticut and Rhode Island.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Massachusetts administered Block Island and the area around present-day Stonington, Connecticut , as part of these spoils of war, [ 125 ] [ 126 ] and was one of several claimants to land in what was known as Narragansett Country (roughly Washington County, Rhode Island ). Massachusetts lost these territories in the 1660s, when Connecticut and Rhode Island received their royal charters.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Timeline of settlement [ edit ] See also: List of municipalities in Massachusetts This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( August 2008 ) Weymouth (Wessagusset): 1622 as part of Plymouth Colony ; part of Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630 Gloucester : 1623 (Dorchester Company) Chelsea : 1624 Braintree : 1625 Quincy : 1625 Naumkeag (later Salem ): 1626 (Dorchester Company) Beverly : 1626 (originally a part of Salem, incorporated separately in 1668) Duxbury, Massachusetts ; settled in 1627 as part of Plymouth Colony , incorporated in 1637 Charlestown : 1628 (first capital, now part of Boston) Lynn : 1629 Saugus : 1629 Manchester-by-the-Sea (Jeffery's Creek): 1629 Marblehead : 1629 (settled as a plantation of Salem , incorporated separately in 1639) Boston : 1630 (from Shawmut and Trimountaine) Medford : 1630 Mystic (now part of Malden ): [ 129 ] 1630 Everett : 1630 (settlement) Watertown : 1630 (on land now part of Cambridge) Newtowne (now Cambridge ): 1630 (near Harvard Square ) Roxbury : 1630 (now part of Boston) Dorchester : 1630 (now part of Boston) Newton : 1630 Marshfield : 1632 Ipswich : 1633 Milton : 1634 Attleboro : 1634 Agawam : 1635 (Settled as Agawam Plantation and originally administered by the Connecticut Colony ; defected to Massachusetts with Springfield in 1640) Concord : 1635 Hingham : 1635 Newbury : 1635 Dedham : 1635 (settled as Contentment, renamed Dedham and incorporated in 1636) Winthrop : 1635 Menotomy (now Arlington , then part of Newtowne): 1635 Scituate : 1636 Andover : 1636 (split into Andover and North Andover in 1856) Springfield : 1636 (settled as Agawam Plantation and originally administered by the Connecticut Colony ; defected to Massachusetts and renamed Springfield in 1640) Taunton : 1637 Brookline : 1638 (settled as Muddy River, considered part of Boston until it was renamed Brookline and incorporated in 1705) Rowley : 1638 Salisbury : 1638 Reading : 1639 (Lynn Village, renamed and incorporated as Reading in 1644) Sandwich : 1639 (first settled in 1637) Sudbury : 1639 Winchester : 1640 (founded as part of Charlestown , incorporated as Waterfield in 1640, incorporated 1850) Chicopee : 1640 (settled as Nayasett) Haverhill : 1640 Malden : 1640 (founded as part of Charlestown , incorporated separately in 1649) Woburn : 1640 Methuen : 1642 (founded as part of Haverhill , incorporated separately in 1725) Longmeadow : 1644 Andover : 1646 (original settlement is now in North Andover ) Framingham : 1647 Natick : 1651 Eastham : 1651 Medfield : 1651 Billerica : 1653 (Founded as Shawshin, incorporated in 1655) Chelmsford : 1653 (incorporated in 1655) Lancaster : 1653 Lowell : 1653 (Founded as East Chelmsford , was formally incorporated in 1826) Northampton : 1654 (incorporated in 1653) Groton : 1655 Dunstable : 1656 Hadley : 1659 Middleton : 1659 Holliston : 1659 Marlborough : 1660 Westfield : 1660 West Springfield : 1660 Brookfield : 1660 Milford : 1662 Mendon : 1667 Middleborough : 1669 Deerfield : 1673 Worcester : 1673 Notable people [ edit ] Anne Hutchinson (1591-1643) religious figure [ 130 ] Historian Michael Winship, author of two books about her, has called her "the most famous—or infamous—English woman in colonial American history".

[ 131 ] John Oliver (c. 1616, died 1646), Puritan minister [ 132 ] Presidential Legacy [ edit ] The posterity of the Massachusetts Bay Colony would go on to have an outsized influence on American politics, with thirteen presidents of the United States tracing their patrilineal ancestry back to settlers of the colony. The presidents include John Adams , [ 133 ] John Quincy Adams , [ 133 ] Millard Fillmore , [ 134 ] Franklin Pierce , [ 134 ] Abraham Lincoln , [ 135 ] Ulysses S. Grant , [ 135 ] James A. Garfield , [ 133 ] Grover Cleveland , [ 136 ] William Howard Taft , [ 134 ] Warren G. Harding , [ 136 ] Calvin Coolidge , [ 135 ] George H.W. Bush , [ 137 ] and George W. Bush .

[ 137 ] See also [ edit ] Massachusetts portal History of Massachusetts History of the Puritans in North America List of colonial governors of Massachusetts List of members of the colonial Massachusetts House of Representatives References [ edit ] ^ A. Lamport, Mark (2016).

Encyclopedia of Christianity in the United States . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 1939.

ISBN 9781442244320 .

Congregationalism did became the official religion of the Massachusetts Bay Colony.

^ Pestana, Carla Gardina (September 1983). "The City upon a Hill under Siege: The Puritan Perception of the Quaker Threat to Massachusetts Bay, 1656–1661".

The New England Quarterly .

56 (3): 323– 353.

doi : 10.2307/365396 .

JSTOR 365396 .

^ Vaughan, pp. 97, 129, 332 ^ Hart, pp. 1:129–131 ^ a b Hart, p. 1:129 ^ Hart, pp. 1:127–128 ^ "The First Charter of Virginia; April 10, 1606" .

The Avalon Project; Documents in Law, History and Diplomacy . Yale Law School Avalon Project. December 18, 1998 . Retrieved March 17, 2018 .

^ The 1606 charter did not assign names to the regional companies or councils, but the April 4, 1629 charter granted by King Charles I erroneously asserted that the 1606 charter had given the name "Council established at Plymouth in the county of Devon" to the council governing the "second Colony".

^ Hart, p. 1:5 ^ Hart, pp. 1:16–17 ^ Thayer, pp. 13–216 ^ Vaughan, p. 14 ^ Vaughan, p. 15 ^ Hart, pp. 1:67–70 ^ Stratton, p. 27 ^ Heath, pp. xiii–xv ^ Labaree, p. 26 ^ Adams and Nash, pp. 29–34 ^ Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society (Volume 16 ed.). The Society. 1879. pp.

196– 197 . Retrieved May 24, 2022 .

^ Moore, Jacob Bailey (1848).

Lives of the governors of New Plymouth, and Massachusetts bay . p. 235.

^ Cook, Louis A (1918).

History of Norfolk County, Massachusetts, 1622–1918 Volume 1 . The S.J. Clark Publishing Co. p. 291 . Retrieved May 24, 2022 .

^ Young, Alexander (1846).

Chronicles of the First Planters of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay, 1623–1636 . Boston: C. C. Little and J. Brown. p.

26 . Retrieved December 23, 2008 .

^ Moore, p. 238 ^ Labaree, pp. 17–19 ^ a b Dates in this article are in the Julian calendar , which was then in use in England. The new year in that calendar fell on Lady Day , March 25, so dates between January 1 and March 25 are written with both years to avoid confusion.

^ a b Morison (1981), p. 32 ^ Morison (1981), p. 31 ^ Moore, pp. 347–348 ^ Hubbard (1848), p. 112 ^ Labaree, p. 39 ^ Winthrop et al., p. 35 ^ MacDonald, p. 22 ^ Francis, Richard.

Judge Sewall's Apology . p. 41 ^ Labaree, p. 30 ^ Bremer (2003), p. 175 ^ Labaree, p. 85 ^ (Barnes 1923, p. 6) ^ a b (Barnes 1923, p. 7) ^ (Barnes 1923, p. 17) ^ (Barnes 1923, pp. 8–10) ^ (Barnes 1923, pp. 10–18) ^ (Barnes 1923, pp. 18–23) ^ (Barnes 1923, p. 23) ^ Starkey, pp. 129–131 ^ Starkey, p. 131 ^ Labaree, p. 56 ^ Labaree, pp. 56–58 ^ a b , p. 59 ^ Labaree, pp. 48–49 ^ Labaree, pp. 84–90 ^ Labaree, p. 51 ^ Main, p. 29 ^ Hawke, David (2003).

Everyday Life in Early America . New York: Harper. p.

66 .

ISBN 978-0060912512 .

^ Foster, Thomas (October 1999). "Deficient Husbands: Manhood, Sexual Incapacity, and Male Marital Sexuality in Seventeenth-Century New England".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

56 (4): 723– 744.

doi : 10.2307/2674233 .

JSTOR 2674233 .

^ Main, pp. 64–65 ^ Hakim, Joy (2003).

Freedom: A History of US .

New York : Oxford University Press . pp. 56, 58.

ISBN 0-19-515711-7 .

OCLC 50348061 .

^ "Massachusetts Bay Colony" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . January 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 17, 2023 .

^ Hart, p. 1:103 ^ a b Hart, p. 1:105 ^ a b Hart, p. 1:106 ^ Hart, pp. 1:104–105 ^ Main, p. 47 ^ a b Hart, p. 1:107 ^ Hart, p. 1:108 ^ Hart, p. 1:113 ^ Hart, p. 1:112 ^ Hakim, Joy (2003).

Freedom: A History of US .

New York : Oxford University Press . p. 57.

ISBN 0-19-515711-7 .

OCLC 50348061 .

^ Bremer (2003), p. 305 ^ a b "Massachusetts Body of Liberties" . Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Archived from the original on May 21, 2012 . Retrieved May 22, 2012 .

^ a b Dow, p. 200 ^ a b c d e f Nielsen, Kim (2012).

A Disability History of the United States . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-080702204-7 .

^ Wickham, Parnel (2001). "Images of Idiocy in Puritan New England".

Mental Retardation .

39 (2): 147– 151.

doi : 10.1352/0047-6765(2001)039<0147:IOIIPN>2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 11340964 .

^ Wickham, Parnel (April 2001). "Idiocy and the Law in Colonial New England".

Mental Retardation .

39 (2): 104– 113.

doi : 10.1352/0047-6765(2001)039<0104:IATLIC>2.0.CO;2 .

PMID 11340960 .

^ All of these crimes were drawn from the records of Essex County during the colonial period. Dow, pp. 224–225 ^ Dow, p. 201 ^ Dow, pp. 200–204 ^ Dow, p. 202 ^ Dow, p. 224 ^ Addison, p. 131 ^ Guiley, p. 186 ^ Rogers, pp. 1–2 ^ Bremer (2006), p. 1:xli ^ Labaree, pp. 87–88 ^ Labaree, pp. 100–105 ^ West, p. 104 ^ Hart, p. 1:448 ^ Labaree, p. 90 ^ Labaree, p. 93 ^ Labaree, pp. 94–95 ^ Labaree, p. 92 ^ Hart, p. 1:424 ^ Hart, p. 1:425 ^ Hart, p. 1:431 ^ Hart, p. 1:432 ^ Hart, pp. 1:426–427 ^ Hart, p. 1:427 ^ Hart, p. 1:429 ^ Purvis, Thomas L. (1999). Balkin, Richard (ed.).

Colonial America to 1763 . New York: Facts on File . pp.

128–129 .

ISBN 978-0816025275 .

^ Hart, pp. 1:56–57 ^ Hart, p. 1:55 ^ Hart, p. 1:52 ^ a b Hart, p. 1:54 ^ Hart, p. 1:53 ^ Hart, pp. 1:61–62 ^ Hart, p. 1:63 ^ Bremer (2003), p. 273 ^ Bremer (2003), p. 314 ^ Anderson, p. 1:211 ^ Thomas, p. 453 ^ Thomas, p. 207 ^ Hubbard (2009), pp. 14–17 ^ Winthrop et al., p. 339 ^ Morison (1956), p. 156 ^ Mayo, pp. 221–226 ^ Hubbard (2009), pp. 13–14 ^ Fry, pp. 54–65 ^ Fry, pp. 19–22, 65 ^ Labaree, p. 87 ^ Bowen, p. 15 ^ Bowen, p. 54 ^ Field, p. 171 ^ Field, p. 374 ^ Wheeler, pp. 1–2 ^ Field, pp. 98–101 ^ Wheeler, p. 11 ^ Field, p. 107 ^ Wheeler, p. 15 ^ Field, pp. 100,107 ^ "Answers - The Most Trusted Place for Answering Life's Questions" .

Answers . Archived from the original on March 26, 2007.

^ RI Gov .

^ Winship 2005 , p. 1.

^ Sibley, John Langdon (1873).

Graduates of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts . Vol. I (1st ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Charles William Sever, Harvard University. pp.

102– 103.

^ a b c Cutter, William Richard.

New England Families, Genealogical and Memorial: A Record of the Achievements of Her People in the Making of Commonwealths and the Founding of a Nation , Volume 4 . New York: Lewis Historical Publishing Company, 1913. p. 2048.

^ a b c Vinmont, Rolf Benjamin, ed. (1933).

Our Presidents At A Glance . New York City: Grosset & Dunlap. p. 77.

^ a b c Fischer, David Hackett (1989).

Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America .

New York City : Oxford University Press. pp.

834– 839.

ISBN 978-0-19-506905-1 .

^ a b Cullen, Niall (February 21, 2020).

"A whistlestop tour of every US president's ancestry" .

findmypast.com .

Dundee , Scotland, UK: DC Thomson . Retrieved May 30, 2020 .

^ a b Dowd, Maureen (July 18, 1989).

"Dutch, Digging Deep, Find Bush's Pilgrim Roots" .

The New York Times .

Bibliography [ edit ] Adams, Charles Francis; Nash, Gilbert (1905).

Wessagusset and Weymouth . Weymouth, MA: Weymouth Historical Society.

OCLC 1066255 .

Adams, Brooks (1899).

The Emancipation of Massachusetts .

Addison, Albert Christopher (1912).

The Romantic Story of the Puritan Fathers: And Their Founding of New Boston . L.C. Page & Co.

Anderson, Robert Charles (1995).

The Great Migration Begins: Immigrants to New England, 1620–1633 . Boston: New England Historic Genealogical Society.

ISBN 978-0-88082-120-9 .

OCLC 42469253 .

Barnes, Viola Florence (1923).

The Dominion of New England: A Study in British Colonial Policy . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780804410656 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Bowen, Clarence Winthrop (1882).

The Boundary Disputes of Connecticut . Boston: James R. Osgood.

OCLC 1994357 .

Bremer, Francis (2003).

John Winthrop: America's Forgotten Founder . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-514913-5 .

OCLC 237802295 .

Bremer, Francis; Webster, Tom (2006).

Puritans and Puritanism in Europe and America: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-57607-678-1 .

Dow, George Francis (1967) [1935].

Everyday Life in the Massachusetts Bay Colony . New York: Benjamin Blom.

Field, Edward, ed. (1902).

State of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations at the End of the Century: A History . Boston: Mason Publishing.

OCLC 14245880 .

Fry, William Henry (1908).

New Hampshire as a Royal Province . New York: Columbia University.

OCLC 1981065 .

Guiley, Rosemary (2008) [1999].

The Encyclopedia of Witches, Witchcraft, and Wicca . New York: Facts on File.

ISBN 9781438126845 .

OCLC 435912011 .

Hart, Albert Bushnell, ed. (1927).

Commonwealth History of Massachusetts . New York: The States History Company.

OCLC 1148585635 .

(Five volume history of Massachusetts until the early 20th century; link is to Vol. I: Colony of Massachusetts Bay) Hayes, Kevin (2008).

The Oxford Handbook of Early American Literature . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195187274 .

OCLC 132584511 .

Heath, Dwight, ed. (1986) [1963].

Mourt's Relation: A Journal of the Pilgrims at Plymouth . Cambridge, MA: Applewood Books.

ISBN 9780918222848 .

OCLC 20838253 .

Hubbard, Bill (2009).

American Boundaries: the Nation, the States, the Rectangular Survey . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-35591-7 .

OCLC 163625212 .

Hubbard, William (1848).

A General History of New England . Boston: C.C. Little and J. Brown.

Labaree, Benjamin (1979).

Colonial Massachusetts: a History . Millwood, NY: KTO Press.

ISBN 978-0-527-18714-9 .

OCLC 248194957 .

MacDonald, William (1908).

Documentary Source Book of American History: 1606–1898 . New York: The Macmillan Company. p.

22 .

Main, Gloria (2001).

Peoples of a Spacious Land . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674006287 .

Mayo, Lawrence Shaw (1936).

John Endecott . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

OCLC 1601746 .

Moore, Jacob Bailey (1851).

Lives of the Governors of New Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay . Boston: C. D. Strong. p.

273 .

OCLC 11362972 .

Morison, Samuel Eliot (1956).

The story of the "Old Colony" of New Plymouth, 1620–1692 . New York: Knopf.

OCLC 174859473 .

Morison, Samuel Eliot (1981) [1930].

Builders of the Bay Colony . Boston: Northeastern University Press.

ISBN 978-0-930350-22-2 .

Morison, Samuel (1917).

A History of the Constitution of Massachusetts . Harvard University Library: Wright & Potter Printing Co.

Nagl, Dominik (2013).

No Part of the Mother Country, but Distinct Dominions – Law, State Formation and Governance in England, Massachusetts and South Carolina, 1630–1769 . Berlin: LIT.

ISBN 978-3-643-11817-2 . Archived from the original on August 12, 2016 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

Rogers, Horatio (2009).

Mary Dyer of Rhode Island: The Quaker Martyr That Was Hanged on Boston . BiblioBazaar.

ISBN 978-1-103-80124-4 .

Starkey, Marion L.

(1961) [1949].

The Devil in Massachusetts: A Modern Inquiry into the Salem Witch Trials . Garden City, NY: Dolphin.

Stratton, Eugene (1986).

Plymouth Colony: Its History & People, 1620–1691 . Salt Lake City, UT: Ancestry Publications.

ISBN 9780916489137 .

OCLC 15349442 .

Thayer, Henry Otis (1892).

The Sagadahoc Colony . Portland: Printed for the Gorges Society . Retrieved December 23, 2008 .

Thomas, Hugh (1997).

The Slave Trade: The Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1440–1870 . New York: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-81063-8 .

OCLC 36884041 .

Vaughan, Alden T (1995).

New England Frontier: Puritans and Indians, 1620–1675 . Norman: Oklahoma University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8061-2718-7 .

OCLC 299797876 .

West, Willis (1922).

The Story of American Democracy, Political and Industrial . Boston: Allyn and Bacon. p.

104 .

OCLC 2564556 .

Wheeler, Richard (2009) [1900].

History of the Town of Stonington, Connecticut . Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Publishing Company.

OCLC 30055748 .

Winship, Michael Paul (2005).

The Times and Trials of Anne Hutchinson: Puritans Divided . Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 0-7006-1380-3 .

Winthrop, John; Dunn, Richard; Savage, James; Yeandle, Laetitia (1996).

The Journal of John Winthrop, 1630–1649 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-48425-2 .

OCLC 185405449 .

"Anne Marbury Hutchinson (1591–1643)" . Rhode Island government . Retrieved October 16, 2012 .

Online primary sources [ edit ] 500+ volumes of colonial records at HathiTrust The Charters and General Laws of the Colony and Province of Massachusetts Bay . Boston: Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 1814.

OCLC 19448862 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, David Grayson (1982).

In English Ways: The Movement of Societies and the Transferal of English Local Law and Custom to Massachusetts Bay in the Seventeenth Century . New York: W.W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0393952384 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Massachusetts Bay Company .

Massachusetts Secretary of State: The History of the Arms and Great Seal of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Quaqua Society: Massachusetts Bay Colony Buffalo, NY and the Massachusetts Bay colony Charter of Massachusetts Bay: 1629 (full text) v t e Thirteen Colonies New England Colonies Middle Colonies Chesapeake Colonies Tobacco Colonies Southern Colonies United Colonies Virginia (1607–1776) New Hampshire (1629–1641; 1679–1686; 1689–1776) Maryland (1632–1776) Connecticut (1636–1776) Rhode Island (1636–1776) Delaware (1664–1776) New Jersey (1664–1673; 1702–1776) New York (1664–1776) Pennsylvania (1681–1776) Massachusetts Bay (1691–1776) North Carolina (1712–1776) South Carolina (1712–1776) Georgia (1732–1776) Other British colonial entities in the contemporary United States Roanoke (1585–1590) Popham (1607–1608) Jamestown (1607–1699) Berkeley Hundred (1619) Plymouth (1620–1686; 1689–1691) Maine (1622–1658) Saint Croix (1625–1650) Carolana (1629–1663) Massachusetts Bay Colony (1629–1686; 1689–1691) Saybrook (1635–1644) New Haven (1638–1664) New England Confederation (1643–1654; 1675– c.

1680 ) Carolina (1663–1712) Rupert's Land (1670–1811) North-Western Territory (1670–1870) East Jersey (1674–1702) West Jersey (1674–1702) Dominion of New England (1686–1689) Indian Reserve (1763–1783) Quebec (1763–1783) East Florida (1763–1783) West Florida (1763–1783) New Ireland (1779–1783; 1814–1815) Columbia District (1810–1846) Red River Colony (1811–1818) Stickeen Territories (1862–1863) Colony of British Columbia (1863–1866) Colony of British Columbia and Vancouver Island (1866–1871) Province of British Columbia (1871–1903) Non-British colonial entities in the contemporary United States Columbian Viceroyalty (1492–1535) New Spain 1521–1821; Spanish Florida , 1565–1763 New Navarre , 1565–1821 Captaincy General of the Philippines , 1565–1898 Captaincy General of Puerto Rico , 1580–1898 Santa Fe de Nuevo México , 1598–1821 Captaincy General of Cuba , 1607–1801 Spanish Saint Croix , 1650–1651 Spanish Texas , 1690–1821 Las Californias , 1767–1804 Spanish Louisiana , 1769–1801 Provincias Internas , 1776–1821 Spanish East Florida , 1783–1821 Spanish West Florida , 1783–1821 Alta California , 1804–1821 New France 1534–1763; French Canada , 1535–1763 French Florida , 1562–1565 Hospitaller Saint Croix , 1651–1665 French Saint Croix , 1665–1733 Illinois Country , 1675–1769 and 1801–1803 French Louisiana , 1682–1763 and 1801–1803 New Netherland (1614–1667) Dutch Virgin Islands (1625–1672) New Sweden (1638–1655) Danish West Indies (1672–1917) Brandenburger Saint Thomas (1685–1754) Krabbeninsel (1689–1693) Scottish Darien Company (1698) Russian America (1799–1867) Related documents Discourse Concerning Western Planting (1584) Mayflower Compact (1620) Mourt's Relation (1622) Of Plymouth Plantation (1630–1651) Fundamental Orders of Connecticut (1638) Quintipartite Deed (1676) Category v t e Former British Empire and current British Overseas Territories Legend Former territory Current territory *Current Commonwealth realm † Current member of the Commonwealth of Nations Europe Akrotiri and Dhekelia since 1960 (before as part of Cyprus ) Corsica 1794–1796 † Cyprus 1878–1960 Gibraltar since 1713 Heligoland 1807–1890 Ionian Islands 1809–1864 Lordship of Ireland 1177–1542 Kingdom of Ireland 1542–1800 ( integrated into the UK ) Free State 1921–1931 † Malta Protectorate 1800–1813 Colony 1813–1964 Minorca 1708–1757, 1763–1782 and 1798–1802 Africa Basutoland ( † Lesotho ) 1868–1966 Bechuanaland ( † Botswana ) 1884–1966 Cameroons 13 1919–1961 Cape Colony 1795–1803 Cape of Good Hope 1806–1910 Central Africa 1891–1907 East Africa 1895–1920 Egypt 1882–1922 † The Gambia 1816–1965 Gold Coast ( † Ghana ) 1874–1957 † Kenya 1920–1963 Lagos 1862–1906 Madeira 1807–1808 † Mauritius 1810–1968 Natal 1856–1910 Niger Coast 1884–1900 † Nigeria 1914–1960 Northern Nigeria 1900–1914 Northern Rhodesia 15 1924–1964 Nyasaland 1891–1964 Orange River 1900–1910 † Seychelles 1903–1976 † Sierra Leone 1792–1961 Somaliland 1884–1960 † South Africa 1910–1931 South-West Africa 12 1915–1931 Southern Rhodesia 14 1923–1965 and 1979–1980 Southern Nigeria 1900–1914 † Swaziland 1893–1968 Sudan 1899–1956 Tanganyika 13 1922–1961 Transvaal 1900–1910 † Uganda 1890–1962 Zanzibar 1890–1963 Zululand 1887–1897 12 Now † Namibia 13 League of Nations mandate . British Cameroons is now part of † Cameroon and Nigeria , while Tanganyika is part of † Tanzania .

14 Self-governing Southern Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence in 1965 (as Rhodesia ) and continued as an unrecognised state until the 1979 Lancaster House Agreement . After recognised independence in 1980, Zimbabwe was a member of the Commonwealth until it withdrew in 2003.

15 Now † Zambia Asia Aden Colony 1839–1967 Afghanistan 1839–1842 Protectorate 1879–1919 Bencoolen 1685–1824 Banka and Billiton 1812–1824 Bengal 1757–1947 Bhutan (protectorate) 1907–1949 Borneo 1874–1963 British Indian Ocean Territory since 1965 (before as part of Mauritius and Seychelles ) 26 Burma 1824–1948 † Brunei 1888–1984 † Ceylon 1795–1948 † Cyprus 1878–1960 Hong Kong 1841–1997 † India 18 1858–1947 Java 1811–1816 Kuwait 1918–1961 Labuan 1848–1946 Malaya 1819–1826 Federated States 1895–1946 Unfederated States 1885–1946 Union 1946–1948 Federation 1948–1957 Malacca 1824–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1957 † Maldives 1796–1965 Manila and Cavite 1762–1764 Mesopotamia 19 1920–1932 Muscat and Oman 1891–1971 North Borneo 1882–1963 Crown Colony 1946–1963 Padang 1781–1784 and 1795–1819 Palestine 19 1923–1948 Penang 1786–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1957 Pulo Condore 1702–1705 Sarawak 1841–1946 Crown Colony 1946–1963 † Singapore 1946–1963 South Vietnam 1945–1946 Straits Settlements 1826–1946 Transjordan 1921–1946 Trucial States 1892–1971 Weihai 1898–1930 18 Now † India , † Pakistan and † Bangladesh 19 League of Nations mandate . Iraq's mandate was not enacted and replaced by the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty 26 Legitimacy of territorial establishment disputed North America Anguilla since 1650 * Antigua 1632–1860 * Antigua and Barbuda 1860–1981 † * Bahamas 1670–1973 † Barbados 1624–1966 Bay Islands 1643–1860 † * Belize 1871–1981 Bermuda since 1619 British Arctic Territories 16th c.–1880 British Columbia 1858–1866 1866–1871 Cape Breton Island 1754–1820 † Dominica 1763–1978 East Florida 1763–1783 † * Grenada 1762–1974 † * Canada Lower 1791–1841 Upper 1791–1841 Province 1841–1867 Dominion 1867–1931 Carolina 1663–1712 Cayman Islands since 1670 Columbia District / Oregon Country 1818–1846 Connecticut 1636–1776 Delaware 1701–1776 East Jersey 1674–1702 Georgia 1733–1776 † * Jamaica 1655–1962 Leeward Islands 1671–1816, 1833–1960 Massachusetts Bay 1629–1691 Province , 1691–1776 Maryland 1632–1776 Montserrat since 1632 Mosquito Coast 1655–1860 Nevis 1628–1983 New Albion 1579 New Brunswick 1784–1867 New England 1686–1689 New Hampshire 1680–1776 New Haven 1637–1662 New Jersey 1665–1674 and 1702–1776 New York 1664–1776 Newfoundland 1907–1949 Newfoundland and Labrador 1583–1907 North Carolina 1712–1776 North-Western Territory 1859–1870 Nova Scotia 1713–1867 Paulet affair 1843 Prince Edward Island 1763–1873 Pennsylvania 1681–1776 Plymouth 1620–1691 Quebec 1763–1791* Queen Charlotte Islands 1853–1863 Rhode Island 1636–1776 Rupert's Land 1670–1870 Saint Croix 1625–1650 Saint Kitts 1623–1983 † * Saint Kitts and Nevis 1882–1983 † * Saint Lucia 1605–1979 † * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 1627–1979 Saybrook 1635–1644 South Carolina 1712–1776 Stickeen 1862–1863 † Trinidad and Tobago 1889–1962 Turks and Caicos Islands since 1799 Vancouver Island 1849–1866 Virgin Islands since 1666 Virginia 1607–1776 West Florida 1763–1783 West Indies Federation 1958–1962 Associated States 1967–1983 West Jersey 1674–1702 Windward Islands 1833–1960 South America Providence Island 1631–1641 Willoughbyland 1651–1667 Saint Andrew and Providence Islands 4 1670–1688 † Guiana 1831–1966 4 Now a department of Colombia Oceania New South Wales 1788–1901 Van Diemen's Land / Tasmania 1803–1901 Auckland Islands 20 1807–1863 New Hebrides 21 1824–1980 Queensland 1824–1901 Swan River / Western Australia 1829–1901 South Australia 1836–1901 Pitcairn Islands since 1838 New Zealand 1841–1907 North Australia 1846–1847 Victoria 1851–1901 † Fiji 1874–1970 Western Pacific Territories 1877–1976 Papua 1884–1902 Rarotonga / Cook Islands 20 1888–1901 Union Islands 20 1889–1948 Gilbert and Ellice Islands 22 1892–1979 † * Solomon Islands 1893–1978 † Tonga 1900–1970 Niue 20 1900–1974 † * Australia 1901–1942 † * New Zealand 1907–1947 † Samoa 1914–1962 † Nauru 1919–1942 and 1945–1968 20 Now part of the † Realm of New Zealand 21 Now † Vanuatu 22 Now † Kiribati and † * Tuvalu Antarctica and the South Atlantic Saint Helena 23 since 1658 Ascension Island 23 since 1815 Tristan da Cunha 23 since 1816 Falkland Islands 5 since 1833 † Australian Antarctic Territory (transferred to the Commonwealth of Australia ) 1841–1933 † Ross Dependency (transferred to the Realm of New Zealand ) 1841–1947 British Antarctic Territory 24 since 1908 South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 25 since 1908 5 Occupied by Argentina during the Falklands War of April–June 1982.

23 Since 2009 part of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ; Ascension Island (1922–) and Tristan da Cunha (1938–) were previously dependencies of Saint Helena.

24 Claimed in 1908; territory formed 1962; overlaps portions of Argentine and Chilean claims, borders not enforced but claim not renounced under the Antarctic Treaty .

25 Claimed in 1908; territory formed 1985 Historical flags of the British Empire Anglosphere culture Category Portal v t e Chartered companies British African Company of Merchants Barbary Company British American Land Company British East Africa Company Canada Company Canterbury Association Company of Merchant Adventurers of London Company of Merchant Adventurers to New Lands Company of Scotland East India Company Eastern Archipelago Company Eastland Company Guinea Company Hudson's Bay Company Levant Company London and Bristol Company Massachusetts Bay Company Muscovy Company New Zealand Company North Borneo Company Providence Island Company Royal African Company Royal British Bank Royal Niger Company South Africa Company Sierra Leone Company Somers Isles Company South Australian Company South Sea Company Spanish Company Venice Company Virginia Company Plymouth Company Virginia Company of London French First French East Indies Company Company of One Hundred Associates Company of the American Islands Company of Habitants French West India Company Compagnie du Sénégal Louis XIV's East India Company John Law's Company French Indies Company Compagnie de Calonne German Brandenburg African Company East Africa Company Emden Company New Guinea Company West African Company Portuguese Cacheu and Cape Verde Company East India Company Grão Pará and Maranhão Company Company of Guinea House of India Mozambique Company Zambezia Company Niassa Company Austrian and Low Countries Brabantsche Compagnie Dutch East India Company Imperial Company of Trieste and Antwerp Imperial Privileged Oriental Company New Netherland Company Noordsche Compagnie Ostend Company Dutch West India Company Compagnie van Verre Compagnie van De Moucheron Veerse Compagnie Spanish Adelantamientos Columbian Adelantamiento Peruvian Adelantamientos' Charters New Andalusia New Castile New León New Toledo Terra Australis Barcelona Trading Company Casa de Contratación Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas Royal Company of the Philippines Welser's Klein-Venedig Charter Swedish Swedish Africa Company Swedish East India Company Swedish Levant Company Swedish South Company Swedish West India Company Danish Danish Asiatic Company Danish East India Company Danish West India Company Royal Greenland Trading Department Russian Russian-American Company Category Portals : England Monarchy North America Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐spvx7
Cached time: 20250818070250
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.177 seconds
Real time usage: 1.345 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10700/1000000
Revision size: 86052/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 311987/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10826/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 261187/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.660/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12334394/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1056.362      1 -total
 29.53%  311.930     51 Template:Cite_book
 20.43%  215.772      1 Template:Reflist
 15.05%  158.979     10 Template:Navbox
 10.81%  114.242      1 Template:Infobox_country
  8.43%   89.052      1 Template:Thirteen_Colonies
  5.41%   57.152      1 Template:Short_description
  3.99%   42.176      1 Template:One_source
  3.97%   41.959      1 Template:British_overseas_territories
  3.94%   41.590      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:197490:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818070250 and revision id 1301127719. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Massachusetts_Bay_Colony&oldid=1301127719 " Categories : Colonial Massachusetts 1620s establishments in the Massachusetts Bay Colony 1628 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies 1691 disestablishments in the Thirteen Colonies Colonial settlements in North America Colonial United States (British) Dominion of New England English colonization of the Americas Former English colonies History of the Thirteen Colonies Politically motivated migrations Pre-statehood history of Massachusetts Christian states States and territories disestablished in 1686 States and territories disestablished in 1691 States and territories established in 1628 States and territories established in 1689 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2023 Use American English from February 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Incomplete lists from August 2008 CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 06:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Massachusetts Bay Colony 31 languages Add topic

