Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By crop Toggle By crop subsection 1.1 Tree plantations 1.2 Sugar 1.3 Rubber 1.4 Oil palm plants 1.5 Orchards 1.6 Arable crops 2 Ecological impact 3 Slave plantation Toggle Slave plantation subsection 3.1 American South 4 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 4.1 Fishing 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Plantation 60 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Farm for cash crops Plantations are farms specializing in cash crops , usually mainly planting a single crop, with perhaps ancillary areas for vegetables for eating and so on.  Plantations, centered on a plantation house , grow crops including cotton , cannabis , tobacco , coffee , tea , cocoa , sugar cane , opium , sisal , oil seeds , oil palms , fruits, rubber trees and forest trees.

Protectionist policies and natural comparative advantage have sometimes contributed to determining where plantations are located.

In modern use, the term usually refers only to large-scale estates. Before about 1860, it was the usual term for a farm of any size in the southern parts of British North America , with, as Noah Webster noted, "farm" becoming the usual term from about Maryland northward. The enslavement of people was the norm in Maryland and states southward. The plantations there were forced-labor farms. The term "plantation" was used in most British colonies but very rarely in the United Kingdom itself in this sense. There it was used mainly for tree plantations , areas artificially planted with trees, whether purely for commercial forestry , or partly for ornamental effect in gardens and parks, when it might also cover plantings of garden shrubs.

[ 1 ] Among the earliest examples of plantations were the latifundia of the Roman Empire , which produced large quantities of grain, wine, and olive oil for export. Plantation agriculture proliferated with the increase in international trade and the development of a worldwide economy that followed the expansion of European colonialism .

By crop [ edit ] Tree plantations [ edit ] Main article: Tree plantation Tree plantations, in the United States often called tree farms , are established for the commercial production of timber or tree products such as palm oil , coffee , or rubber .

Teak and bamboo plantations in India have given good results and an alternative crop solution to farmers of central India, where conventional farming was widespread. But due to the rising input costs of agriculture, many farmers have done teak and bamboo plantations, which require very little water (only during the first two years). Teak and bamboo have legal protection from theft. Bamboo, once planted, gives output for 50 years till flowering occurs. Teak requires 20 years to grow to full maturity and fetch returns.

These may be established for watershed or soil protection. They are established for erosion control, landslide stabilization, and windbreaks. Such plantations are established to foster native species and promote forest regeneration on degraded lands as a tool of environmental restoration .

Sugar cane workers in Puerto Rico , 1941 Sugar [ edit ] Main article: Sugar plantations in the Caribbean Sugar plantations were highly valued in the Caribbean by the British and French colonists in the 17th and 18th centuries, and the use of sugar in Europe rose during this period. Sugarcane is still an important crop in Cuba. Sugar plantations also arose in countries such as Barbados and Cuba because of the natural endowments that they had. These natural endowments included soil conducive to growing sugar and a high marginal product of labor realized through the increasing number of enslaved people.

Rubber [ edit ] Sugarcane plantation in rural Cuba Plantings of the Pará rubber tree ( Hevea brasiliensis ) are usually called plantations.

Oil palm plants [ edit ] Oil palm agriculture rapidly expands across wet tropical regions and is usually developed at a plantation scale.

Orchards [ edit ] Fruit orchards are plantations of woody trees of fruits or nuts.

[ 2 ] Arable crops [ edit ] These include tobacco , sugarcane , pineapple , bell pepper , and cotton , especially in historical usage.

Before the rise of cotton in the American South, indigo and rice were also sometimes called plantation crops.

Harvesting tea in Bogor, West Java Ecological impact [ edit ] Probably the most critical factor a plantation has on the local environment is the site where the plantation is established. In Brazil, coffee plantations would use slash-and-burn agriculture, tearing down rainforests and planting coffee trees that depleted the nutrients in soil.

[ 3 ] Once the soil had been sapped, growers would move on to another place. If a natural forest is cleared for a planted forest, then a reduction in biodiversity and loss of habitat will likely result. In some cases, their establishment may involve draining wetlands to replace mixed hardwoods that formerly predominated with pine species.
If a plantation is established on abandoned agricultural land or highly degraded land, it can increase both habitat and biodiversity. A planted forest can be profitably established on lands that will not support agriculture or suffer from a lack of natural regeneration.

The tree species used in a plantation are also an important factor. Where non-native varieties or species are grown, few native faunas are adapted to exploit these, and further biodiversity loss occurs. However, even non-native tree species may serve as corridors for wildlife and act as a buffer for native forests, reducing edge effect .

Once a plantation is established, managing it becomes an important environmental factor. The most critical aspect of management is the rotation period. Plantations harvested on more extended rotation periods (30 years or more) can provide similar benefits to a naturally regenerated forest managed for wood production on a similar rotation. This is especially true if native species are used. In the case of exotic species, the habitat can be improved significantly if the impact is mitigated by measures such as leaving blocks of native species in the plantation or retaining corridors of natural forest. In Brazil, similar measures are required by government regulation.

Slave plantation [ edit ] Main article: Slave plantation 1913 photo: African-Americans picking cotton on a plantation in the South Plantation owners extensively used enslaved Africans to work on early plantations (such as tobacco, rice, cotton, hemp, and sugar plantations) in the American colonies and the United States, throughout the Caribbean, the Americas, and in European-occupied areas of Africa.

In modern times, the low wages typically paid to plantation workers are the basis of plantation profitability in some areas.

In more recent times, overt slavery has been replaced by para-slavery or slavery-in-kind , including the sharecropping system , and even that has been severely reduced. At its most extreme, workers are in " debt bondage ": they must work to pay off a debt at such punitive interest rates that it may never be paid off. Others work unreasonably long hours and are paid subsistence wages that (in practice) may only be spent in the company store .

In Brazil, a sugarcane plantation was termed an engenho ("engine"), and the 17th-century English usage for organized colonial production was "factory." Such colonial social and economic structures are discussed at Plantation economy .

Sugar workers on plantations in Cuba and elsewhere in the Caribbean lived in company towns known as bateyes .

American South [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Plantation complexes in the Southern United States .

[ edit ] Stratford Hall is a classic example of Southern plantation architecture, built on an H-plan and completed in 1738 near Lerty, Virginia .

The Seward Plantation is a historic Southern plantation-turned-ranch in Independence, Texas .

Plantation complexes were common on agricultural plantations in the Southern United States from the 17th into the 20th century. The complex included everything from the main residence down to the pens for livestock . Until the abolition of slavery , such plantations were generally self-sufficient settlements that relied on the forced labor of enslaved people.

Plantations are an important aspect of the history of the Southern United States , particularly before the American Civil War . The mild temperate climate , plentiful rainfall, and fertile soils of the Southeastern United States allowed the flourishing of large plantations, where large numbers of enslaved Africans were held captive and forced to produce crops to create wealth for a white elite .

[ 4 ] Today, as was also true in the past, there is a wide range of opinion as to what differentiated a plantation from a farm . Typically, the focus of a farm was subsistence agriculture . In contrast, the primary focus of a plantation was the production of cash crops , with enough staple food crops produced to feed the population of the estate and the livestock.

[ 5 ] A common definition of what constituted a plantation is that it typically had 500 to 1,000 acres (2.0 to 4.0 km 2 ) or more of land and produced one or two cash crops for sale.

[ 6 ] Other scholars have attempted to define it by the number of enslaved persons.

[ 7 ] Society and culture [ edit ] Fishing [ edit ] When Newfoundland was colonized by England in 1610, the original colonists were called "planters", and their fishing rooms were known as "fishing plantations". These terms were used well into the 20th century.

The following three plantations are maintained by the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador as provincial heritage sites: Sea-Forest Plantation was a 17th-century fishing plantation established at Cuper's Cove (present-day Cupids ) under a royal charter issued by King James I .

Mockbeggar Plantation is an 18th-century fishing plantation at Bonavista .

Pool Plantation a 17th-century fishing plantation maintained by Sir David Kirke and his heirs at Ferryland . The plantation was destroyed by French invaders in 1696.

Other fishing plantations: Bristol's Hope Plantation, a 17th-century fishing plantation established at Harbour Grace, created by the Bristol Society of Merchant-Adventurers.

Benger Plantation, an 18th-century fishing plantation maintained by James Benger and his heirs at Ferryland. It was built on the site of a Georgia plantation.

Piggeon's Plantation, an 18th-century fishing plantation maintained by Ellias Piggeon at Ferryland.

See also [ edit ] Agriculture and Agronomy portal Trees portal Forest farming List of plantations Plantation complexes in the Southern United States Slavery in the United States Sugar plantations in the Caribbean References [ edit ] Notes ^ "Plantation" in the History of Early American Landscape Design , Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts, National Gallery of Art (Washington DC).

^ "Defining Orchards (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 2025-03-01 .

^ "How Coffee Influenced The Course Of History" .

NPR . Retrieved 2022-12-07 .

^ Guelzo, Allen C.

(2012).

Fateful Lightning: A New History of the Civil War and Reconstruction . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

33– 36.

ISBN 978-0-19-984328-2 .

^ Phillips, Ulrich Bonnell (1929).

Life and Labor in the Old South . Boston: Little, Brown, and Company. p.

338 .

ISBN 978-0-316-70607-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Robert J. Vejnar II (November 6, 2008).

"Plantation Agriculture" .

The Encyclopedia of Alabama . Auburn University . Retrieved April 15, 2011 .

^ Vlach, John Michael (1993).

Back of the Big House, The Architecture of Plantation Slavery . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4412-0 .

Bibliography Aldhous, J. R. & Low, A. J. (1974). The potential of Western Hemlock, Western Red Cedar, Grand Fir, and Noble Fir in Britain.

Forestry Commission Bulletin 49.

Everard, J. E. & Fourt, D. F. (1974). Monterey Pine and Bishop Pine as plantation trees in southern Britain.

Quarterly Journal of Forestry 68: 111–25.

Lewes, Diana , A Year in Jamaica: Memoirs of a girl in Arcadia in 1889 (Eland, 2013) ISBN 978-1906011833 Savill, P. Evans, J. Auclair, D. Falk, J. (1997). Plantation Silviculture in Europe.

Oxford University Press . Oxford.

ISBN 0198549091 Sedjo, R. A. & Botkin, D. (1997). Using forest plantations to spare natural forests.

Environment 39 (10): 15–20, 30 Thompson, Edgar Tristram.

The Plantation edited by Sidney Mintz and George Baca (University of South Carolina Press; 2011) 176 pp. 1933 dissertation Virts, Nancy, "Change in the Plantation System: American South, 1910–1945," Explorations in Economic History, 43 (Jan. 2006), 153–76.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Plantations at Wikimedia Commons Trends in Round wood production Earth Repair Network Advocates plantation forestry.

"Pulping the South" Criticism of industrial plantations.

NGO World Rainforest Movement v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Plantation agriculture in the Southeastern United States The plantation Planter class Ancient planter Plantation economy Plantation complexes in the Southern United States Plantation house Cash crops Cotton King Cotton Hemp Indigo Rice Sugarcane Tobacco Slavery Slavery in the United States Children of the plantation Field slaves House negro Slave breeding Slave health on plantations in the United States Treatment of the enslaved in the United States Slave trade Atlantic Internal Interregional Fugitive slave laws Underground Railroad Other labor Convict leasing Sharecropping Lists of plantations Alabama Florida Leon Georgia Kentucky Louisiana Mississippi North Carolina South Carolina Virginia James River West Virginia v t e Sugar as food commodity List of sugars and sugar products Chemistry Monosaccharide Fructose Galactose Glucose Xylose Disaccharide Lactose Maltose Sucrose Trehalose Added sugar Reducing sugar Sources Sugar beet Sugarcane Agave syrup Birch Coconut Date Honeydew Maple Palm Malt Products Syrups List of syrups Agave syrup Barley malt syrup Brown rice syrup Cheong Maesil-cheong Mogwa-cheong Yuja-cheong Corn syrup High-fructose High-maltose Glucose syrup Golden syrup Honey Inverted sugar syrup Kuromitsu Maple syrup Mizuame Molasses Pine honey Steen's cane syrup Table syrup Treacle Yacón syrup Solid forms Brown Peen tong Candi sugar Chancaca Crystalline fructose Gelling Gula melaka Jaggery Misri Molasses sugar Muscovado Nib Non-centrifugal cane sugar Panela Plantation Reserve Powdered Preserving Sucanat Sugar candy Barley sugar Butterscotch Candy Hard Rock candy Toffee Sugar glass Sugarloaf Wasanbon White Other forms Caramel Cotton candy floss Maple sugar foods Rum Sugar alcohol Sugar confectionery Sugarcane juice Tuzemák Unrefined sweeteners Industry Production Boilery Plantation Casa-grande Refinery Sugar bush Sugarcane mill Engenho Batey Zafra Sugar marketing By region Current Australia Bundaberg Sugar CSR Wilmar Sugar Cuba Caribbean Kenya India Mauritius Philippines Rwanda Sri Lanka South Africa Illovo Sugar Tongaat Hulett Tanzania Uganda United Kingdom British Sugar Tate & Lyle United States Sugar Association U.S. Sugar Program Historical Danish West Indies Fiji Hawaii History 1811 German Coast uprising Amelioration Act 1798 Blackbirding Colonial molasses trade Demerara rebellion of 1823 Holing cane Leith Sugar House Molasses Act Reciprocity Treaty of 1875 Slavery in the British and French Caribbean Sugar Act Sugar Duties Acts 1846 Sugar Intervention Taiwan Sugar Railways Triangular trade Culture Added sugar Crop Over Sugar shack Sugaring Sugar nips Sugar packet Sucrology Sugar people Sugar tit Sugar sculpture Treacle mining Related Australian Aboriginal sweet foods Bagasse Blood sugar level Cane knife Flavored syrup Fruit syrup Date honey Grape Jallab Health effects Nectar Sugar addiction Sugars in wine Residual sugar Sugar substitute Sweetened beverage Sweetener Sweetness Vinasse Research Robert Lustig John Yudkin Pure, White and Deadly (1972) Category Production Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mqd7l
Cached time: 20250812000654
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.517 seconds
Real time usage: 0.685 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1480/1000000
Revision size: 12005/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104030/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 950/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 60302/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.324/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8822418/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  535.168      1 -total
 23.58%  126.177      6 Template:Navbox
 22.10%  118.293      1 Template:Excerpt
 21.81%  116.697      1 Template:Reflist
 19.23%  102.929      1 Template:Forestry
 13.21%   70.706      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.44%   66.578      1 Template:Short_description
  6.84%   36.597      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.87%   31.436      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.75%   25.403      1 Template:Convert Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:142473:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000654 and revision id 1295622509. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plantation&oldid=1295622509 " Categories : Agricultural establishments Forest management Plantations Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 22:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plantation 60 languages Add topic

