Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and academic career 2 Research work 3 Awards 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents David C. Parkes Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British-American computer scientist David C. Parkes Born 1973 (age 51–52) Sidcup, Kent , England Alma mater Lincoln College, Oxford ( MEng ) University of Pennsylvania ( PhD ) Awards Thouron Award (1995) Scientific career Fields Artificial Intelligence , Multi-agent systems , Machine learning , Microeconomics Institutions Harvard University Website www .eecs .harvard .edu /~parkes David C. Parkes (born 1973) is a British-American computer scientist. He is the George F. Colony Professor of Computer Science and Co Faculty Director of the Harvard Data Science Initiative. From 2013–17, he was Area Dean for Computer Science.

[ 1 ] Parkes is a Fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). He was named dean of the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences in 2023.

[ 2 ] Education and academic career [ edit ] Parkes was born in 1973 in Sidcup, Kent. He attended Holmes Chapel Comprehensive, Cheshire, then Lincoln College, Oxford , for an M.Eng. degree in Engineering and Computer Science. Having gained the Thouron Award to the University of Pennsylvania , he completed a Ph.D. in Computer and Information Science in 2001.
Parkes worked as a research intern at the Xerox PARC , Palo Alto Research Center for summer 1997 and the IBM, T.J. Watson Research Center in the summer of 2000. In the spring of 2001 Parkes was lecturer of Operations and Information Management at the Wharton School , University of Pennsylvania.

He became an assistant professor of computer science at Harvard in 2001. He was awarded the John L. Loeb Associate Professor of Natural Sciences in 2005, with tenure as a Gordon McKay Professor of Computer Science in 2008.

[ 3 ] He was later appointed the George F. Colony Professor of Computer Science .

[ 4 ] From September 2008 to January 2009 Parkes was a visiting professor of computer science at the Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne , Switzerland. For Lent and Easter terms 2012 he was a distinguished visiting scholar at Christ's College, Cambridge . He was appointed Harvard Area Dean for Computer Science (2013–17) which involved planning for the expansion of Engineering and Applied Sciences into Allston.

[ 5 ] He is co-director of the Harvard Data Science Initiative 2017 [ 6 ] and currently Co-Chair of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences (FAS) Data Science Masters, and Co-Chair of the Harvard Business Analytics Program.

Parkes was named dean of the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences in 2023.

[ 2 ] Research work [ edit ] Parkes founded the EconCS research group within Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences . Known for his work on incentive engineering for computational systems, [ 7 ] early research contributed to the design of combinatorial auctions, procedures for selling complex packages of goods.

[ 8 ] He has worked on decentralized mechanism design as well as mechanism design in dynamic environments, where resources, participants, and information local to participants vary over time to embrace the real-world uncertainty.

[ 9 ] He served as technical advisor to CombineNet, Inc. (Pittsburgh, PA), 2001–2010, scientific advisor to Nanigans, Inc. (Boston, MA), 2011–2017, and since 2014 has served as acting chief scientist at Nift Networks, Inc. (Boston, MA).

He is a member of the scientific advisory committee of the Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), Amsterdam, the Netherlands, from 2019. Parkes is a council member for the Computing Community Consortium of the Computing Research Association since 2018. He chaired the ACM Special Interest Group on Electronic Commerce between 2011 and 2015.

He is also currently associate editor of ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation , since 2011; INFORMS Journal on Computing , since 2009; and Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent System s , since 2007.

Awards [ edit ] Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Fellow, 2018 [ 10 ] ACM SIGAI Autonomous Agents Research Award, 2017 [ 11 ] Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Fellow, 2014 Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship , 2005-2007 Thouron Award , 1995 References [ edit ] ^ "David C. Parkes" .

Harvard.edu .

^ a b "Q&A with Dean Parkes" (Interview). Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering. 17 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 March 2024 .

^ "David Parkes named professor of computer science" .

Harvard Gazette . 22 July 2008.

^ "David C. Parkes awarded Harvard College Professorship" .

Harvard University .

^ "Harry R. Lewis Named Interim Engineering Dean [Updated]" .

Harvard Magazine . 2 December 2014.

^ "Co-directors of newly launched Harvard Data Science Initiative discuss new era" .

Harvard Gazette . 28 March 2017.

^ "David Parkes and Salil Vadhan named 2018 ACM Fellows" .

Harvard.edu .

^ "Inside electronic commerce" .

Harvard Gazette . 4 March 2010.

^ "How artificial intelligence is changing economic theory" .

Phys.org .

^ "2018 ACM Fellows Honored for Pivotal Achievements that Underpin the Digital Age" .

Acm.org .

^ "The ACM/SIGAI Autonomous Agents Research Award" .

AA Award - SIGAI .

External links [ edit ] David C. Parkes publications indexed by Google Scholar v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Academics ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_C._Parkes&oldid=1298337666 " Categories : Living people Sloan Research Fellows Alumni of Lincoln College, Oxford University of Pennsylvania alumni People from Sidcup British emigrants to the United States Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences faculty 1973 births American academic journal editors Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence American university and college faculty deans American computer scientists British computer scientists British academic journal editors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Date of birth not in Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David C. Parkes Add languages Add topic

