Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice List of stoae Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stoas , in the context of ancient Greek architecture , are covered walkways or porticos, commonly for public usage. The following is a list of Greek and Hellenistic stoas sorted alphabetically by the stoa's city or location, with the name appearing in bold text, followed by a short description and/or location of the stoa: Contents: Top 0–9 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A [ edit ] Alexandria [ edit ] Doric Stoa : monumental Doric stoa built at a right angle to the ancient main street along the ancient street R4, dated to the Ptolemaic period [ 1 ] Assos [ edit ] North Stoa (Lower Story): Two-storied Doric on the north side of the agora.

South Stoa : Two-aisled on the south side of the agora.

Athens [ edit ] Stoa of Attalos Middle Stoa Doric Stoa : near Theater of Dionysos in the Sanctuary of Dionysos Eleuthereus on the south slope of the Acropolis, sharing its north wall with the back wall of the stage building of the Theater of Dionysos .

East stoa a small stoa in the south-east quadrant of the Agora.

Middle Stoa :  approximately in the middle of the Agora and dividing it into north and south areas.

South Stoa I (of Athens) :  on the south side of the Agora, located between the Heliaia and the Enneakrounos .

South Stoa II : on the southern edge of the Agora, on the approximate location of the South Stoa I, between the Heliaia, and the Middle Stoa.

Southeast Stoa : near Library of Pantainos and the Eleusinion .

Stoa Amphiaraion :  on the east side of the Sanctuary of Amphiaraios , southeast of the Theater.

Stoa Basileios ( Royal Stoa ): in the northeast corner of the Agora.

Stoa of Hermes located to the north of the Agora.

Stoa of Artemis Brauronia : Stoa with wings; the south boundary of the Sanctuary of Artemis Brauronia, on the Acropolis , southeast of the Propylaia , west of the Chalkotheke.

Stoa of Attalos : Two-storied on the eastern side of the Agora.

Stoa of Zeus ( Eleutherios ): Two-aisled in the northwest corner of the Agora.

Stoa Poikile ( Painted Porch ): on the north side of the Ancient Agora of Athens , the stoa from which Stoicism takes its name Street Stoa : between Library of Pantainos and Roman Agora .

D [ edit ] Delos [ edit ] Stoa of Philip, Delos South Stoa I : south of the Sanctuary of Apollo and west of the Oblique Stoa and the L-shaped Stoa of the Agora of the Delians.

Stoa of Philip : Two-part south of the Sanctuary of Apollo, between the South Stoa and the harbour.

Oblique Stoa :  south of the Sanctuary of Apollo, south of the L-shaped Stoa of the Agora of the Delians.

Stoa of Antigonos : Two-aisled the north boundary of the Sanctuary of Apollo.

L-shaped Stoa of the Agora of the Delians : Stoa creating north and east sides of a court, south of the Sanctuary of Apollo.

Stoa of the Naxians : L-shaped forming the southwest corner of the Sanctuary of Apollo.

L-Shaped Stoa : L-shaped bounded the Sanctuary of Artemis ( Artemision ) on the eastern side of the Sanctuary of Apollo.

Delphi [ edit ] Stoa of the Athenians, Delphi Stoa of the Athenians :  in the Sanctuary of Apollo, south of the Apollo Temple platform, with the southern, polygonal wall of the platform forming the north wall of the stoa.

Stoa SD 108 :  At the south-East entrance of the Sanctuary of Apollo, on the north side of the so-called "Sacred Way". Offering from the Arcadians.

West Stoa :  projecting from the west wall of the Sanctuary of Apollo, southwest of the Theater .

Stoa of Attalos I :  in the Sanctuary of Apollo, east of theater and northeast of the Temple of Apollo , intersecting and projecting east from the peribolos wall.

B [ edit ] Brauron [ edit ] Stoa at Artemision : Three-sided surrounding the northern end of the Sanctuary of Artemis.

E [ edit ] Eleusis [ edit ] Stoa of the Great Forecourt : L-shaped stoa with rooms; northeast of the Greater Propylon, outside the Sanctuary of Demeter and Kore, bounding east and west sides of a court.

Epidauros [ edit ] Stoa of Apollo Maleatas :  on the north side of the Sanctuary of Apollo Maleatas.

L [ edit ] Lindos [ edit ] Lindos stoa Acropolis of Lindos Stoa : Hellenistic stoa.

O [ edit ] Olympia [ edit ] South Stoa : T-shaped the southern boundary of the Sanctuary of Zeus ( Altis ).

Echo Hall (Painted Stoa): on the east side of the Sanctuary of Zeus (Altis), forming an eastern boundary to the central sanctuary.

P [ edit ] Philippi [ edit ] Stoa of Philippi Stoa of Philippi : Roman-era stoa.

Priene [ edit ] Sacred Stoa : Two-aisled stoa located in the north of the agora in the center of the city.

Stoa of Athena Sanctuary : One-aisled stoa facing south, forming southern extremity of Sanctuary of Athena Polias.

S [ edit ] Samos [ edit ] South Stoa : South Stoa, SW of the main altar in Sanctuary of Hera , Samos.

North West Stoa : North West Stoa, NW of main altar and W of N gate at Sanctuary of Hera.

Sounion [ edit ] West Hall : along western wall of the Sanctuary of Poseidon , at a right angle and adjacent to the North Hall.

Sounion , North Hall : along the northern wall of the Sanctuary of Poseidon at the western end.

T [ edit ] Thermon [ edit ] Middle Stoa :  in the Sanctuary of Apollo Thermios, running north–south between the Temple of Apollo and the South Stoa.

South Stoa :  on the south side of the Sanctuary of Apollo Thermios, parallel to the southern sanctuary wall.

East Stoa :  at the southeast corner of the Sanctuary of Apollo Thermios.

References [ edit ] ^ McKenzie, Judith (2007).

The architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 B.C. to A.D. 700 . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-11555-0 .

OCLC 63680003 .

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lflb6
Cached time: 20250812035029
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, no‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.290 seconds
Real time usage: 0.411 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1475/1000000
Revision size: 6772/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 142300/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 703/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 24982/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.121/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4688221/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  258.191      1 -total
 33.96%   87.682      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 33.03%   85.274      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 28.32%   73.132      1 Template:Reflist
 24.70%   63.768      1 Template:Cite_book
 24.34%   62.846      1 Template:Short_description
 13.00%   33.569      2 Template:Pagetype
 12.80%   33.052      1 Template:Compact_ToC
 11.39%   29.419     10 Template:Navbox
  9.79%   25.289      1 Template:Flatlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4313210:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812035029 and revision id 1301114964. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_stoae&oldid=1301114964 " Categories : Architecture lists Lists of buildings and structures in Greece Ancient Greece-related lists Stoas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search List of stoae Add languages Add topic

