Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Member states 3 Institutions and aims 4 Priority areas of cooperation 5 Financing 6 Euronest Parliamentary Assembly Toggle Euronest Parliamentary Assembly subsection 6.1 Prospect of EU membership 7 EU-Ukraine bilateral relations 8 Relationship with Russia 9 Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum 10 Summits 11 Criticism 12 See also 13 References 14 External links 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Academic policy papers 15.2 Books 15.3 Journal articles Toggle the table of contents Eastern Partnership 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gagauz Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia EU project with Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine Eastern Partnership European Union Non-EU members of the Eastern Partnership Suspended members Formation 7 May 2009 ; 16 years ago ( 2009-05-07 ) Founded at Prague Type European External Action Service initiative Headquarters Brussels , Belgium Location Europe Membership European Union Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus (suspended) Georgia Moldova Ukraine Website Website The Eastern Partnership ( EaP ) is a joint initiative of the European Union , together with its member states, and six Eastern European countries. The EaP framework governs the EU's relationship with the post-Soviet states of Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Georgia , Moldova , and Ukraine .

[ 1 ] The EaP is intended to provide a forum for discussions regarding trade, economic strategy, travel agreements, and other issues between the EU and its Eastern European neighbours. It also aims at building a common area of shared values of democracy, prosperity, stability, and increased cooperation.

[ 1 ] The project was initiated by Poland and a subsequent proposal was prepared in co-operation with Sweden.

[ 2 ] It was presented by the foreign ministers of Poland and Sweden at the EU's General Affairs and External Relations Council in Brussels on 26 May 2008.

[ 3 ] The Eastern Partnership was inaugurated by the EU in Prague , Czech Republic on 7 May 2009.

[ 4 ] The first meeting of foreign ministers in the framework of the Eastern Partnership was held on 8 December 2009 in Brussels.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] The Eastern Partnership (EaP) was established as a specific Eastern dimension of the European Neighbourhood Policy , which contains both a bilateral and multilateral track.

[ 6 ] The Eastern Partnership complements the Northern Dimension and the Union for the Mediterranean by providing an institutionalised forum for discussing visa agreements, free trade deals, and strategic partnership agreements with the EU's eastern neighbours, while avoiding the controversial topic of accession to the European Union . Its geographical scope consists of Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Georgia , Moldova , and Ukraine .

[ 7 ] Unlike the Union for the Mediterranean, the Eastern Partnership does not have its own secretariat, but is controlled directly by the European Commission .

[ 8 ] 4th Eastern Partnership Summit, Riga , May 2015 In May 2008, Poland and Sweden put forward a joint proposal for an Eastern Partnership with Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, with Russia and Belarus participating in some aspects. Eventually, Belarus joined the initiative as a full member, while Russia does not participate at all. The Polish foreign minister Radosław Sikorski said " We all know the EU has enlargement fatigue. We have to use this time to prepare as much as possible so that when the fatigue passes, membership becomes something natural " [ 9 ] It was discussed at the European Council on 19 and 20 June 2008, along with the Union for the Mediterranean.

[ 10 ] The Czech Republic endorsed the proposal completely, while Bulgaria and Romania were cautious, fearing that the Black Sea Forum for Partnership and Dialogue and the Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation could be undermined. Meanwhile, Germany, France, and others were not happy with the possibility that the Eastern Partnership could be seen as a stepping stone to membership (especially for Ukraine ), while Poland and other Eastern states have explicitly welcomed this effect.

[ 11 ] The Eastern Partnership was officially launched in May 2009 when the Czech Republic invited the leaders of the six members of the initiative. Meanwhile, Germany attended the summit to signal their alarm at the economic situation in the East. Russia accused the EU of trying to carve out a new sphere of influence , which the EU denied, stating that they were "responding to the demands of these countries...and the economic reality is that most of their trade is done with the EU".

[ 12 ] Member states [ edit ] The Eastern Partnership consists of the following 27 EU member states and six Eastern European post-Soviet states : EU member states Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Non-EU members Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus (suspended) Georgia Moldova Ukraine In addition, the above members, except Belarus, further participate in the Council of Europe and the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly in which these states forge closer political and economic ties with the European Union.

The participation of Belarus in the Eastern Partnership and their President Lukashenko, who has been described as authoritarian, at a summit in 2009 was the subject of debate.

[ 13 ] On 30 September 2011 Belarus seemingly withdrew from the initiative because of: "unprecedented discrimination" and a "substitution" of the principles on which it was built two years ago.

[ 14 ] However three days later Foreign Minister of Belarus Sergei Martynov refuted this.

[ 15 ] On 28 June 2021, the Belarusian Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed that Belarus would suspend its membership in the Eastern Partnership.

[ 16 ] Institutions and aims [ edit ] Warsaw Summit 2011 The Eastern Partnership is a forum aiming to improve the political and economic trade-relations of the six Post-Soviet states of "strategic importance" – Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Georgia , Moldova , Ukraine with the European Union .

[ 13 ] Promotion of human rights and rule of law in former Soviet states has been reported to form the "core" of the policy of the Eastern Partnership.

[ 17 ] The EU draft of the EaP states that: "Shared values including democracy, the rule of law , and respect for human rights will be at its core, as well as the principles of market economy , sustainable development and good governance ." The Partnership is to provide the foundation for new Association Agreements between the EU and those partners who have made sufficient progress towards the principles and values mentioned. Apart from values, the declaration says the region is of "strategic importance" and the EU has an "interest in developing an increasingly close relationship with its Eastern partners..." [ 18 ] The inclusion of Belarus prompts the question whether values or geopolitics are paramount in the initiative. EU diplomats agree that the country's authoritarian president, Alexander Lukashenko , has done little to merit involvement in the policy at this stage. But the EU fears Russia will strengthen its grip on Minsk if it is left out.

[ 19 ] There are plans to model the concept on the Stabilisation and Association Process used by the EU in the Balkans , including a possible free trade area encompassing the countries in the region, similar to BAFTA or CEFTA . A future membership perspective is not ruled out, either.

[ 20 ] Priority areas of cooperation [ edit ] The key focus of the EU engagement within the Eastern Partnership includes the achievement of tangible results for the citizens in the partner countries. The pursuit of tangible outcomes has resulted in 20 deliverables of Eastern Partnership cooperation for 2020.

[ 1 ] They were developed in close consultation with the stakeholders, and include the following: Modernised transport connections through the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T); Increased political ownership of energy efficiency; Easier access to finance for SMEs, including to lending in local currency; Establishing ways of reducing mobile telephony roaming tariffs between partners by conducting a study; Increased trade opportunities; Greater outreach to grassroots Civil Society Organizations; and, More support for youth.

[ 1 ] A joint working document "Eastern Partnership – focusing on key priorities and deliverables" drafted by the Commission and EEAS details the objectives across the five priority areas of cooperation agreed at the Eastern Partnership Summit in Riga in 2015: [ 21 ] Stronger governance: Strengthening institutions and good governance Stronger economy: Economic development and market opportunities Better connectivity: Connectivity, energy efficiency, environment and climate change Stronger society: Mobility and people-to-people contacts Involvement of broader society, gender and communication [ 1 ] Financing [ edit ] The EC earmarked €600 million for the six partner countries for the period 2010–13 as part of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , constituting about a quarter of the total funding available to the Eastern Partnership countries in that period. The programme had three main purposes: Comprehensive Institution Building programmes, aimed at supporting reforms (approximately €175 million); Pilot regional development programmes, aimed at addressing regional economic and social disparities (approximately €75 million); and Implementation of the Eastern Partnership, focusing on democracy, governance and stability, economic integration and convergence with EU policies, energy security, and contacts between people with the aim of bringing the partners closer to the EU (approximately €350 million).

[ 22 ] In December 2010, the European Investment Bank established the ″Eastern Partnership Technical Assistance Trust Fund″ (EPTATF).

[ 23 ] It includes the ″Eastern Partnership Internship Programme″ which is open to students who are nationals of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, or Ukraine.

[ 24 ] In 2021, a new aid package was given to the EU's six Eastern Partnership countries, where Ukraine received €1.9 billion, Azerbaijan €140 million, and Armenia €2.6 billion. In particular, the aid package to Armenia was 62 percent more than previously promised.

[ 25 ] Euronest Parliamentary Assembly [ edit ] Main article: Euronest Parliamentary Assembly Established in 2011 as a component of the Eastern Partnership, the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly is the inter-parliamentary forum in which members of the European Parliament and the Eastern Partnership participate and forge closer political and economic ties with the EU. The Assembly gathers once a year, meeting locations alternate between an Eastern Partnership country and one of the European Parliament places of work (Brussels, Luxembourg or Strasbourg).

Countries that could join the European Union Current members Candidate countries Applicant / potential candidate countries Membership possible Membership not possible Prospect of EU membership [ edit ] Main article: Euronest Parliamentary Assembly § EU membership perspective See also: Accession of Ukraine to the European Union , Accession of Moldova to the European Union , Accession of Georgia to the European Union , and Accession of Armenia to the European Union In December 2019, following the eighth Euronest Parliamentary Assembly, a resolution was passed by all members outlining various EU integration goals to be achieved by 2030. The resolution affirms that the process of EU enlargement is open to Eastern Partnership member states and that future enlargement of the EU will be mutually beneficial for both the EU and Eastern Partnership members.

[ 26 ] In June 2020, European lawmakers called for the creation of a common economic space between the EU and the six members of the Eastern Partnership, as part of a process of gradual integration into the EU. The European Parliament passed the motion which was supported by 507 MEPs , with 119 voting against and 37 abstaining. The motion also confirmed that the Eastern Partnership policy can facilitate a process of gradual integration into the EU.

[ 27 ] EU-Ukraine bilateral relations [ edit ] Pro-EU demonstration on 27 November 2013 in Kyiv Main article: Ukraine–European Union relations Ukraine is one of six post-Soviet nations to be invited to co-operate with the EU within the new multilateral framework that the Eastern partnership is expected to establish. However, Kyiv pointed out that it remains pessimistic about the "added value" of this initiative. Indeed, Ukraine and the EU have already started the negotiations on new, enhanced political and free-trade agreements (Association and Free-Trade Agreements). Also, there has been some progress in liberalising the visa regime despite persistent problems in the EU Member States' visa approach towards Ukrainians.

[ citation needed ] That is why Ukraine has a specific view of the Eastern Partnership Project. According to the Ukrainian presidency, it should correspond, in case of his country, to the strategic foreign policy objective, i.e. the integration with the EU.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Yet, the Eastern Partnership documents (the European Council Declaration of May 2009) [ 30 ] do not confirm such priorities as political and economic integration or lifting visas.

Ukraine has expressed enthusiasm about the project. Ukraine deputy premier Hryhoriy Nemyria said that the project is the way to modernise the country and that they welcome the Eastern Partnership policy, because it uses 'de facto' the same instruments as for EU candidates .

[ 31 ] Under the Eastern Partnership, Poland and Ukraine have reached a new agreement replacing visas with simplified permits for Ukrainians residing within 30 km of the border. Up to 1.5 million people may benefit from this agreement which took effect on 1 July 2009.

[ 32 ] Relationship with Russia [ edit ] See also: Russia–European Union relations Russia has expressed strong concerns over the Eastern Partnership, [ 33 ] seeing it as an attempt to expand the European Union 's " sphere of influence ". Russia has also expressed concerns that the EU is putting undue pressure on Belarus [ 34 ] by suggesting it might be marginalised if it follows Russia in recognising the independence of the Georgian breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . "Is this promoting democracy or is it blackmail? It's about pulling countries from the positions they want to take as sovereign states", Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has stated.

Sweden , the co-author of the Eastern Partnership project together with Poland , rejected Mr Lavrov's position as "completely unacceptable". "The Eastern Partnership is not about spheres of influence . The difference is that these countries themselves opted to join", Swedish foreign minister Carl Bildt said at the Brussels Forum. The EU's position on Georgia is not 'blackmail' but "is about upholding the principles of the EU and international law , which Russia should also be respecting", he added.

[ 31 ] In November 2009, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev dismissed the Eastern Partnership as useless: "Frankly speaking, I don't see any special use (in the program) and all the participants of this partnership are confirming this to me". However a few days later Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said that Russia does not rule out joining the EU's Eastern Partnership programme.

[ 35 ] Russia maintained its opposition towards the EPP. For instance, after the Warsaw Summit 2011 of the EPP, Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin stated that due to the economic crisis in the EU, Ukraine would probably not join the EU. Instead of joining the EU, Putin offered a Russia – Ukraine relationship which he said would provide a more competitive and productive economic process.

[ 36 ] In May 2015, President of the European Council Donald Tusk stated that Russia was "[compensating for] its shortcomings by destructive, aggressive and bullying tactics against its neighbours" while German Chancellor Angela Merkel said that "the EU makes a crystal clear difference with Russia. We accept that the different Eastern Partnership nations can go their own way and we accept these different ways." [ 37 ] Finnish Prime Minister Alexander Stubb stated that "It is the prerogative and right of every independent and sovereign state to choose which club it wants to belong to." [ 38 ] Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum [ edit ] Founded during the Prague Eastern Partnership Summit in 2009, the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum (EaP CSF) is an integral part of the Eastern Partnership program and creates a significant and institutional platform for civil society organisations to monitor and discuss the developments regarding democracy building and human rights development in the six partnership countries.

[ 39 ] The EaP CSF consists of six national platforms and five thematic working groups, which are represented by an annually elected Steering Committee composed of 13 members. The Secretariat of the EaP CSF is based in Brussels. The EaP CSF meets annually to discuss the latest developments and to set their working programme. The first meeting took place in Brussels in 2009. The last EaP CSF Civil Society Summit meeting – which continued the tradition of its preceding 16 Annual Assemblies - took place in Vienna in November 2024. During the meeting, 90 civil society organizations from the EaP countries and the EU adopted a resolution detailing key recommendations on the future of the EaP region and policy.

[ 40 ] The EaP CSF aims to support the effective participation of civil society from EaP and EU countries in the process of planning, monitoring and implementing the Eastern Partnership policy. It maintains a dialogue with EU and EaP decision makers to democratically transform the EaP countries and guarantee their integration into the EU.

In 2011, the EaP CSF launched the Eastern Partnership Index, a data-driven monitoring tool used to inform policy-making.

[ 41 ] It tracks, on a biennial scale, the reform journey of the six Eastern Partnership countries towards sustainable democratic development and European integration.

The EaP CSF has actively advocated for greater political and financial support to civil society in the Eastern partnership, in light of their role in supporting democratization and rule of law reforms. It has also actively campaigned for an EU response to the human rights situation in Azerbaijan and Belarus.

[ 42 ] It also monitors the progress on the Moldovan, Ukrainian and Georgian candidacies to the EU.

As of January 2025, the EaP CSF counts over 1,200 member organizations and remains an official interlocutor of EU institutions and EaP partner countries in the EaP architecture. A similar set up is unique for the EaP region, given that no similar platform exists for the Western Balkans or the Southern Neighbourhood. The EaP CSF provides a framework for transmitting European values and norms. As a result, some scholars have attributed a socialization function to the Forum, whereby norms sponsored by the European Union are internalized by participating civil society organizations.

Summits [ edit ] 1st Eastern Partnership Summit in Prague in May 2009 [ 43 ] 2nd Eastern Partnership Summit in Warsaw in September 2011 [ 44 ] 3rd Eastern Partnership Summit in Vilnius in November 2013 [ 45 ] [ 46 ] 4th Eastern Partnership Summit in Riga in May 2015 [ 47 ] 5th Eastern Partnership Summit in Brussels in November 2017 [ 48 ] 6th Eastern Partnership Summit in Brussels in December 2021 [ 49 ] Criticism [ edit ] Although the Eastern Partnership was inaugurated on 7 May 2009, academic research critically analysing the policy became available by early 2010 with the findings from a UK research project, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council , examining the EU's relations with three Eastern Partnership member states, Belarus , Ukraine , and Moldova notes both conceptual and empirical dilemmas.

[ 50 ] First, conceptually the EU has limited uniform awareness of what it is trying to promote in its eastern neighbourhood under the aegis of 'shared values', 'collective norms' and 'joint ownership'. Secondly, empirically, the EU seems to favour a 'top-down' governance approach (based on rule/norm transfer and conditionality) in its relations with outsiders, which is clearly at odds with a voluntary idea of 'partnership', and explicitly limits the input of 'the other' in the process of reform.

[ 51 ] See also [ edit ] European Union portal Europe portal Politics portal Association Trio Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Community of Democratic Choice Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area Eastern European Group Euromaidan Euronest Parliamentary Assembly Eurosphere Eurasian Economic Union European integration Eurovoc EU Strategy for the South Caucasus Greater Europe INOGATE Politics of Europe Potential enlargement of the European Union References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Eastern Partnership - EEAS - European External Action Service - European Commission" .

EEAS - European External Action Service . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

Content is copied from this source, which is (c) European Union, 1995-2018. Reuse is authorised, provided the source is acknowledged.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 September 2012 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Poland takes on Russia with 'Eastern Partnership' proposal , The Daily Telegraph , 2008-05-25 ^ EU pact challenges Russian influence in the east , Guardian.co.uk , 2009-05-07 ^ "Eastern Partnership implementation well on track" . Europa.eu. 8 December 2009.

^ "EEAS - European External Action Service - European Commission" .

EEAS - European External Action Service . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ EU might get new Eastern Partnership , Barents Observer , 2008-05-22 ^ " Poland and Sweden to pitch 'Eastern Partnership' idea ", EUObserver , 2008-05-22 ^ " 'Eastern Partnership' could lead to enlargement, Poland says" .

EU Observer . 27 May 2008.

^ Poland, Sweden defend 'Eastern initiative' Archived 27 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , EurActive.com , 2008-05-26 ^ " 'Eastern Partnership' could lead to enlargement, Poland says ", EU Observer , 2008-05-27 ^ " 'EU reaches out to troubled East ", BBC News , 2009-05-07 ^ a b EU assigns funds and staff to 'Eastern Partnership' , EU Observer , 2009-03-20 ^ Belarus quits EU's Eastern Partnership initiative Archived 2 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Eur Activ , 2011-10-30 ^ Belarus still Participating in "Eastern Partnership," FM Archived 15 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine , [1] , 2011-11-03 ^ https://en.armradio.am/2021/06/28/belarus-suspends-participation-in-eastern-partnership-initiative/ Belarus suspends participation in Eastern Partnership initiative ^ Karina SHYROKYKH (December 2017).

"Effects and side effects of European Union assistance on the former Soviet republics" .

Democratization .

24 (4): 651– 669.

doi : 10.1080/13510347.2016.1204539 .

S2CID 148150487 .

^ Values to form core of EU 'Eastern Partnership' , EU Observer , 2009-03-18 ^ Karina SHYROKYKH (June 2021).

"Human rights sanctions and the role of black knights: Evidence from the EU's post-Soviet neighbours" .

Journal of European Integration .

44 (3): 429– 449.

doi : 10.1080/07036337.2021.1908278 .

S2CID 237828279 .

^ Balkans model to underpin EU's 'Eastern Partnership' , EU Observer , 2008-09-18 ^ "EAP Generic Factsheet" (PDF) .

Eeas.europa.eu . Retrieved 10 December 2018 .

^ "Vademecum on Financing in the Frame of the Eastern Partnership" (PDF) .

Eeas.europa.eu . Retrieved 4 January 2011 .

^ "Trust fund" .

Eib.org . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "EPTATF Internships" .

Eib.org . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Mejlumyan, Ani (15 July 2021).

"Armenia gets boost from EU | Eurasianet" .

DiasporArm.org . Archived from the original on 9 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ "The future of the Trio Plus Strategy 2030: building a future of Eastern Partnership" (PDF) .

^ "European Lawmakers Call For Eastern Partners' Greater Integration" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 20 June 2020.

^ "Офіційне інтернет-представництво Президента України" .

Офіційне інтернет-представництво Президента України . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Karina SHYROKYKH (June 2018).

"The Evolution of the Foreign Policy of Ukraine: External Actors and Domestic Factors" .

Europe-Asia Studies .

70 (5): 832– 850.

doi : 10.1080/09668136.2018.1479734 .

S2CID 158408883 .

^ "Joint Declaration of the Prague Eastern Partnership Summit" (PDF) .

Consilium.europa.eu . Prague. 7 May 2009 . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ a b EU expanding its 'sphere of influence,' Russia says , EU Observer , 2009-03-21 ^ "Sikorski: umowa o małym ruchu granicznym od 1 lipca" .

Gazeta Wyborcza . 17 June 2009 . Retrieved 17 June 2009 .

^ " Playing East against West: The success of the Eastern Partnership depends on Ukraine ".

The Economist . 23 November 2013.

^ Korosteleva, E.A., "The Limits of the EU Governance: Belarus ' Response to the European Neighbourhood Policy", Contemporary Politics, Vol. 15(2), June 2009, pp. 229–45 ^ "Lavrov: Russia could join EU Eastern Partnership" .

Hurriyet . 25 November 2009.

^ "Польша: Увидев процветающую в ЕС Украину, Россия сама попросит об экономической интеграции с нами" .

Regnum.ru . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Ritter, Karl; Casert, Raf (21 May 2015).

"EU seeks to keep partnership with ex-Soviet nations on track" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015 . Retrieved 22 May 2015 .

^ Ritter, Karl; Casert, Raf (22 May 2015).

"EU embrace of eastern partners turns lukewarm" . Associated Press.

^ "Eastern Partnership – Civil Society Forum" .

European Commission website . Archived from the original on 12 July 2009.

^ "Resolution of the 1st EaP CSF Civil Society Summit" .

eap-csf.eu .

^ "Eastern Partnership Index" .

eap-csf.eu .

^ "Statement: EaPCSF condemns arrests of internationally respected civil society leaders in Azerbaijan" .

Eap-csf.eu . Archived from the original on 10 July 2015.

^ "Press release - Brussels, 7 May 2009 Joint Declaration of the Prague Eastern Partnership Summit, Prague" .

European Commission . 7 May 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2017 .

^ "Press release - José Manuel Durão Barroso President of the European Commission Statement by President Barroso following the Eastern Partnership Summit Eastern Partnership Summit Warsaw" .

European Commission . 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 11 June 2017 .

^ "European Commission - PRESS RELEASES - Press release - Third Eastern Partnership summit, Vilnius 28-29 November 2013" .

Europa.eu . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "Joint Declaration of the Eastern Partnership Summit" (PDF) .

Consilium.europa.eu . Vilnius. November 2013 . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "Eastern Partnership summit, Riga, 21-22/05/2015 - Consilium" .

Consilium.europa.eu . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "Eastern Partnership summit, 24/11/2017 - Consilium" .

Consilium.europa.eu . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "Eastern Partnership: a renewed agenda for recovery, resilience and reform underpinned by an Economic and Investment plan" .

europa.eu . Retrieved 6 December 2021 .

^ "Moldova most EU-friendly Eastern country, survey reveals" .

Euractive.com . 14 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 22 January 2013 . Retrieved 15 June 2010 .

^ "Europeanizing or Securitizing the 'outsiders'? Assessing the EU's partnership-building approach with Eastern Europe" .

Esrcsocietytoday.ac.uk . 10 October 2009. Archived from the original on 10 October 2009 . Retrieved 6 April 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eastern Partnership .

Eastern Partnership European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations - Eastern Partnership Eastern Partnership on Twitter EU Neighbourhood Info Centre EU Neighbourhood Library European External Action Service: Eastern Partnership (europa.eu) Eastbook.eu – Portal on Eastern Partnership: Eastbook.eu [ usurped ] Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum: [2] (eap-csf.eu) Eastern Partnership Community: Eastern Partnership Community (easternpartnership.org) Europeanizing or Securitizing the 'outsiders'? Assessing the EU's partnership-building approach with Eastern Europe Archived 20 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine The Eastern Partnership – an ambitious new chapter in the EU's relations with its Eastern neighbours (europa.eu, 3 December 2008) European Council – Conclusions (Declaration in annex II) (europa.eu, 19–20 March 2009) Eastern Partnership Summit Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine (eu2009.cz, 7 May 2009) Joint Declaration of the Eastern Partnership Summit (europa.eu, 7 May 2009) Conference Eastern Partnership: Towards Civil Society Forum [ permanent dead link ] Eastern Partnership: The Opening Report – submitted by the Polish Institute of International Affairs (www.pism.pl, April 2009) Marcin Łapczyński: The European Union's Eastern Partnership: Chances and Perspectives – submitted by the Caucasian Review of International Affairs (www.cria-online.org, Spring 2009) Schäffer, Sebastian; Tolksdorf, Dominik (April 2009).

"The Eastern Partnership – 'ENP plus' for Europe's Eastern neighbors" .

Centrum für angewandte Politikforschung .

Sebastian Schäffer und Dominik Tolksdorf: „The EU member states and the Eastern Neighbourhood – From composite to consistent EU foreign policy?" , CAP Policy Analysis , August 2009.

"Polish-Swedish Proposal: Eastern Partnership" , June 2008.

Belarus Engages Ukraine, Moldova, Improves Ties With EU And US – Foreign Policy Digest Archived 21 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine Central And Eastern European Dimension Of Belarusian Diplomacy – Belarus Foreign Policy Digest Archived 3 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Academic policy papers [ edit ] Moldova's Values Survey: Widening a European Dialogue in Moldova, Global Europe Centre, University of Kent, January 2014 Visegrad 4 the Eastern Partnership: Towards the Vilnius Summit, Research Center of the Slovak Foreign Policy Association, Bratislava, October 2013 Belarus and the Eastern Partnership: a National Values SurveyGlobal Europe Centre, University of Kent, October 2013 Building a Stronger Eastern Partnership: Towards an EaP 2.0, Global Europe Centre, University of Kent, September 2013 The EEAS and the Eastern Partnership: Let the blame game stop, Centre for European Policy Studies, September 2012 German Foreign Policy and Eastern Partnership: Position Paper of the Eastern Partnership Task Force, German Council on Foreign Relations, February 2012 Archived 16 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine Books [ edit ] Korosteleva, E.A., Natorski, M. and Simao, L.(Eds.), (2014), EU Policies in the Eastern Neighbourhood: the practices perspective, London: Routledge, ISBN 0415720575 Korosteleva, E.A. (2012),The European Union and its Eastern Neighbours: Towards a more ambitious partnership? London: BASEES/Routledge Series on Russian and East European Studies, ISBN 0-415-61261-6 Korosteleva E.A, (Ed.), (2011), Vostochnoe Partnerstvo: problemy i perspektivy [Eastern Partnership: problems and perspectives], Minsk: Belarusian State University, ISBN 978-985-491-088-8 Korosteleva, E.A. (Ed.) (2011), Eastern Partnership: A New Opportunity for the Neighbours?, London: Routledge, ISBN 0-415-67607-X Whitman, R., & Wolff, S., (Ed.), (2010), The European Neighbourhood Policy in perspective: context, implementation and impact, Palgrave:London, ISBN 023020385X Journal articles [ edit ] Ambassador Gert ANTSU: ”We just cannot afford to lose interest in Eastern neighbors” — Interview of Ambassador Gert ANTSU for Caucasian Journal , 19.01.2022.

Ambassador Gert ANTSU: ”At times reforms sound like a tired buzzword that has lost its luster” — Interview of Ambassador Gert ANTSU for Caucasian Journal , 18.07.2021.

Korosteleva, E.A, 'Change or Continuity: Is the Eastern Partnership an Adequate Tool for the European Neighbourhood', International Relations, 25(2) June 2011: 243–62 Korosteleva, E.A, 'Change or Continuity: Is the Eastern Partnership an Adequate Tool for the European Neighbourhood', International Relations, 25(2) June 2011: 243–62 Whitman, R., European Union's relations with the Wider Europe' Journal of Common Market Studies Annual Review of the European Union in 2010, 49, (2011). pp. 187–208.

Korosteleva, E.A, 'Eastern Partnership: a New Opportunity for the Neighbours?', Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics, Special Issue, 27(1) 2011: 1–21 Korosteleva, E.A, 'Moldova's European Choice: Between Two Stools', Europe-Asia Studies, 61(8) 2010: 1267–89 Wolfgang Tiede and Jakob Schirmer: "The EU's Eastern Partnership – Objectives and Legal Basis", in: " The European Legal Forum " (EuLF) 3/2009, pp. 168–174.

Korosteleva, E.A, 'The Limits of the EU Governance: Belarus' Response to the European Neighbourhood Policy', Contemporary Politics, 15 (2) 2009: 229–45 Bosse, G., & Korosteleva, E.A, 'Changing Belarus? The Limits of EU Governance in Eastern Europe', Cooperation and Conflict, 44 (2) 2009: 143–165 Yefremenko, D.

Life after Vilnius. A new geopolitical configuration for Ukraine.

// Russia in global affairs. - Vol. 11, No. 3 - July – September 2013.

v t e Foreign relations of the European Union Bilateral relations See also : Economic relationships with third countries Africa Algeria Cape Verde Egypt Libya Morocco South Africa Sudan Tunisia Americas Argentina trade Brazil Canada Colombia Cuba Greenland Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Bahrain Bangladesh China India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Lebanon Malaysia Nepal North Korea Pakistan Palestine † Philippines South Korea Syria Taiwan Vietnam Yemen Europe Internal Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Poland Slovenia External Albania Andorra Armenia Accession negotiations Azerbaijan Belarus Bosnia and Herzegovina Faroe Islands Georgia Accession negotiations Iceland Kosovo † Liechtenstein Moldova Accession negotiations Monaco Montenegro North Macedonia Northern Cyprus † Norway Russia San Marino Serbia Sovereign Military Order of Malta Switzerland Turkey Accession negotiations Ukraine Accession negotiations United Kingdom Vatican City Oceania Australia Micronesia New Zealand Papua New Guinea Former Yugoslavia General Overseas territories of member states European microstates Largest trading partners Association Agreements Free trade agreements European Union Sanctions †= Disputed state, may not be recognised as an independent state by some or all European Union members.

Multilateral relations and initiatives Organisations Arab League ASEAN Council of Europe ECHR G7 ICC IOC Mercosur NATO UN Initiatives African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States Asia–Europe Meeting CARIFORUM Customs Union Eastern Partnership Energy Community Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly European Common Aviation Area European Economic Area Euro-Mediterranean free trade area Euro-Mediterranean Partnership Euronest Economic Partnership Agreements EU CBRN Risk Mitigation CoE Initiative Neighbourhood Policy Northern Dimension Mediterranean Union Stabilisation and Association Process Administration and policies Foreign and Security Policy Global Strategy Neighbourhood Policy Enlargement Security and Defence Policy Administration Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Department Directorate-General for International Cooperation and Development External Action Service Foreign Affairs Council High Representative Josep Borrell Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee Foreign Policy Instruments Service Diplomatic missions of the EU ( ambassadors ) / to the EU Special Representatives Funding Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance Global Europe v t e Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union Leadership High Representative Director General of the Military Staff/Director of the Military Planning and Conduct Capability Director of the Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability Chairman of the Military Committee European Council Foreign Affairs Council Structure External Action Service Command structure on the civilian/military strategic and operational levels ( Military Planning and Conduct Capability within the Military Staff , Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability , Joint Support Coordination Cell ) Intelligence and Situation Centre ( Club de Berne ) Crisis Management and Planning Directorate Security & Defence College Agencies Defence Agency Institute for Security Studies Satellite Centre Council preparatory  bodies Committee of Permanent Representatives Political and Security Committee Politico-Military Group Military Committee Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management European Commission bodies Directorate-General for Defence Industry and Space Funding Defence Fund Policies Security Strategy Everything but Arms Annual Review Equipment Galileo navigation system Secure Software-defined Radio (PESCO) Decorations Service medal Medal for Extraordinary Meritorious Service Monitor mission medal Related Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) Headline Goal 2010 Military Erasmus Military Mobility (PESCO) Intelligence School (PESCO) Kortenberg building NATO relations ( Berlin Plus agreement , Joint Declaration ) v t e European Union articles History Timeline Ideas of European unity before 1948 Founders 1948–1957 1958–1972 1973–1993 1993–2004 Since 2004 Predecessors Defence policy Western Union (1948–1954) Western European Union (1954–2011) European Communities (1967–2009) International Authority for the Ruhr (1949–1951) European Coal and Steel Community (1951–2002) European Economic Community (1958–1993) European Community (1993–2009) European Atomic Energy Community (est. 1958) Central bank European Monetary Cooperation Fund (1973–1994) European Monetary Institute (1994–1998) Financial stability European Financial Stability Facility (2010– 2012 ) European Financial Stability Mechanism (2010– 2012 ) Enlargements 1954 1973 1981 1986 1990 1995 2004 2007 2013 Withdrawals 1962 1984 1985 2012 2020 Geography Geography Demographics External border Environmental issues Extreme points Geographic centre Institutional seats of the European Union Larger urban zones Member states Protected areas Regions (first-level NUTS) Special territories Statistics Bodies Institutions Legislature European Parliament President Vice-Presidents Secretariat Committees Elections Constituencies Political groups European political parties European political foundations Council of the European Union Presidency General Secretariat Eurogroup Executive European Council President Euro summit European Commission President Vice-Presidents Commissioners Directorates-General Judiciary Court of Justice of the European Union Court of Justice General Court Central bank European Central Bank President System of Central Banks Eurosystem Supreme audit institution European Court of Auditors Secretary-General Other international-law EU bodies European Atomic Energy Community EIB Group European Investment Bank European Investment Fund EIB Institute European University Institute European Stability Mechanism Unified Patent Court Independent offices European Ombudsman European Data Protection Supervisor Agencies Agencies of the European Union Advisory bodies European Committee of the Regions European Economic and Social Committee Military bodies Political and Security Committee European Union Military Committee European Union Military Staff Law Acquis Charter of Fundamental Rights Competition law Copyright law Directive Citizens' Rights Mechanism for Cooperation and Verification Official Journal Legislative procedure Citizens' Initiative Regulation LGBT rights Enhanced cooperation Treaties opt-outs Withdrawal Economy Budget Currencies Community preference Government procurement Eurozone Euro International status and usage Transport TRACECA Minimum wage Average wage Unemployment rate Health expense per person Politics Concepts European integration Eurosphere Intergovernmentalism Multi-speed Europe Neofunctionalism Optimum currency area Supranational union Euroscepticism Euromyths Federalisation Pro-Europeanism Budget accountability Censorship Democratic legitimacy Differentiated integration Privileged partnership Potential superpower status Policies Area of freedom, security and justice Migration and asylum policy Schengen Area European Judicial Network (criminal matters) European Judicial Network in civil and commercial matters Citizenship passports identity card ( list ) Driving licence Vehicle registration plates Common Foreign and Security Policy Common Security and Defence Policy Permanent Structured Cooperation Enlargement Policy Neighbourhood Policy Global Strategy Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) Eurozone European banking union European Banking Supervision Single Resolution Mechanism Capital Markets Union European System of Financial Supervision Single market Agricultural policy Cultural policies Customs Union Educational policies Energy policy Environmental policy European Green Deal Fisheries policy Healthcare Health Insurance Card Labour mobility Regional development European Structural and Investment Funds Space policy Sport policies VAT Area Foreign relations Neighbourhood Policy European Economic Area EEA Joint Committee Energy Community European Political Community European Common Aviation Area European Higher Education Area EU/ESA Framework Agreement EU/ESA Space Council European Peace Facility Economic Partnership Agreements European Union Association Agreement Stabilisation and Association Process Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly EU Gateway Programme EU Strategy for the South Caucasus Northern Dimension Union for the Mediterranean Global Strategy Free trade agreements Enlargement Current agenda Statistics Culture Douzelage House of European History 2012 Nobel Peace Prize Laissez-passer Languages Media freedom Public holidays Religion Telephone numbers Symbols Lists Books on the subject Directives Largest cities by population within city limits National parties by affiliation Presidents of the institutions Terrorist incidents Urban areas Outline Category Portal v t e Enlargement and partners of the European Union Previous enlargements 1973 ( Denmark , Ireland , United Kingdom ) 1981 (Greece) 1986 (Portugal, Spain) 1995 ( Austria , Finland , Sweden ) 2004 (Cyprus, Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , Slovakia , Slovenia ) 2007 (Bulgaria, Romania) 2013 ( Croatia ) Statistics Candidates Negotiating Screened Albania status Montenegro status Moldova status relations North Macedonia status Serbia status Ukraine status relations Pre-negotiations Bosnia and Herzegovina status Georgia status relations Suspended negotiations Turkey status relations Potential candidates Kosovo status Partnerships Eastern Partnership Armenia status relations Azerbaijan relations Belarus ( suspended ) relations Northern Dimension Iceland relations Norway relations Russia relations Customs union Andorra relations Monaco relations San Marino relations Free trade agreements Liechtenstein relations Switzerland relations United Kingdom relations Trade and Cooperation Agreement Other geographically European countries Kazakhstan relations Vatican City relations Current membership Criteria Withdrawal Brexit v t e Europe articles History Chronology Bibliography of European history Prehistory Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages Early modernity World War I World War II Pax Europaea Crisis situations and unrest since 2000 COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine By topic Military Sovereignty predecessor states Geography Areas and populations Countries by area European microstates Largest metropolitan areas Cities Climate Climate change Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Rivers Sovereign states and dependent territories by population Villages Politics Eurosphere International organisations Integration Law Post-Soviet Europe Transatlantic relations Intergovernmental Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Europe (CoE) Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) European Political Community (EPC) GUAM Organization Open Balkan North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) statistics Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation European Union Economy relations free trade agreements Education European Economic Area (EEA) European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly European Union Customs Union (EUCU) Eurozone Foreign relations Members enlargement Politics Schengen Area Visa policy Statistics Economy History Financial (and social) rankings Free trade areas Energy Telecommunications Transport Rail Road Intergovernmental Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Eurasian Customs Union (EACU) Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Sovereign states by Average wage Budget revenues per capita GDP (nominal) per capita GDP (PPP) per capita GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita HDI Internet users (%) Minimum wage Press Freedom Index Unemployment rate (%) Health expense per capita Military spending (%) Urban population (%) Electricity use per capita Society Ages of consent Etiquette Social (and financial) rankings Languages endangered Tattooing Universities Bologna Process Erasmus Culture Art painting sculpture Architecture Capital of Culture Cinema film festivals Classical music Cuisine Dance Folklore Literature Philosophy Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Sport Symbols ( Armorial , Flags ) Demographics Ageing Childhood population (%) Ethnic groups genetic history Immigration Life expectancy by region Retirement Outline Index Category Portal Maps v t e Euromaidan and the Revolution of Dignity 21 November 2013 – 23 February 2014 Main topics Timeline of the Euromaidan Domestic responses to the Euromaidan International reactions to the Euromaidan Casualties Heavenly Hundred Order of the Heavenly Hundred Heroes Damaged communist monuments Main events 1 December 2013 riots Fall of the monument to Lenin in Kyiv 11 December 2013 assault Ukrainian–Russian action plan Anti-Maidan Vasylkiv terrorists case Anti-protest laws in Ukraine 2014 Odesa clashes 2014 Hrushevskoho Street riots 2014 RSA occupations Agreement on settlement of political crisis in Ukraine Revolution of Dignity Aftermath 2014 pro-Russian unrest Timeline Russian military intervention 2014 annexation of Crimea by Russia Timeline War in Donbas timeline First Yatsenyuk government Lustration in Ukraine Decommunization in Ukraine Elections 2014 Ukrainian presidential election 2014 Ukrainian local elections 2014 Kyiv local election 2014 Crimean status referendum 2014 Donbas status referendums 2014 Ukrainian parliamentary election Main places Maidan Nezalezhnosti Mezhyhirya Khreshchatyk Lypky Bankova Street European Square Hrushevskoho Street Dynamo Stadium Kyiv City Council Trade Unions Building Ukrainian House Mariinskyi Park October Palace Kyiv Conservatory European integration Ukraine–European Union relations Eastern Partnership European Union Association Agreement European Union–Ukraine Association Agreement Constitution of Ukraine Protest figures Organizations Maidan People's Union Euromaidan Press Parliamentary opposition parties Batkivshchyna Svoboda UDAR Other parties Congress of Ukrainian Nationalists Democratic Alliance UNA–UNSO United Left and Peasants Civic organizations Automaidan Road Control Vidsich Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People Militant groups Autonomous Resistance Right Sector Spilna Sprava Lead figures Vitali Klitschko Arseniy Yatsenyuk Oleh Tyahnybok Petro Poroshenko Yuriy Lutsenko Oleksandr Turchynov Yulia Tymoshenko Andriy Parubiy Andriy Sadovyi Arsen Avakov Ruslana Tetiana Chornovol Dmytro Bulatov Dmytro Yarosh Refat Chubarov Anti-protest figures Organizations Second Azarov government Ministry of Internal Affairs Internal Troops of Ukraine Security Service of Ukraine Berkut Militsiya (Ukraine) Party of Regions Titushky Night Wolves Don Cossacks Antimaidan Lead figures Viktor Yanukovych Mykola Azarov Serhiy Arbuzov Vitaliy Zakharchenko Oleksandr Yefremov Andriy Klyuyev Hennadiy Kernes Mykhailo Dobkin Viktor Pshonka Olena Lukash Yuriy Boyko Leonid Kozhara Dmytro Tabachnyk Oleksandr Klymenko v t e Ukraine–European Union relations Main topics Eastern Partnership Plan on Priority Measures for European Integration of Ukraine Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement Accession of Ukraine to the European Union Ukraine topics Constitution of Ukraine Economy of Ukraine Natural gas in Ukraine Ukrainian Parliament European Union topics Common Security and Defence Policy European Defence Agency European Investment Bank European Parliament European Union Association Agreement Related Russia–Ukraine relations v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n8rv6
Cached time: 20250818022801
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.149 seconds
Real time usage: 1.480 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14134/1000000
Revision size: 46614/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 589177/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 57576/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 219017/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.580/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11313448/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1129.382      1 -total
 21.94%  247.757      1 Template:Reflist
 19.84%  224.023      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 18.99%  214.415      1 Template:Infobox
 15.86%  179.145     28 Template:Cite_web
 12.91%  145.782      3 Template:Unbulleted_list
  9.85%  111.297     20 Template:Navbox
  8.53%   96.311      1 Template:Foreign_relations_of_the_European_Union_2
  8.17%   92.233      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.09%   91.388      3 Template:Military_navigation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:17578576:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818022801 and revision id 1302778587. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eastern_Partnership&oldid=1302778587 " Categories : Treaties entered into by the European Union Foreign relations of Armenia Foreign relations of Azerbaijan Foreign relations of Ukraine Foreign relations of Belarus Armenia–European Union relations Georgia (country)–European Union relations Moldova–European Union relations Ukraine–European Union relations Eastern Europe European integration International organizations based in Europe Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2013 Use dmy dates from September 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 Commons category link from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 11:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eastern Partnership 41 languages Add topic

