Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Evolutionary history Toggle Evolutionary history subsection 2.1 Fossil record 2.2 Taxonomy 3 Anatomy Toggle Anatomy subsection 3.1 Teeth 3.2 Skeleton 3.3 Jaw 3.4 Fins 3.5 Dermal denticles 3.6 Tails 4 Physiology Toggle Physiology subsection 4.1 Buoyancy 4.2 Respiration 4.3 Thermoregulation 4.4 Osmoregulation 4.5 Digestion 4.6 Fluorescence 5 Senses Toggle Senses subsection 5.1 Smell 5.2 Sight 5.3 Hearing 5.4 Electroreception 5.5 Lateral line 6 Life history Toggle Life history subsection 6.1 Reproduction 6.1.1 Sexual 6.1.2 Asexual 6.2 Brooding 6.2.1 Ovoviviparity 6.2.2 Oviparity 6.2.3 Viviparity 7 Behavior Toggle Behavior subsection 7.1 Speed 7.2 Intelligence 7.3 Sleep 8 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 8.1 Feeding 8.2 Range and habitat 9 Relationship with humans Toggle Relationship with humans subsection 9.1 Attacks 9.2 In captivity 9.3 In culture 9.3.1 In Hawaii 9.3.2 In American Samoa 9.3.3 In popular culture 9.3.4 Popular misconceptions 10 Threats to sharks Toggle Threats to sharks subsection 10.1 Fishery 10.2 Shark culling 10.3 Other threats 11 Conservation 12 See also 13 References Toggle References subsection 13.1 Citations 13.2 General and cited references 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Shark 155 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Iñupiatun Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Fɔ̀ngbè ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Selachian ) Predatory cartilaginous fishes For other uses, see Shark (disambiguation) .

Sharks Temporal range: Early Jurassic–Present PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Possible records extend back to Early Permian A grey reef shark (Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Chondrichthyes Clade : Euselachii Subclass: Elasmobranchii Division: Selachii Orders Galeomorphi Carcharhiniformes Heterodontiformes Orectolobiformes Lamniformes † Synechodontiformes ?

Squalomorphi Hexanchiformes Squaliformes † Protospinaciformes Echinorhiniformes Squatiniformes Pristiophoriformes Synonyms Pleurotremata Selachimorpha Sharks are a group of elasmobranch cartilaginous fishes characterized by a ribless endoskeleton , dermal denticles , five to seven gill slits on each side, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head . Modern sharks are classified within the division Selachii [ 1 ] [ page needed ] and are the sister group to the Batomorphi ( rays and skates ). Some sources extend the term "shark" as an informal category including extinct members of Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) with a shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts . Shark-like chondrichthyans such as Cladoselache and Doliodus first appeared in the Devonian Period (419–359 million years), though some fossilized chondrichthyan-like scales are as old as the Late Ordovician (458–444 million years ago).

[ 2 ] The earliest confirmed modern sharks (Selachii) are known from the Early Jurassic around 200 million years ago , with the oldest known member being Agaleus , though records of true sharks may extend back as far as the Permian .

[ 3 ] Sharks range in size from the small dwarf lanternshark ( Etmopterus perryi ), a deep sea species that is only 17 centimetres (6.7 in) in length, to the whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ), the largest fish in the world, which reaches approximately 12 metres (40 ft) in length.

[ 4 ] They are found in all seas and are common to depths up to 2,000 metres (6,600 ft). They generally do not live in freshwater, although there are a few known exceptions, such as the bull shark and the river sharks , which can be found in both seawater and freshwater, and the Ganges shark , which lives only in freshwater.

[ 5 ] Sharks have a covering of placoid scales (denticles) that protects the skin from damage and parasites in addition to improving their fluid dynamics . They have numerous sets of replaceable teeth .

[ 6 ] Several shark species are apex predators , which are organisms that are at the top of their food chain with select examples including the bull shark , tiger shark , great white shark , mako sharks , thresher sharks and hammerhead sharks . Some sharks are filter-feeding planktivores , such as the whale shark and basking shark , which are among the largest fish ever lived.

Sharks are caught by humans for shark meat or shark fins . Many shark populations are threatened by human activities. Since 1970, shark populations have been reduced by 71%, mostly from overfishing [ 7 ] and mutilating practice such as shark finning .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Etymology Until the 16th century, [ 10 ] sharks were known to mariners as "sea dogs".

[ 11 ] This is still evidential in several species termed " dogfish ", or the porbeagle .

The etymology of the word shark is uncertain. The most likely etymology states that the original sense of the word was that of "predator, one who preys on others" from the Dutch schurk , meaning 'villain, scoundrel' ( cf.

card shark , loan shark , etc.), which was later applied to the fish due to its predatory behaviour.

[ 12 ] A now disproven [ original research?

] theory is that it derives from the Yucatec Maya word xook ( pronounced [ʃoːk] ), meaning 'shark'.

[ 13 ] Evidence for this etymology came from the Oxford English Dictionary , which notes that shark first came into use after Sir John Hawkins ' sailors exhibited one in London in 1569 and posted " sharke " to refer to the large sharks of the Caribbean Sea . However, the Middle English Dictionary records an isolated occurrence of the word shark (referring to a sea fish) in a letter written by Thomas Beckington in 1442, which rules out a New World etymology.

[ 14 ] [ original research?

] Evolutionary history See also: Evolution of fish Fossil record Fossil shark tooth (size over 9 cm or 3.5 inches) with crown, shoulder, root and root lobe A collection of Cretaceous shark teeth The oldest total-group chondrichthyans, known as acanthodians or "spiny sharks", appeared during the Early Silurian , around 439 million years ago.

[ 15 ] The oldest confirmed members of Elasmobranchii sensu lato (the group containing all cartilaginous fish more closely related to modern sharks and rays than to chimaeras ) appeared during the Devonian .

[ 16 ] Anachronistidae , the oldest probable representatives of Euselachii, the group containing modern sharks (Selachii) and rays (Batomorphi) to the exclusion of most extinct elasmobranch groups, date to the Carboniferous .

[ 17 ] Selachii and Batomorphi are suggested by some to have diverged during the Triassic .

[ 18 ] Fossils of the earliest true sharks may have appeared during the Permian , based on remains of " synechodontiforms " found in the Early Permian of Russia, [ 19 ] but if remains of "synechodontiforms" from the Permian and Triassic are true sharks, they only had low diversity. Modern shark orders first appeared during the Early Jurassic, and during the Jurassic true sharks underwent great diversification.

[ 20 ] Sharks largely replaced the hybodonts , which had previously been a dominant group of shark-like fish during the Triassic and Early Jurassic.

[ 21 ] Taxonomy Elasmobranchii Batomorphi Selachii Galeomorphi Heterodontiformes Orectolobiformes Carcharhiniformes Lamniformes Squalomorphi Hexanchiformes Squatiniformes Pristiophoriformes Squaliformes Phylogeny of living shark orders based on mitochondrial DNA [ 22 ] Sharks belong to the division Selachii in the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes . The Elasmobranchii also include rays and skates ; the Chondrichthyes also include Chimaeras . It was thought that the sharks form a polyphyletic group: some sharks are more closely related to rays than they are to some other sharks, [ 23 ] but current molecular studies support monophyly of both groups of sharks and batoids.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The division Selachii is divided into the superorders Galeomorphi (or Galea), and Squalomorphi (or Squalea). The galeomorphs are the Heterodontiformes , Orectolobiformes , Lamniformes , and Carcharhiniformes . Lamnoids and carcharhinoids are usually placed in one clade , but recent studies show that Lamnoids and orectoloboids are a clade. Some scientists now think that Heterodontoids may be squalomorphs. The squalomorphs are divided into Hexanchiformes and Squalomorpha. The former includes cow shark and frilled shark , though some authors propose that both families be moved to separate orders. The Squalomorpha contains the Squaliformes and the Hypnosqualea. The Hypnosqualea may be invalid. It includes the Squatiniformes , and the Pristorajea, which may also be invalid, but includes the Pristiophoriformes and the Batomorphi .

[ 23 ] [ 26 ] There are more than 500 species of sharks split across thirteen orders, including several orders of sharks that have gone extinct: [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Carcharhiniformes : Commonly known as ground sharks , the order includes the blue , tiger , bull , grey reef , blacktip reef , Caribbean reef , blacktail reef , whitetip reef , and oceanic whitetip sharks (collectively called the requiem sharks ) along with the houndsharks , catsharks , and hammerhead sharks . They are distinguished by an elongated snout and a nictitating membrane which protects the eyes during an attack.

Heterodontiformes : They are generally referred to as the bullhead or horn sharks .

Hexanchiformes : Examples from this group include the cow sharks and frilled sharks , which somewhat resembles a marine snake.

Lamniformes : They are commonly known as the mackerel sharks . They include the goblin shark , basking shark , megamouth shark , the thresher sharks , shortfin and longfin mako sharks , and great white shark . They are distinguished by their large jaws and ovoviviparous reproduction. The Lamniformes also include the extinct megalodon , Otodus megalodon .

Orectolobiformes : They are commonly referred to as the carpet sharks , including zebra sharks , nurse sharks , wobbegongs , and the whale shark .

Pristiophoriformes : These are the sawsharks , with an elongated, toothed snout that they use for slashing their prey.

Squaliformes : This group includes the dogfish sharks and roughsharks .

Squatiniformes : Also known as angel sharks , they are flattened sharks with a strong resemblance to stingrays and skates .

Echinorhiniformes : This group includes the prickly shark and bramble shark . Phylogenetic placement of this group has been ambiguous in scientific studies.

[ 28 ] They are sometimes given their own order, Echinorhiniformes.

[ 27 ] Anatomy Main article: Shark anatomy General anatomical features of sharks Teeth Main article: Shark tooth The teeth of tiger sharks are oblique and serrated to saw through flesh Shark teeth are embedded in the gums rather than directly affixed to the jaw, and are constantly replaced throughout life. Multiple rows of replacement teeth grow in a groove on the inside of the jaw and steadily move forward in comparison to a conveyor belt ; some sharks lose 30,000 or more teeth in their lifetime. The rate of tooth replacement varies from once every 8 to 10 days to several months. In most species, teeth are replaced one at a time as opposed to the simultaneous replacement of an entire row, which is observed in the cookiecutter shark .

[ 29 ] Tooth shape depends on the shark's diet: those that feed on mollusks and crustaceans have dense and flattened teeth used for crushing, those that feed on fish have needle-like teeth for gripping, and those that feed on larger prey such as mammals have pointed lower teeth for gripping and triangular upper teeth with serrated edges for cutting. The teeth of plankton-feeders such as the basking shark are small and non-functional.

[ 30 ] Skeleton Shark skeletons are very different from those of bony fish and terrestrial vertebrates . Sharks and other cartilaginous fish ( skates and rays ) have skeletons made of cartilage and connective tissue . Cartilage is flexible and durable, yet is about half the normal density of bone. This reduces the skeleton's weight, saving energy.

[ 31 ] Because sharks do not have rib cages, they can easily be crushed under their own weight on land.

[ 32 ] Jaw The jaws of sharks, like those of rays and skates, are not attached to the cranium . The jaw's surface (in comparison to the shark's vertebrae and gill arches) needs extra support due to its heavy exposure to physical stress and its need for strength. It has a layer of tiny hexagonal plates called "tesserae", which are crystal blocks of calcium salts arranged as a mosaic.

[ 33 ] This gives these areas much of the same strength found in the bony tissue found in other animals.

Generally sharks have only one layer of tesserae, but the jaws of large specimens, such as the bull shark, tiger shark, and the great white shark, have two to three layers or more, depending on body size. The jaws of a large great white shark may have up to five layers.

[ 31 ] In the rostrum (snout), the cartilage can be spongy and flexible to absorb the power of impacts.

[ citation needed ] Fins Fin skeletons are elongated and supported with soft and unsegmented rays named ceratotrichia, filaments of elastic protein resembling the horny keratin in hair and feathers.

[ 34 ] Most sharks have eight fins. Sharks can only drift away from objects directly in front of them because their fins do not allow them to move in the tail-first direction.

[ 32 ] Dermal denticles Further information: Fish scale § Placoid scales The dermal denticles of a lemon shark , viewed through a scanning electron microscope Unlike bony fish, sharks have a complex dermal corset made of flexible collagenous fibers and arranged as a helical network surrounding their body. This works as an outer skeleton, providing attachment for their swimming muscles and thus saving energy.

[ 35 ] Their dermal teeth give them hydrodynamic advantages as they reduce turbulence when swimming.

[ 36 ] Some species of shark have pigmented denticles that form complex patterns like spots (e.g.

Zebra shark ) and stripes (e.g.

Tiger shark ). These markings are important for camouflage and help sharks blend in with their environment, as well as making them difficult for prey to detect.

[ 37 ] For some species, dermal patterning returns to healed denticles even after they have been removed by injury.

[ 38 ] Tails Tails provide thrust, making speed and acceleration dependent on tail shape.

Caudal fin shapes vary considerably between shark species, due to their evolution in separate environments. Sharks possess a heterocercal caudal fin in which the dorsal portion is usually noticeably larger than the ventral portion. This is because the shark's vertebral column extends into that dorsal portion, providing a greater surface area for muscle attachment. This allows more efficient locomotion among these negatively buoyant cartilaginous fish. By contrast, most bony fish possess a homocercal caudal fin.

[ 39 ] Tiger sharks have a large upper lobe , which allows for slow cruising and sudden bursts of speed. The tiger shark must be able to twist and turn in the water easily when hunting to support its varied diet, whereas the porbeagle shark , which hunts schooling fish such as mackerel and herring , has a large lower lobe to help it keep pace with its fast-swimming prey.

[ 40 ] Other tail adaptations help sharks catch prey more directly, such as the thresher shark's usage of its powerful, elongated upper lobe to stun fish and squid.

Physiology Buoyancy Unlike bony fish, sharks do not have gas-filled swim bladders for buoyancy. Instead, sharks rely on a large liver filled with oil that contains squalene , and their cartilage, which is about half the normal density of bone.

[ 35 ] Their liver constitutes up to 30% of their total body mass.

[ 41 ] The liver's effectiveness is limited, so sharks employ dynamic lift to maintain depth while swimming.

Sand tiger sharks store air in their stomachs, using it as a form of swim bladder. Bottom-dwelling sharks, like the nurse shark , have negative buoyancy, allowing them to rest on the ocean floor.

Some sharks, if inverted or stroked on the nose, enter a natural state of tonic immobility . Researchers use this condition to handle sharks safely.

[ 42 ] Respiration Like other fish, sharks extract oxygen from seawater as it passes over their gills . Unlike other fish, shark gill slits are not covered, but lie in a row behind the head. A modified slit called a spiracle lies just behind the eye, which assists the shark with taking in water during respiration and plays a major role in bottom–dwelling sharks. Spiracles are reduced or missing in active pelagic sharks.

[ 30 ] While the shark is moving, water passes through the mouth and over the gills in a process known as "ram ventilation". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills to ensure a constant supply of oxygenated water. A small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are obligate ram ventilators and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The respiratory and circulatory process begins when deoxygenated venous blood travels to the shark's two-chambered heart . Here, the shark pumps blood to its gills via the ventral aorta where it branches into afferent branchial arteries .

Gas exchange takes place in the gills and the reoxygenated blood flows into the efferent branchial arteries, which come together to form the dorsal aorta . The blood flows from the dorsal aorta throughout the body. The deoxygenated blood from the body then flows through the posterior cardinal veins and enters the posterior cardinal sinuses . From there venous blood re-enters the heart ventricle and the cycle repeats.

[ 45 ] Thermoregulation Most sharks are "cold-blooded" or, more precisely, poikilothermic , meaning that their internal body temperature matches that of their ambient environment. Members of the family Lamnidae (such as the shortfin mako shark and the great white shark ) are homeothermic and maintain a higher body temperature than the surrounding water. In these sharks, a strip of aerobic red muscle located near the center of the body generates the heat, which the body retains via a countercurrent exchange mechanism by a system of blood vessels called the rete mirabile ("miraculous net"). The common thresher and bigeye thresher sharks have a similar mechanism for maintaining an elevated body temperature.

[ 46 ] Larger species, like the whale shark, are able to conserve their body heat through sheer size when they dive to colder depths. The scalloped hammerhead closes its mouth and gills when diving to depths of around 800 metres, holding its breath until it reaches warmer waters again.

[ 47 ] Osmoregulation In contrast to bony fish, with the exception of the coelacanth , [ 48 ] the blood and other tissue of sharks and Chondrichthyes is generally isotonic to their marine environments because of the high concentration of urea (up to 2.5% [ 49 ] ) and trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), allowing them to be in osmotic balance with the seawater. This adaptation prevents most sharks from surviving in freshwater, and they are therefore confined to marine environments. A few exceptions exist, such as the bull shark , which has developed a way to change its kidney function to excrete large amounts of urea.

[ 41 ] When a shark dies, the urea is broken down to ammonia by bacteria, causing the dead body to gradually smell strongly of ammonia.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Research in 1930 by Homer W. Smith showed that sharks' urine does not contain sufficient sodium to avoid hypernatremia , and it was postulated that there must be an additional mechanism for salt secretion. In 1960 it was discovered at the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory in Salsbury Cove, Maine that sharks have a type of salt gland located at the end of the intestine, known as the "rectal gland", whose function is the secretion of chlorides.

[ 52 ] Digestion Digestion can take a long time. The food moves from the mouth to a J-shaped stomach, where it is stored and initial digestion occurs.

[ 53 ] Unwanted items may never get past the stomach, and instead the shark either vomits or turns its stomachs inside out and ejects unwanted items from its mouth.

[ 54 ] One of the biggest differences between the digestive systems of sharks and mammals is that sharks have much shorter intestines. This short length is achieved by the spiral valve with multiple turns within a single short section instead of a long tube-like intestine. The valve provides a long surface area, requiring food to circulate inside the short gut until fully digested, when remaining waste products pass into the cloaca .

[ 53 ] Fluorescence A few sharks appear fluorescent under blue light, such as the swell shark and the chain catshark , where the fluorophore derives from a metabolite of kynurenic acid .

[ 55 ] Senses Smell The shape of the hammerhead shark 's head may enhance olfaction by spacing the nostrils further apart.

Sharks have keen olfactory senses, located in the short duct (which is not fused, unlike bony fish) between the anterior and posterior nasal openings, with some species able to detect as little as one part per million of blood in seawater.

[ 56 ] The size of the olfactory bulb varies across different shark species, with size dependent on how much a given species relies on smell or vision to find their prey.

[ 57 ] In environments with low visibility, shark species generally have larger olfactory bulbs.

[ 57 ] In reefs, where visibility is high, species of sharks from the family Carcharhinidae have smaller olfactory bulbs.

[ 57 ] Sharks found in deeper waters also have larger olfactory bulbs.

[ 58 ] Sharks have the ability to determine the direction of a given scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril.

[ 59 ] This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound.

They are more attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species, and as a result often linger near or in sewage outfalls. Some species, such as nurse sharks , have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sight Eye of a bigeyed sixgill shark ( Hexanchus nakamurai ) Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates , including similar lenses , corneas and retinas , though their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment with the help of a tissue called tapetum lucidum . This tissue is behind the retina and reflects light back to it, thereby increasing visibility in the dark waters. The effectiveness of the tissue varies, with some sharks having stronger nocturnal adaptations. Many sharks can contract and dilate their pupils , like humans, something no teleost fish can do. Sharks have eyelids, but they do not blink because the surrounding water cleans their eyes. To protect their eyes some species have nictitating membranes . This membrane covers the eyes while hunting and when the shark is being attacked. However, some species, including the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ), do not have this membrane, but instead roll their eyes backwards to protect them when striking prey. The importance of sight in shark hunting behavior is debated. Some believe that electro- and chemoreception are more significant, while others point to the nictating membrane as evidence that sight is important, since presumably the shark would not protect its eyes were they unimportant. The use of sight probably varies with species and water conditions. The shark's field of vision can swap between monocular and stereoscopic at any time.

[ 60 ] A micro-spectrophotometry study of 17 species of sharks found 10 had only rod photoreceptors and no cone cells in their retinas giving them good night vision while making them colorblind . The remaining seven species had in addition to rods a single type of cone photoreceptor sensitive to green and, seeing only in shades of grey and green, are believed to be effectively colorblind. The study indicates that an object's contrast against the background, rather than colour, may be more important for object detection.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Hearing Although it is hard to test the hearing of sharks, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey from many miles away.

[ 64 ] The hearing sensitivity for most shark species lies between 20 and 1000 Hz.

[ 65 ] A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel. The lateral line shows a similar arrangement, and is open to the environment via a series of openings called lateral line pores . This is a reminder of the common origin of these two vibration- and sound-detecting organs that are grouped together as the acoustico-lateralis system. In bony fish and tetrapods the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

Electroreception Main article: Electroreception Electromagnetic field receptors (ampullae of Lorenzini) and motion detecting canals in the head of a shark The ampullae of Lorenzini are the electroreceptor organs. They number in the hundreds to thousands. Sharks use the ampullae of Lorenzini to detect the electromagnetic fields that all living things produce.

[ 66 ] This helps sharks (particularly the hammerhead shark ) find prey. The shark has the greatest electrical sensitivity of any animal. Sharks find prey hidden in sand by detecting the electric fields they produce.

Ocean currents moving in the magnetic field of the Earth also generate electric fields that sharks can use for orientation and possibly navigation.

[ 67 ] Lateral line Main article: Lateral line This system is found in most fish, including sharks. It is a tactile sensory system which allows the organism to detect water speed and pressure changes near by.

[ 68 ] The main component of the system is the neuromast, a cell similar to hair cells present in the vertebrate ear that interact with the surrounding aquatic environment. This helps sharks distinguish between the currents around them, obstacles off on their periphery, and struggling prey out of visual view. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz .

[ 69 ] Life history The claspers of male spotted wobbegong Shark egg The spiral egg case of a Port Jackson shark Shark lifespans vary by species. Most live 20 to 30 years. The spiny dogfish has one of the longest lifespans at more than 100 years.

[ 70 ] Whale sharks ( Rhincodon typus ) may also live over 100 years.

[ 71 ] Earlier estimates suggested the Greenland shark ( Somniosus microcephalus ) could reach about 200 years, but a recent study found that a 5.02-metre-long (16.5 ft) specimen was 392 ± 120 years old (i.e., at least 272 years old), making it the longest-lived vertebrate known.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Reproduction Unlike most bony fish , sharks are K-selected reproducers, meaning that they produce a small number of well-developed young as opposed to a large number of poorly developed young.

Fecundity in sharks ranges from 2 to over 100 young per reproductive cycle.

[ 74 ] Sharks mature slowly relative to many other fish. For example, lemon sharks reach sexual maturity at around age 13–15.

[ 75 ] Sexual Sharks practice internal fertilization .

[ 76 ] The posterior part of a male shark's pelvic fins are modified into a pair of intromittent organs called claspers , analogous to a mammalian penis , of which one is used to deliver sperm into the female.

[ 77 ] Mating has rarely been observed in sharks.

[ 78 ] The smaller catsharks often mate with the male curling around the female. In less flexible species the two sharks swim parallel to each other while the male inserts a clasper into the female's oviduct . Females in many of the larger species have bite marks that appear to be a result of a male grasping them to maintain position during mating . The bite marks may also come from courtship behavior: the male may bite the female to show his interest. In some species, females have evolved thicker skin to withstand these bites.

[ 77 ] Asexual There have been a number of documented cases in which a female shark who has not been in contact with a male has conceived a pup on her own through parthenogenesis .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] The details of this process are not well understood, but genetic fingerprinting showed that the pups had no paternal genetic contribution, ruling out sperm storage . The extent of this behavior in the wild is unknown. Mammals are now the only major vertebrate group in which asexual reproduction has not been observed.

Scientists say that asexual reproduction in the wild is rare, and probably a last-ditch effort to reproduce when a mate is not present. Asexual reproduction diminishes genetic diversity , which helps build defenses against threats to the species. Species that rely solely on it risk extinction. Asexual reproduction may have contributed to the blue shark 's decline off the Irish coast.

[ 81 ] Brooding Sharks display three ways to bear their young, varying by species, oviparity , viviparity and ovoviviparity .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Ovoviviparity Most sharks are ovoviviparous , meaning that the eggs hatch in the oviduct within the mother's body and that the egg's yolk and fluids secreted by glands in the walls of the oviduct nourishes the embryos. The young continue to be nourished by the remnants of the yolk and the oviduct's fluids. As in viviparity, the young are born alive and fully functional.

Lamniforme sharks practice oophagy , where the first embryos to hatch eat the remaining eggs. Taking this a step further, sand tiger shark pups cannibalistically consume neighboring embryos. The survival strategy for ovoviviparous species is to brood the young to a comparatively large size before birth. The whale shark is now classified as ovoviviparous rather than oviparous, because extrauterine eggs are now thought to have been aborted. Most ovoviviparous sharks give birth in sheltered areas, including bays, river mouths and shallow reefs. They choose such areas for protection from predators (mainly other sharks) and the abundance of food.

Dogfish have the longest known gestation period of any shark, at 18 to 24 months.

Basking sharks and frilled sharks appear to have even longer gestation periods, but accurate data are lacking.

[ 82 ] Oviparity Some species are oviparous , laying their fertilized eggs in the water. In most oviparous shark species, an egg case with the consistency of leather protects the developing embryo(s). These cases may be corkscrewed into crevices for protection. The egg case is commonly called a mermaid's purse . Oviparous sharks include the horn shark , catshark , Port Jackson shark , and swellshark .

[ 82 ] [ 84 ] Viviparity Viviparity is the gestation of young without the use of a traditional egg, and results in live birth.

[ 85 ] Viviparity in sharks can be placental or aplacental.

[ 85 ] Young are born fully formed and self-sufficient.

[ 85 ] Hammerheads, the requiem sharks (such as the bull and blue sharks ), and smoothhounds are viviparous.

[ 74 ] [ 82 ] Behavior The classic view describes a solitary hunter, ranging the oceans in search of food. However, this applies to only a few species. Most live far more social, sedentary, benthic lives, and appear likely to have their own distinct personalities.

[ 86 ] Even solitary sharks meet for breeding or at rich hunting grounds, which may lead them to cover thousands of miles in a year.

[ 87 ] Shark migration patterns may be even more complex than in birds, with many sharks covering entire ocean basins .

Sharks can be highly social, remaining in large schools. Sometimes more than 100 scalloped hammerheads congregate around seamounts and islands, e.g., in the Gulf of California .

[ 41 ] Cross-species social hierarchies exist. For example, oceanic whitetip sharks dominate silky sharks of comparable size during feeding.

[ 74 ] When approached too closely some sharks perform a threat display . This usually consists of exaggerated swimming movements, and can vary in intensity according to the threat level.

[ 88 ] Speed In general, sharks swim ("cruise") at an average speed of 8 kilometres per hour (5.0 mph), but when feeding or attacking, the average shark can reach speeds upwards of 19 kilometres per hour (12 mph). The shortfin mako shark , the fastest shark and one of the fastest fish, can burst at speeds up to 50 kilometres per hour (31 mph).

[ 89 ] The great white shark is also capable of speed bursts. These exceptions may be due to the warm-blooded , or homeothermic , nature of these sharks' physiology. Sharks can travel 70 to 80 km in a day.

[ 90 ] Intelligence Sharks possess brain-to-body mass ratios that are similar to mammals and birds, [ 91 ] and have exhibited apparent curiosity and behavior resembling play in the wild.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] There is evidence that juvenile lemon sharks can use observational learning in their investigation of novel objects in their environment.

[ 94 ] Sleep All sharks need to keep water flowing over their gills in order for them to breathe; however, not all species need to be moving to do this. Those that are able to breathe while not swimming do so by using their spiracles to force water over their gills, thereby allowing them to extract oxygen from the water. It has been recorded that their eyes remain open while in this state and actively follow the movements of divers swimming around them [ 95 ] and as such they are not truly asleep.

Species that do need to swim continuously to breathe go through a process known as sleep swimming, in which the shark is essentially unconscious. It is known from experiments conducted on the spiny dogfish that its spinal cord , rather than its brain, coordinates swimming, so spiny dogfish can continue to swim while sleeping, and this also may be the case in larger shark species.

[ 95 ] In 2016 a great white shark was captured on video for the first time in a state researchers believed was sleep swimming.

[ 96 ] Ecology Feeding This section is about shark feeding. For the sport of shark feeding, see Shark baiting .

A great white shark attacking bait at Isla Guadalupe , Mexico Most sharks are carnivorous .

[ 97 ] Basking sharks , whale sharks , and megamouth sharks have independently evolved different strategies for filter feeding plankton : basking sharks practice ram feeding , whale sharks use suction to take in plankton and small fishes, and megamouth sharks make suction feeding more efficient by using the luminescent tissue inside of their mouths to attract prey in the deep ocean. This type of feeding requires gill rakers —long, slender filaments that form a very efficient sieve —analogous to the baleen plates of the great whales . The shark traps the plankton in these filaments and swallows from time to time in huge mouthfuls. Teeth in these species are comparatively small because they are not needed for feeding.

[ 97 ] Other highly specialized feeders include cookiecutter sharks , which feed on flesh sliced out of other larger fish and marine mammals . Cookiecutter teeth are enormous compared to the animal's size. The lower teeth are particularly sharp. Although they have never been observed feeding, they are believed to latch onto their prey and use their thick lips to make a seal, twisting their bodies to rip off flesh.

[ 41 ] Some seabed–dwelling species are highly effective ambush predators.

Angel sharks and wobbegongs use camouflage to lie in wait and suck prey into their mouths.

[ 98 ] Many benthic sharks feed solely on crustaceans which they crush with their flat molariform teeth.

Other sharks feed on squid or fish, which they swallow whole. The viper dogfish has teeth it can point outwards to strike and capture prey that it then swallows intact. The great white and other large predators either swallow small prey whole or take huge bites out of large animals.

Thresher sharks use their long tails to stun shoaling fishes, and sawsharks either stir prey from the seabed or slash at swimming prey with their tooth-studded rostra .

The bonnethead shark is the only known omnivorous species. Its main prey is crustaceans and mollusks, but it also eats a large amount of seagrass, and is able to digest and extract nutrients from about 50% of the seagrass it consumes.

[ 99 ] Many sharks, including the whitetip reef shark are cooperative feeders and hunt in packs to herd and capture elusive prey. These social sharks are often migratory, traveling huge distances around ocean basins in large schools. These migrations may be partly necessary to find new food sources.

[ 100 ] Range and habitat Sharks are found in all seas. They generally do not live in fresh water, with a few exceptions such as the bull shark and the river shark which can swim both in seawater and freshwater.

[ 101 ] Sharks are common down to depths of 2,000 metres (7,000 ft), and some live even deeper, but they are almost entirely absent below 3,000 metres (10,000 ft). The deepest confirmed report of a shark is a Portuguese dogfish at 3,700 metres (12,100 ft).

[ 102 ] Relationship with humans Attacks Main article: Shark attack A sign warning about the presence of sharks in Salt Rock , South Africa Snorkeler swims near a blacktip reef shark . In rare circumstances involving poor visibility, blacktips may bite a human, mistaking it for prey. Under normal conditions they are harmless and shy.

In 2006 the International Shark Attack File (ISAF) undertook an investigation into 96 alleged shark attacks, confirming 62 of them as unprovoked attacks and 16 as provoked attacks. The average number of fatalities worldwide per year between 2001 and 2006 from unprovoked shark attacks is 4.3.

[ 103 ] Contrary to popular belief, only a few sharks are dangerous to humans. Out of more than 470 species, only four have been involved in a significant number of fatal, unprovoked attacks on humans: the great white , oceanic whitetip , tiger , and bull sharks .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] These sharks are large, powerful predators, and may sometimes attack and kill people. Despite being responsible for attacks on humans they have all been filmed without using a protective cage.

[ 106 ] The perception of sharks as dangerous animals has been popularized by publicity given to a few isolated unprovoked attacks, such as the Jersey Shore shark attacks of 1916 , and through popular fictional works about shark attacks, such as the Jaws film series.

Jaws author Peter Benchley , as well as Jaws director Steven Spielberg , later attempted to dispel the image of sharks as man-eating monsters.

[ 107 ] To help avoid an unprovoked attack, humans should not wear jewelry or metal that is shiny and refrain from splashing around too much.

[ 108 ] In general, sharks show little pattern of attacking humans specifically, part of the reason could be that sharks prefer the blood of fish and other common preys.

[ 109 ] Research indicates that when humans do become the object of a shark attack, it is possible that the shark has mistaken the human for species that are its normal prey, such as seals.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] This was further proven in a recent study conducted by researchers at the California State University's Shark Lab. According to footage caught by the Lab's drones, juveniles swam right up to humans in the water without any bites incidents. The lab stated that the results showed that humans and sharks can co-exist in the water.

[ 112 ] In captivity Main article: Sharks in captivity A whale shark in Georgia Aquarium Until recently, only a few benthic species of shark, such as hornsharks , leopard sharks and catsharks , had survived in aquarium conditions for a year or more. This gave rise to the belief that sharks, as well as being difficult to capture and transport, were difficult to care for. More knowledge has led to more species (including the large pelagic sharks) living far longer in captivity, along with safer transportation techniques that have enabled long-distance transportation.

[ 113 ] The great white shark had never been successfully held in captivity for long periods of time until September 2004, when the Monterey Bay Aquarium successfully kept a young female for 198 days before releasing her.

Most species are not suitable for home aquaria, and not every species sold by pet stores are appropriate. Some species can flourish in home saltwater aquaria.

[ 114 ] Uninformed or unscrupulous dealers sometimes sell juvenile sharks like the nurse shark , which upon reaching adulthood is far too large for typical home aquaria.

[ 114 ] Public aquaria generally do not accept donated specimens that have outgrown their housing. Some owners have been tempted to release them.

[ 114 ] Species appropriate to home aquaria represent considerable spatial and financial investments as they generally approach adult lengths of 3 feet (90 cm) and can live up to 25 years.

[ 114 ] In culture Shark-themed nose art , made popular by the Flying Tigers (pictured), is commonly seen on military aircraft.

In Hawaii Sharks figure prominently in Hawaiian mythology . Stories tell of men with shark jaws on their back who could change between shark and human form. A common theme was that a shark-man would warn beach-goers of sharks in the waters. The beach-goers would laugh and ignore the warnings and get eaten by the shark-man who warned them.

Hawaiian mythology also includes many shark gods . Among a fishing people, the most popular of all aumakua , or deified ancestor guardians, are shark aumakua.

Kamaku describes in detail how to offer a corpse to become a shark. The body transforms gradually until the kahuna can point the awe-struck family to the markings on the shark's body that correspond to the clothing in which the beloved's body had been wrapped. Such a shark aumakua becomes the family pet, receiving food, and driving fish into the family net and warding off danger. Like all aumakua it had evil uses such as helping kill enemies. The ruling chiefs typically forbade such sorcery. Many Native Hawaiian families claim such an aumakua, who is known by name to the whole community.

[ 115 ] Kamohoali'i is the best known and revered of the shark gods, he was the older and favored brother of Pele , [ 116 ] and helped and journeyed with her to Hawaii. He was able to assume all human and fish forms. A summit cliff on the crater of Kilauea is one of his most sacred spots. At one point he had a heiau (temple or shrine) dedicated to him on every piece of land that jutted into the ocean on the island of Molokai . Kamohoali'i was an ancestral god, not a human who became a shark and banned the eating of humans after eating one herself.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] In Fijian mythology, Dakuwaqa was a shark god who was the eater of lost souls.

In American Samoa On the island of Tutuila in American Samoa (a U.S. territory ), there is a location called Turtle and Shark ( Laumei ma Malie ) which is important in Samoan culture —the location is the site of a legend called O Le Tala I Le Laumei Ma Le Malie , in which two humans are said to have transformed into a turtle and a shark.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] According to the U.S. National Park Service , "Villagers from nearby Vaitogi continue to reenact an important aspect of the legend at Turtle and Shark by performing a ritual song intended to summon the legendary animals to the ocean surface, and visitors are frequently amazed to see one or both of these creatures emerge from the sea in apparent response to this call." [ 119 ] In popular culture Main article: Sharks in popular culture In contrast to the complex portrayals by Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, the European and Western view of sharks has historically been mostly of fear and malevolence.

[ 122 ] Sharks are used in popular culture commonly as eating machines, notably in the Jaws novel and the film of the same name , along with its sequels .

[ 123 ] Sharks are threats in other films such as Deep Blue Sea , The Reef , and others , although they are sometimes used for comedic effect such as in Finding Nemo and the Austin Powers series. Sharks tend to be seen quite often in cartoons whenever a scene involves the ocean. Such examples include the Tom and Jerry cartoons, Jabberjaw , and other shows produced by Hanna-Barbera. They also are used commonly as a clichéd means of killing off a character that is held up by a rope or some similar object as the sharks swim right below them, or the character may be standing on a plank above shark infested waters.

[ citation needed ] Popular misconceptions A popular myth is that sharks are immune to disease and cancer , but this is not scientifically supported. Sharks have been known to get cancer.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Both diseases and parasites affect sharks. The evidence that sharks are at least resistant to cancer and disease is mostly anecdotal and there have been few, if any, scientific or statistical studies that show sharks to have heightened immunity to disease.

[ 126 ] Other apparently false claims are that fins prevent cancer [ 127 ] and treat osteoarthritis .

[ 128 ] No scientific proof supports these claims; at least one study has shown shark cartilage of no value in cancer treatment.

[ 129 ] Threats to sharks Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary The annual shark catch has increased rapidly over the last 60 years.

The value of shark fins for shark fin soup has led to an increase in shark catches where usually only the fins are taken, while the rest of the shark is discarded, typically into the sea; health concerns about BMAA in the fins now exists regarding consumption of the soup A 4.3-metre (14 ft), 540-kilogram (1,200 lb) tiger shark caught in Kāne'ohe Bay , Oahu in 1966 Fishery In 2008, it was estimated that nearly 100 million sharks were being killed by people every year, due to commercial and recreational fishing.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] In 2021, it was estimated that the population of oceanic sharks and rays had dropped by 71% over the previous half-century.

[ 7 ] Shark finning yields are estimated at 1.44 million metric tons (1.59 million short tons) for 2000, and 1.41 million metric tons (1.55 million short tons) for 2010. Based on an analysis of average shark weights, this translates into a total annual mortality estimate of about 100 million sharks in 2000, and about 97 million sharks in 2010, with a total range of possible values between 63 and 273 million sharks per year.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia . In southern Australia, shark is commonly used in fish and chips , [ 134 ] in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called flake . In India , small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil language , Telugu language ) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not developed, cooking the flesh breaks it into powder, which is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed, they are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu .

Icelanders ferment Greenland sharks to produce a delicacy called hákarl .

[ 135 ] During a four-year period from 1996 to 2000, an estimated 26 to 73 million sharks were killed and traded annually in commercial markets.

[ 136 ] Sharks are often killed for shark fin soup . Fishermen capture live sharks, fin them, and dump the finless animal back into the water.

Shark finning involves removing the fin with a hot metal blade.

[ 131 ] The resulting immobile shark soon dies from suffocation or predators.

[ 137 ] Shark fin has become a major trade within black markets all over the world. Fins sell for about $300/lb in 2009.

[ 138 ] Poachers illegally fin millions each year. Few governments enforce laws that protect them.

[ 133 ] In 2010 Hawaii became the first U.S. state to prohibit the possession, sale, trade or distribution of shark fins.

[ 139 ] From 1996 to 2000, an estimated 38 million sharks had been killed per year for harvesting shark fins.

[ 136 ] It is estimated by TRAFFIC that over 14,000 tonnes of shark fins were exported into Singapore between 2005–2007 and 2012–2014.

[ 140 ] Shark fin soup is a status symbol in Asian countries and is erroneously considered healthy and full of nutrients. Scientific research has revealed, however, that high concentrations of BMAA are present in shark fins.

[ 141 ] Because BMAA is a neurotoxin , consumption of shark fin soup and cartilage pills, therefore, may pose a health risk.

[ 142 ] BMAA is under study for its pathological role in neurodegenerative diseases such as ALS , Alzheimer's disease , and Parkinson's disease .

Sharks are also killed for meat . European diners consume dogfishes , smoothhounds , catsharks , makos, porbeagle and also skates and rays.

[ 143 ] However, the U.S.

FDA lists sharks as one of four fish (with swordfish , king mackerel , and tilefish ) whose high mercury content is hazardous to children and pregnant women.

Sharks generally reach sexual maturity only after many years and produce few offspring in comparison to other harvested fish. Harvesting sharks before they reproduce severely impacts future populations. Capture induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished.

[ 76 ] Capture-induced parturition is rarely considered in fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).

[ 76 ] The majority of shark fisheries have little monitoring or management. The rise in demand for shark products increases pressure on fisheries.

[ 42 ] Major declines in shark stocks have been recorded—some species have been depleted by over 90% over the past 20–30 years with population declines of 70% not unusual.

[ 144 ] A study by the International Union for Conservation of Nature suggests that one quarter of all known species of sharks and rays are threatened by extinction and 25 species were classified as critically endangered.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Shark culling Main article: Shark culling In 2014, a shark cull in Western Australia killed dozens of sharks (mostly tiger sharks ) using drum lines , [ 147 ] until it was cancelled after public protests and a decision by the Western Australia EPA; from 2014 to 2017, there was an "imminent threat" policy in Western Australia in which sharks that "threatened" humans in the ocean were shot and killed.

[ 148 ] This "imminent threat" policy was criticized by senator Rachel Siewart for killing endangered sharks.

[ 149 ] The "imminent threat" policy was cancelled in March 2017.

[ 150 ] In August 2018, the Western Australia government announced a plan to re-introduce drum lines (though, this time the drum lines are "SMART" drum lines).

[ 151 ] From 1962 to the present, [ 152 ] the government of Queensland has targeted and killed sharks in large numbers by using drum lines , under a "shark control" program—this program has also inadvertently killed large numbers of other animals such as dolphins ; it has also killed endangered hammerhead sharks .

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] Queensland's drum line program has been called "outdated, cruel and ineffective".

[ 156 ] From 2001 to 2018, a total of 10,480 sharks were killed on lethal drum lines in Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef .

[ 157 ] From 1962 to 2018, roughly 50,000 sharks were killed by Queensland authorities.

[ 158 ] The government of New South Wales has a program that deliberately kills sharks using nets .

[ 155 ] [ 159 ] The current net program in New South Wales has been described as being "extremely destructive" to marine life, including sharks.

[ 160 ] Between 1950 and 2008, 352 tiger sharks and 577 great white sharks were killed in the nets in New South Wales—also during this period, a total of 15,135 marine animals were killed in the nets, including dolphins, whales, turtles, dugongs, and critically endangered grey nurse sharks .

[ 161 ] There has been a very large decrease in the number of sharks in eastern Australia, and the shark-killing programs in Queensland and New South Wales are partly responsible for this decrease.

[ 158 ] Kwazulu-Natal , an area of South Africa , has a shark-killing program using nets and drum lines—these nets and drum lines have killed turtles and dolphins, and have been criticized for killing wildlife.

[ 162 ] During a 30-year period, more than 33,000 sharks have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal's shark-killing program—during the same 30-year period, 2,211 turtles, 8,448 rays, and 2,310 dolphins were killed in KwaZulu-Natal.

[ 162 ] Authorities on the French island of Réunion kill about 100 sharks per year.

[ 163 ] Killing sharks negatively affects the marine ecosystem.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] Jessica Morris of Humane Society International calls shark culling a "knee-jerk reaction" and says, "sharks are top order predators that play an important role in the functioning of marine ecosystems. We need them for healthy oceans." [ 166 ] George H. Burgess , the former [ 167 ] director of the International Shark Attack File , "describes [shark] culling as a form of revenge, satisfying a public demand for blood and little else"; [ 168 ] he also said shark culling is a "retro-type move reminiscent of what people would have done in the 1940s and 50s, back when we didn't have an ecological conscience and before we knew the consequences of our actions." [ 168 ] Jane Williamson, an associate professor in marine ecology at Macquarie University, says "There is no scientific support for the concept that culling sharks in a particular area will lead to a decrease in shark attacks and increase ocean safety." [ 169 ] Other threats Other threats include habitat alteration, damage and loss from coastal development, pollution and the impact of fisheries on the seabed and prey species.

[ 170 ] The 2007 documentary Sharkwater exposed how sharks are being hunted to extinction.

[ 171 ] Conservation Further information: List of threatened sharks and Shark sanctuary In 1991, South Africa was the first country in the world to declare Great White sharks a legally protected species [ 172 ] (however, the KwaZulu-Natal Sharks Board is allowed to kill great white sharks in its " shark control " program in eastern South Africa).

[ 162 ] Intending to ban the practice of shark finning while at sea, the United States Congress passed the Shark Finning Prohibition Act in 2000.

[ 173 ] Two years later the Act saw its first legal challenge in United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins . In 2008 a Federal Appeals Court ruled that a loophole in the law allowed non-fishing vessels to purchase shark fins from fishing vessels while on the high seas.

[ 174 ] Seeking to close the loophole, the Shark Conservation Act was passed by Congress in December 2010, and it was signed into law in January 2011.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] In 2003, the European Union introduced a general shark finning ban for all vessels of all nationalities in Union waters and for all vessels flying a flag of one of its member states.

[ 177 ] This prohibition was amended in June 2013 to close remaining loopholes.

[ 178 ] In 2009, the International Union for Conservation of Nature 's IUCN Red List of Endangered Species named 64 species, one-third of all oceanic shark species, as being at risk of extinction due to fishing and shark finning.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] In 2010, the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ( CITES ) rejected proposals from the United States and Palau that would have required countries to strictly regulate trade in several species of scalloped hammerhead , oceanic whitetip and spiny dogfish sharks . The majority, but not the required two-thirds of voting delegates, approved the proposal.

China , by far the world's largest shark market, and Japan , which battles all attempts to extend the convention to marine species, led the opposition.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] In March 2013, three endangered commercially valuable sharks, the hammerheads , the oceanic whitetip and porbeagle were added to Appendix 2 of CITES , bringing shark fishing and commerce of these species under licensing and regulation.

[ 183 ] In 2010, Greenpeace International added the school shark , shortfin mako shark , mackerel shark , tiger shark and spiny dogfish to its seafood red list, a list of common supermarket fish that are often sourced from unsustainable fisheries.

[ 184 ] Advocacy group Shark Trust campaigns to limit shark fishing. Advocacy group Seafood Watch directs American consumers to not eat sharks.

[ 185 ] Under the auspices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), also known as the Bonn Convention, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks was concluded and came into effect in March 2010. It was the first global instrument concluded under CMS and aims at facilitating international coordination for the protection, conservation and management of migratory sharks, through multilateral, intergovernmental discussion and scientific research.

In July 2013, New York state, a major market and entry point for shark fins, banned the shark fin trade joining seven other states of the United States and the three Pacific U.S. territories in providing legal protection to sharks.

[ 186 ] In the United States , and as of January 16, 2019, 12 states including ( Massachusetts , Maryland , Delaware , California , Illinois , Hawaii , Oregon , Nevada , Rhode Island , Washington , New York and Texas ) along with 3 U.S. territories ( American Samoa , Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands ) have passed laws against the sale or possession of shark fins.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] Several regions now have shark sanctuaries or have banned shark fishing—these regions include American Samoa , the Bahamas , the Cook Islands , French Polynesia , Guam , the Maldives , the Marshall Islands , Micronesia , the Northern Mariana Islands , and Palau .

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] In April 2020 researchers reported to have traced the origins of shark fins of endangered hammerhead sharks from a retail market in Hong Kong back to their source populations and therefore the approximate locations where the sharks were first caught using DNA analysis .

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] In July 2020 scientists reported results of a survey of 371 reefs in 58 nations estimating the conservation status of reef sharks globally . No sharks have been observed on almost 20% of the surveyed reefs and shark depletion was strongly associated with both socio-economic conditions and conservation measures.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] Sharks are considered to be a vital part of the ocean ecosystem .

According to a 2021 study in Nature , [ 196 ] overfishing has resulted in a 71% global decline in the number of oceanic sharks and rays over the preceding 50 years. The oceanic whitetip, and both the scalloped hammerhead and great hammerheads are now classified as critically endangered .

[ 197 ] Sharks in tropical waters have declined more rapidly than those in temperate zones during the period studied.

[ 198 ] A 2021 study published in Current Biology found that overfishing is currently driving over one-third of sharks and rays to extinction .

[ 199 ] See also Fish portal Sharks portal List of sharks List of prehistoric cartilaginous fish genera Osteichthyes Marine vertebrate Outline of sharks Shark meat References Citations ^ Nelson, Joseph Schieser (2016).

Fishes of the world (Fifth ed.). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-119-17484-4 .

^ Andreev, Plamen; Coates, Michael I.; Karatajūtė-Talimaa, Valentina; Shelton, Richard M.; Cooper, Paul R.; Wang, Nian-Zhong; Sansom, Ivan J. (2016-06-16).

"The systematics of the Mongolepidida (Chondrichthyes) and the Ordovician origins of the clade" .

PeerJ .

4 e1850.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.1850 .

ISSN 2167-8359 .

PMC 4918221 .

PMID 27350896 .

S2CID 9236223 .

^ Marjanović, D. (2021).

"The Making of Calibration Sausage Exemplified by Recalibrating the Transcriptomic Timetree of Jawed Vertebrates" .

Frontiers in Genetics .

12 . 521693.

doi : 10.3389/fgene.2021.521693 .

ISSN 1664-8021 .

PMC 8149952 .

PMID 34054911 .

^ Pimiento, Catalina; Cantalapiedra, Juan L.; Shimada, Kenshu; Field, Daniel J.; Smaers, Jeroen B. (24 January 2019).

"Evolutionary pathways toward gigantism in sharks and rays" .

Evolution .

73 (2): 588– 599.

doi : 10.1111/evo.13680 .

PMID 30675721 .

S2CID 59224442 .

^ Allen, Thomas B. (1999).

The Shark Almanac . New York: The Lyons Press.

ISBN 978-1-55821-582-5 .

OCLC 39627633 .

^ Budker, Paul (1971).

The Life of Sharks . London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 9780231035514 .

^ a b Einhorn, Catrin (January 27, 2021).

"Shark Populations Are Crashing, with a 'Very Small Window' to Avert Disaster" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 31, 2021 .

^ Ker Than (26 September 2006).

"Shark Slaughter: 73 Million Killed Each Year" .

Live Science . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ Caty Fairclough (August 2013).

"Shark Finning: Sharks Turned Prey" .

Ocean.si.edu . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" . Etymonline.com.

Archived from the original on 2012-10-04 . Retrieved 2013-09-07 .

^ Marx, Robert F. (1990).

The History of Underwater Exploration . Courier Dover Publications. p.

3 .

ISBN 978-0-486-26487-5 .

^ Online Etymology Dictionary, shark.

^ Jones, Tom.

"The Xoc, the Sharke, and the Sea Dogs: An Historical Encounter" .

Archived from the original on 2008-11-21 . Retrieved 2009-07-11 .

^ "Shark" .

Middle English Dictionary . University of Michigan.

Archived from the original on 2013-08-20 . Retrieved 2014-02-02 .

^ Andreev, Plamen S.; Sansom, Ivan J.; Li, Qiang; Zhao, Wenjin; Wang, Jianhua; Wang, Chun-Chieh; Peng, Lijian; Jia, Liantao; Qiao, Tuo; Zhu, Min (September 2022).

"Spiny chondrichthyan from the lower Silurian of South China" .

Nature .

609 (7929): 969– 974.

Bibcode : 2022Natur.609..969A .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-022-05233-8 .

PMID 36171377 .

S2CID 252570103 .

^ Frey, Linda; Coates, Michael; Ginter, Michał; Hairapetian, Vachik; Rücklin, Martin; Jerjen, Iwan; Klug, Christian (2019-10-09).

"The early elasmobranch Phoebodus : phylogenetic relationships, ecomorphology and a new time-scale for shark evolution" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

286 (1912): 20191336.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2019.1336 .

ISSN 0962-8452 .

PMC 6790773 .

PMID 31575362 .

^ Ginter, Michał (July 2022).

"The biostratigraphy of Carboniferous chondrichthyans" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

512 (1): 769– 790.

Bibcode : 2022GSLSP.512..769G .

doi : 10.1144/SP512-2020-91 .

ISSN 0305-8719 .

S2CID 229399689 .

^ Pough, F. Harvey; Janis, Christine M. (2018).

Vertebrate Life, 10th Edition . Oxford University Press. pp.

96– 103.

ISBN 9781605357218 .

^ Andreev, Plamen S.; Cuny, Gilles (2012-02-28).

"New Triassic stem selachimorphs (Chondrichthyes, Elasmobranchii) and their bearing on the evolution of dental enameloid in Neoselachii" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

32 (2): 255– 266.

Bibcode : 2012JVPal..32..255A .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2012.644646 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 84162775 .

^ Underwood, Charlie J. (March 2006).

"Diversification of the Neoselachii (Chondrichthyes) during the Jurassic and Cretaceous" .

Paleobiology .

32 (2): 215– 235.

Bibcode : 2006Pbio...32..215U .

doi : 10.1666/04069.1 .

ISSN 0094-8373 .

S2CID 86232401 .

^ Rees, J. A. N., and Underwood, C. J., 2008, Hybodont sharks of the English Bathonian and Callovian (Middle Jurassic): Palaeontology, v. 51, no. 1, p. 117–147.

^ Amaral, Cesar; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse; Amorim, António; de Carvalho, Elizeu F (2017).

"The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)" .

Mitochondrial DNA Part A .

29 (6): 1– 12.

doi : 10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052 .

PMID 28927318 .

S2CID 3258973 .

^ a b "Sharks (Chondrichthyes)" . FAO.

Archived from the original on 2008-08-02 . Retrieved 2009-09-14 .

^ Pavan-Kumar, A.; Gireesh-Babu, P.; Babu, P. P. Suresh; Jaiswar, A. K.; Hari Krishna, V.; Prasasd, K. Pani; Chaudhari, Aparna; Raje, S. G.; Chakraborty, S. K. (January 2014). "Molecular phylogeny of elasmobranchs inferred from mitochondrial and nuclear markers".

Molecular Biology Reports .

41 (1): 447– 457.

doi : 10.1007/s11033-013-2879-6 .

PMID 24293104 .

S2CID 16018112 .

^ Amaral, Cesar R. L.; Pereira, Filipe; Silva, Dayse A.; Amorim, António; de Carvalho, Elizeu F. (2017-09-20).

"The mitogenomic phylogeny of the Elasmobranchii (Chondrichthyes)" .

Mitochondrial DNA Part A .

29 (6): 867– 878.

doi : 10.1080/24701394.2017.1376052 .

PMID 28927318 .

S2CID 3258973 .

^ a b "Compagno's FAO Species List - 1984" . Elasmo.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-28 . Retrieved 2009-09-14 .

^ a b "Echinorhiniformes" . WoRMS . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

^ Straube, Nicolas; Li, Chenhong; Claes, Julien M.; Corrigan, Shannon; Naylor, Gavin J. P. (2015).

"Molecular phylogeny of Squaliformes and first occurrence of bioluminescence in sharks" .

BMC Evolutionary Biology .

15 (1): 162.

Bibcode : 2015BMCEE..15..162S .

doi : 10.1186/s12862-015-0446-6 .

ISSN 1471-2148 .

PMC 4537554 .

PMID 26277575 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Teeth of the Skin" .

Archived from the original on 2007-10-12 . Retrieved 2007-08-28 .

^ a b Gilbertson, Lance (1999).

Zoology Laboratory Manual . New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-07-237716-3 .

^ a b Martin, R. Aidan.

"Skeleton in the Corset" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-11-25 . Retrieved 2009-08-21 .

^ a b "A Shark's Skeleton & Organs" . Archived from the original on August 5, 2010 . Retrieved August 14, 2009 .

^ Hamlett, W. C. (1999f).

Sharks, Skates and Rays: The Biology of Elasmobranch Fishes . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5 .

OCLC 39217534 .

^ Hamlett, William C. (April 23, 1999).

Sharks, skates, and rays: the biology of elasmobranch fishes (1st ed.). The Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6048-5 .

^ a b Martin, R. Aidan.

"The Importance of Being Cartilaginous" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-02-27 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Skin of the Teeth" . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2007-08-28 .

^ "Camouflage facts" .

National Geographic Society . 4 January 2019. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021 . Retrieved 2021-11-25 .

^ Womersley, Freya; Hancock, James; Perry, Cameron T.; Rowat, David (February 2021).

"Wound-healing capabilities of whale sharks (Rhincodon typus) and implications for conservation management" .

Conservation Physiology .

9 (1): coaa120.

doi : 10.1093/conphys/coaa120 .

PMC 7859907 .

PMID 33569175 .

^ Michael, Bright.

"Jaws: The Natural History of Sharks" . Columbia University. Archived from the original on 2009-05-11 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Nelson, Joseph S. (1994).

Fishes of the World . New York: John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-54713-6 .

OCLC 28965588 .

^ a b c d Compagno, Leonard; Dando, Marc; Fowler, Sarah (2005).

Sharks of the World . Collins Field Guides.

ISBN 978-0-00-713610-0 .

OCLC 183136093 .

^ a b Pratt, H. L. Jr; Gruber, S. H.; Taniuchi, T (1990).

Elasmobranchs as living resources: Advances in the biology, ecology, systematics, and the status of the fisheries . NOAA Tech Rept.

^ Bennetta, William J. (1996).

"Deep Breathing" . Archived from the original on 2007-08-14 . Retrieved 2007-08-28 .

^ "Do sharks sleep" . Flmnh.ufl.edu. 2017-05-02. Archived from the original on 2010-09-18.

^ "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, CIRCULATORY SYSTEM" . Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2009-04-24 . Retrieved 2009-09-03 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan (April 1992).

"Fire in the Belly of the Beast" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-09-17 . Retrieved 2009-08-21 .

^ Nogrady, Bianca (May 11, 2023).

"Hammerhead sharks are first fish found to 'hold their breath' " .

Nature .

617 (7962): 663.

Bibcode : 2023Natur.617..663N .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-023-01569-x .

PMID 37169849 .

S2CID 258639015 – via www.nature.com.

^ Griffith, R. W (1980). "Chemistry of the Body Fluids of the Coelacanth, Latimeria chalumnae".

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

208 (1172): 329– 347.

Bibcode : 1980RSPSB.208..329G .

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1980.0054 .

JSTOR 35431 .

PMID 6106196 .

S2CID 38498079 .

^ "Sharkproject" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Musick, John A. (2005).

"Management techniques for elasmobranch fisheries: 14. Shark Utilization" . FAO: Fisheries and Aquaculture Department.

Archived from the original on 2011-07-22 . Retrieved 2008-03-16 .

^ Batten, Thomas.

"MAKO SHARK Isurus oxyrinchus" . Delaware Sea Grant, University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2008-03-11 . Retrieved 2008-03-16 .

^ Forrest, John N. (Jnr.) (2016).

"The Shark Rectal Gland Model: A Champion of Receptor Mediated Chloride Secretion Through CFTR" .

Transactions of the American Clinical Climatological Association .

127 : 162– 175.

PMC 5216465 .

PMID 28066051 .

^ a b Martin, R. Aidan.

"No Guts, No Glory" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-08-11 . Retrieved 2009-08-22 .

^ Potenza, Alessandra (20 June 2017).

"Sharks literally puke their guts out—here's why" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2017 . Retrieved 21 June 2017 .

^ Park, Hyun Bong; Lam, Yick Chong; Gaffney, Jean P.; Weaver, James C.; Krivoshik, Sara Rose; Hamchand, Randy; Pieribone, Vincent; Gruber, David F.; Crawford, Jason M. (27 September 2019).

"Bright Green Biofluorescence in Sharks Derives from Bromo-Kynurenine Metabolism" .

iScience .

19 : 1291– 1336.

Bibcode : 2019iSci...19.1291P .

doi : 10.1016/j.isci.2019.07.019 .

PMC 6831821 .

PMID 31402257 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Smell and Taste" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-12-07 . Retrieved 2009-08-21 .

^ a b c Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Collin, Shaun P. (2015-03-01).

"Not all sharks are "swimming noses": variation in olfactory bulb size in cartilaginous fishes" .

Brain Structure and Function .

220 (2): 1127– 1143.

doi : 10.1007/s00429-014-0705-0 .

ISSN 1863-2661 .

PMID 24435575 .

S2CID 2829434 .

^ Yopak, Kara E.; Lisney, Thomas J.; Darlington, Richard B.; Collin, Shaun P.; Montgomery, John C.; Finlay, Barbara L. (2010-07-20).

"A conserved pattern of brain scaling from sharks to primates" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

107 (29): 12946– 12951.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..10712946Y .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1002195107 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 2919912 .

PMID 20616012 .

S2CID 2151639 .

^ The Function of Bilateral Odor Arrival Time Differences in Olfactory Orientation of Sharks Archived 2012-03-08 at the Wayback Machine , Jayne M. Gardiner, Jelle Atema, Current Biology - 13 July 2010 (Vol. 20, Issue 13, pp. 1187–1191) ^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Vision and a Carpet of Light" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-04-29 . Retrieved 2009-08-22 .

^ "Sharks are colour-blind, new study finds" . Archived from the original on 2011-01-24 . Retrieved 2011-02-03 .

^ Gill, Victoria (2011-01-18).

"Sharks are probably colour-blind" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 2011-01-19 . Retrieved 2011-01-19 .

^ Nathan Scott Hart; Susan Michelle Theiss; Blake Kristin Harahush; Shaun Patrick Collin (2011). "Microspectrophotometric evidence for cone monochromacy in sharks".

Naturwissenschaften .

98 (3): 193– 201.

Bibcode : 2011NW.....98..193H .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-010-0758-8 .

PMID 21212930 .

S2CID 30148811 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Hearing and Vibration Detection" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-01 . Retrieved 2008-06-01 .

^ Casper, B. M. (2006).

The hearing abilities of elasmobranch fishes (PhD dissertation). University of South Florida. p. 16.

^ Kalmijn AJ (1982). "Electric and magnetic field detection in elasmobranch fishes".

Science .

218 (4575): 916– 8.

Bibcode : 1982Sci...218..916K .

doi : 10.1126/science.7134985 .

PMID 7134985 .

^ Meyer CG; Holland KN; Papastamatiou YP (2005).

"Sharks can detect changes in the geomagnetic field" .

Journal of the Royal Society, Interface .

2 (2): 129– 30.

doi : 10.1098/rsif.2004.0021 .

PMC 1578252 .

PMID 16849172 .

^ Bleckmann, Horst; Zelick, Randy (March 2009).

"Lateral line system of fish" .

Integrative Zoology .

4 (1): 13– 25.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-4877.2008.00131.x .

ISSN 1749-4877 .

PMID 21392273 .

^ Popper, A. N.; C. Platt (1993). "Inner ear and lateral line".

The Physiology of Fishes (1st ed).

^ "Mote Marine Laboratory, "Shark Notes" " . Mote.org. Archived from the original on 2012-01-24 . Retrieved 2012-08-27 .

^ "Florida Museum of Natural History Ichthyology Department, "National Shark Research Consortium–Shark Basics" " . Archived from the original on September 4, 2007.

^ Nielsen, J.; Hedeholm, R. B.; Heinemeier, J.; Bushnell, P. G.; Christiansen, J. S.; Olsen, J.; Ramsey, C. B.; Brill, R. W.; Simon, M.; Steffensen, K. F.; Steffensen, J. F. (2016-08-12).

"Eye lens radiocarbon reveals centuries of longevity in the Greenland shark ( Somniosus microcephalus )" .

Science .

353 (6300): 702– 704.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...353..702N .

doi : 10.1126/science.aaf1703 .

hdl : 2022/26597 .

PMID 27516602 .

S2CID 206647043 .

^ Pennisi, Elizabeth (11 August 2016).

"Greenland shark may live 400 years, smashing longevity record" .

Science .

doi : 10.1126/science.aag0748 .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 August 2016 .

^ a b c Leonard J. V. Compagno (1984).

Sharks of the World: An annotated and illustrated catalogue of shark species known to date . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-104543-5 .

OCLC 156157504 .

^ Gruber, Samuel H. (February 21, 2000).

"LIFE STYLE OF SHARKS" . Archived from the original on July 27, 2011 . Retrieved June 20, 2010 .

^ a b c Adams, Kye R.; Fetterplace, Lachlan C.; Davis, Andrew R.; Taylor, Matthew D.; Knott, Nathan A. (January 2018).

"Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs" .

Biological Conservation .

217 : 11– 27.

Bibcode : 2018BCons.217...11A .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010 .

S2CID 90834034 . Archived from the original on 2019-02-23 . Retrieved 2018-11-24 .

^ a b Martin, R. Aidan.

"Why Do Sharks Have Two Penises?" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research. Archived from the original on 2009-08-28 . Retrieved 2009-08-22 .

^ "How Do Sharks Mate? - Center For Ocean Life" .

Center For Ocean Life . Archived from the original on 2018-09-06 . Retrieved 2018-09-09 .

^ Chapman DD; Shivji MS; Louis E; Sommer J; Fletcher H; Prodöhl PA (2007).

"Virgin birth in a hammerhead shark" .

Biology Letters .

3 (4): 425– 7.

doi : 10.1098/rsbl.2007.0189 .

PMC 2390672 .

PMID 17519185 .

^ In shark tank, an asexual birth Archived 2009-07-09 at the Wayback Machine , Boston Globe, 10 Oct. 2008 ^ Fountain, Henry (2007-05-23).

"Female sharks reproduce without male DNA, scientists say" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2009-04-17 . Retrieved 2007-11-13 .

^ a b c d "SHARKS & RAYS, SeaWorld/Busch Gardens ANIMALS, BIRTH & CARE OF YOUNG" . Busch Entertainment Corporation. Archived from the original on 2013-08-03 . Retrieved 2009-09-03 .

^ Adams, Kye R; Fetterplace, Lachlan C; Davis, Andrew R; Taylor, Matthew D; Knott, Nathan A (2018).

"Sharks, rays and abortion: The prevalence of capture-induced parturition in elasmobranchs" .

Biological Conservation .

217 : 11– 27.

Bibcode : 2018BCons.217...11A .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2017.10.010 .

S2CID 90834034 . Archived from the original on 2019-02-23 . Retrieved 2018-11-24 .

^ "Marine Biology notes" . School of Life Sciences, Napier University . Archived from the original on 2003-08-23 . Retrieved 2006-09-12 .

^ a b c Carrier, J.C; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R. (2012).

Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives: Second Edition . Taylor & Francis Group.

^ The truth about sharks: Far from being 'killing machines', they have personalities, best friends and an exceptional capacity for learning Archived 2015-07-03 at the Wayback Machine (2014-11-28), The Independent ^ Ravilious, Kate (2005-10-07).

"Scientists track shark's 12,000 mile round-trip" .

Guardian Unlimited . London . Retrieved 2006-09-17 .

^ Johnson, Richard H. & Nelson, Donald R. (1973-03-05). "Agonistic Display in the Gray Reef Shark, Carcharhinus menisorrah , and Its Relationship to Attacks on Man".

Copeia .

1973 (1): 76– 84.

doi : 10.2307/1442360 .

JSTOR 1442360 .

^ Reefquest Center for Shark Research.

What's the Speediest Marine Creature?

Archived 2009-04-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ The secret life of sharks Archived 2012-04-05 at the Wayback Machine , Maria Moscaritolo, The Adelaide Advertiser , 3 March 2012.

^ Ruckstuhl, Kathreen E.; Neuhaus, Peter, eds. (January 23, 2006). "Sexual Segregation in Sharks".

Sexual segregation in vertebrates . Cambridge University Press. p. 128.

ISBN 978-0-521-83522-0 .

^ "Is the White Shark Intelligent" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2006-08-07 .

^ "Biology of the Porbeagle" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2012-07-29 . Retrieved 2006-08-07 .

^ Guttridge, T.L.; van Dijk, S.; Stamhuis, E.J.; Krause, J.; Gruber, S.H.; Brown, C. (2013).

"Social learning in juvenile lemon sharks, Negaprion brevirostris" .

Animal Cognition .

16 (1): 55– 64.

doi : 10.1007/s10071-012-0550-6 .

PMID 22933179 .

S2CID 351363 . Archived from the original on 2019-04-27 . Retrieved 2019-09-05 .

^ a b "How Do Sharks Swim When Asleep?" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2012-07-29 . Retrieved 2006-08-07 .

^ "Great White Shark Caught On Camera Napping For The First Time" . NPR. 6 July 2016 . Retrieved 16 December 2019 .

^ a b Martin, R. Aidan.

"Building a Better Mouth Trap" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2012-07-10 . Retrieved 2009-08-22 .

^ Martin, R. Aidan.

"Order Orectolobiformes: Carpet Sharks—39 species" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2009-04-29 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Leigh, Samantha C.; Papastamatiou, Yannis P.; German, Donovan P. (September 5, 2018).

"Seagrass digestion by a notorious 'carnivore' " .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

285 (1886): 20181583.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2018.1583 .

PMC 6158537 .

PMID 30185641 .

^ Stevens 1987 ^ " Carcharhinus leucas " . University of Michigan Museum of Zoology, Animal Diversity Web. Archived from the original on 2011-06-05 . Retrieved 2006-09-08 .

^ Priede IG, Froese R, Bailey DM, et al. (2006).

"The absence of sharks from abyssal regions of the world's oceans" .

Proceedings: Biological Sciences .

273 (1592): 1435– 41.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2005.3461 .

PMC 1560292 .

PMID 16777734 .

^ "Worldwide shark attack summary" .

International Shark Attack File . Archived from the original on 2007-08-18 . Retrieved 2007-08-28 .

^ "Statistics on Attacking Species of Shark" . ISAF. Archived from the original on 2009-07-24 . Retrieved 2006-09-12 .

^ "Biology of sharks and rays" . ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research.

Archived from the original on 2006-02-06 . Retrieved 2014-01-17 .

^ Buttigieg, Alex.

"The Sharkman meets Ron & Valerie Taylor" . Sharkman's Graphics. Archived from the original on 2009-03-03 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Handwerk, Brian (7 June 2002).

"Jaws Author Peter Benchley Talks Sharks" . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ "How Should We Respond When Humans and Sharks Collide?" . News.nationalgeographic.com. 2013-07-04. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06 . Retrieved 2013-09-07 .

^ "Sharks and Survival: Three misconceptions about sharks; one striking reality" . Loggerhead Marinelife Center. 2016-07-01.

Archived from the original on 2024-05-09 . Retrieved 2024-05-09 .

^ Gray, Richard (5 December 2023).

"The real reasons why sharks attack humans" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 2024-06-04 .

^ Chapman, Blake K.; McPhee, Daryl (2016).

"Global shark attack hotspots: Identifying underlying factors behind increased unprovoked shark bite incidence" .

Ocean and Coastal Management .

133 : 72.

Bibcode : 2016OCM...133...72C .

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.09.010 .

^ Dazio, Stefanie (June 7, 2023).

"Just keep swimming: SoCal study shows sharks, humans can share ocean peacefully" .

AP News . Retrieved June 8, 2023 .

^ "Whale Sharks in Captivity" . Archived from the original on September 2, 2006 . Retrieved 2006-09-13 .

^ a b c d Michael, Scott W. (March 2004). "Sharks at Home".

Aquarium Fish Magazine . pp.

20– 29.

^ Beckwith, Martha (1940).

"Guardian Gods" .

Archived from the original on May 27, 2009 . Retrieved August 13, 2009 .

^ "Pele, Goddess of Fire" . Archived from the original on 2006-09-01 . Retrieved 2006-09-13 .

^ "Traditions of O'ahu: Stories of an Ancient Island" . Archived from the original on September 18, 2009 . Retrieved August 14, 2009 .

^ Taylor, Leighton R. (November 1993).

Sharks of Hawaii: Their Biology and Cultural Significance . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-1562-2 .

^ a b "National Register of Historic Places Registration Form - Turtle and Shark (American Samoa)" (PDF) . United States National Park Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-10-25 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ "The Turtle And The Shark" .

Ryanwoodwardart.com . Archived from the original on 2018-10-25 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ "Samoa - Some Legends of Samoa" .

Janesocienia.coam . Archived from the original on 2018-11-28 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ Crawford, Dean (2008).

Shark . Reaktion Books. pp.

47– 55.

ISBN 978-1861893253 .

^ Jøn, A. Asbjørn; Aich, Raj S. (2015).

"Southern shark lore forty years after Jaws: The positioning of sharks within Murihiku, New Zealand" .

Australian Folklore: A Yearly Journal of Folklore Studies (30).

^ Finkelstein JB (2005).

"Sharks do get cancer: few surprises in cartilage research" .

Journal of the National Cancer Institute .

97 (21): 1562– 3.

doi : 10.1093/jnci/dji392 .

PMID 16264172 .

^ Ostrander GK; Cheng KC; Wolf JC; Wolfe MJ (2004).

"Shark cartilage, cancer and the growing threat of pseudoscience" .

Cancer Research .

64 (23): 8485– 91.

doi : 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-04-2260 .

PMID 15574750 .

^ "Do Sharks Hold Secret to Human Cancer Fight?" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 2012-07-16 . Retrieved 2006-09-08 .

^ "Alternative approaches to prostate cancer treatment" . Archived from the original on June 2, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-06-23 .

^ Pollack, Andrew (3 June 2007).

"Shark Cartilage, Not a Cancer Therapy" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ The results of a study sponsored by the National Cancer Institute , and led by Dr. Charles Lu of the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas , were presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology on June 2, 2007 in Chicago . Cancer patients treated with extracts from shark cartilage had a shorter median lifespan than patients receiving a placebo.

"Shark fin won't help fight cancer, but ginseng will" . Retrieved 2008-06-23 .

[ dead link ] ^ HowStuffWorks "How many sharks are killed recreationally each year - and why?" . Animals.howstuffworks.com. Retrieved on 2010-09-16.

Archived March 7, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "Shark fin soup alters an ecosystem—CNN.com" .

CNN . 2008-12-15.

Archived from the original on 2010-03-26 . Retrieved 2010-05-23 .

^ Worm, Boris; Davis, Brendal; Kettemer, Lisa; Ward-Paige, Christine A.; Chapman, Demian; Heithaus, Michael R.; Kessel, Steven T.; Gruber, Samuel H. (2013). "Global catches, exploitation rates, and rebuilding options for sharks".

Marine Policy .

40 : 194– 204.

Bibcode : 2013MarPo..40..194W .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2012.12.034 .

^ a b Nicholas K Dulvy; Sarah L Fowler; John A Musick; Rachel D Cavanagh; Peter M Kyne; Lucy R Harrison; John K Carlson; Lindsay NK Davidson; Sonja V Fordham; Malcolm P Francis; Caroline M Pollock; Colin A Simpfendorfer; George H Burgess; Kent E Carpenter; Leonard JV Compagno; David A Ebert; Claudine Gibson; Michelle R Heupel; Suzanne R Livingstone; Jonnell C Sanciangco; John D Stevens; Sarah Valenti; William T White (2014).

"Extinction risk and conservation of the world's sharks and rays" .

eLife .

3 : e00590.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.00590 .

PMC 3897121 .

PMID 24448405 .

eLife 2014;3:e00590 ^ "Endangered shark meat sold in Australian fish and chip shops, study finds" .

Sky News . Retrieved 2023-07-27 .

^ Herz, Rachel (28 January 2012).

"You eat that?" .

The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 .

^ a b Bakalar, Nicholas (October 12, 2006).

"38 Million Sharks Killed for Fins Annually, Experts Estimate" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on October 17, 2012 . Retrieved 2012-12-02 .

^ Hood, Ali (June 7, 2007).

"Stop Shark Finning Factsheet" .

www.sharktrust.org . Archived from the original on August 4, 2008.

^ "The Action Network" .

archive.ph . September 3, 2013. Archived from the original on 2013-09-03.

^ "Hawaii: Shark Fin Soup Is Off the Menu" .

The New York Times . Associated Press. May 28, 2010.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2017 . Retrieved June 20, 2010 .

Research exemptions are available.

^ "Sharks and Rays - Species we work with at TRAFFIC" .

www.traffic.org . Archived from the original on 2019-01-10 . Retrieved 2019-01-10 .

^ Mondo, Kiyo; Hammerschlag, Neil; Basile, Margaret; Pablo, John; Banack, Sandra A.; Mash, Deborah C. (2012).

"Cyanobacterial Neurotoxin β-N-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) in Shark Fins" .

Marine Drugs .

10 (2): 509– 520.

doi : 10.3390/md10020509 .

PMC 3297012 .

PMID 22412816 .

^ "Neurotoxins in shark fins: A human health concern" .

Science Daily . February 23, 2012.

Archived from the original on August 9, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "Shark fisheries and trade in Europe: Fact sheet on Italy" .

Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-09-06 .

^ Walker, T.I. (1998).

Shark Fisheries Management and Biology .

^ France Porcher, Illa (2014-01-24).

"One Quarter of Sharks and Rays Face Extinction" . Archived from the original on 2014-01-26 . Retrieved 2014-01-24 .

^ Morales, Alex.

"Extinction Threatens 1/4 of Sharks and Rays on Red List" . Bloomberg L.P.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2014 . Retrieved 24 January 2014 .

^ Brown, Sophie (8 May 2014).

"Australia: Over 170 sharks caught under controversial cull program" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2017 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Milman, Oliver (23 October 2014).

"WA abandons shark culling program, but reserves right to kill again" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2016 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Wahlquist, Calla (12 February 2015).

"Western Australia's 'serious threat' shark policy condemned by Senate" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2016 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Mercer, Daniel (19 April 2017).

"Premier Mark McGowan's shark plan not enough to protect us" .

The West Australian .

Archived from the original on 2018-09-09 . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ "Sharks to be caught on SMART drum lines off WA's South West after Labor U-turn" .

ABC News (Australia) . August 14, 2018.

Archived from the original on 2018-09-02 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ "Queensland - Overview" .

seashepherd.org.au . Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ "Drumlines nab 695 sharks" .

The Australian . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Watson, Matt (25 August 2015).

"Dolphins, rays among hundreds killed on Queensland shark nets and drum lines, figures show" .

ABC News (Australia) .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ a b "Shark nets in Australia—what are they and how do they work?" .

Sealifetrust.org.au . Archived from the original on 2018-09-19 . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ a b Phillips, Jack.

"Endangered Hammerhead Sharks Dead on Drum Line in Great Barrier Reef" .

Ntd.tv . Archived from the original on 2018-09-19 . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ "Queensland Government Kills Sharks, Faces Court Challenge" .

maritime-executive.com . September 4, 2018.

Archived from the original on 2018-09-04 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ a b Deutrom, Rhian (December 14, 2018).

"Aussie shark population in staggering decline" .

News.com.au .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-23 . Retrieved December 22, 2018 .

^ "New South Wales - Overview" .

seashepherd.org.au . Archived from the original on 27 November 2016 . Retrieved 31 December 2016 .

^ Scott, Elfy (July 5, 2018).

"Here's What You Need To Know About Australia's SMART Drum Lines Being Used To Prevent Shark Attacks" .

Buzzfeed . Archived from the original on 2018-10-13 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ "Shark Culling" . Australian Marine Convservation Society. Archived from the original on 2018-10-02 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ a b c "Shark nets" .

Sharkangels.org . Archived from the original on 2018-09-19 . Retrieved September 18, 2018 .

^ "Man Who Devoted Life To Sharks, Killed Off The Coast Of Reunion" .

The New Zealand Herald . April 30, 2017.

Archived from the original on 2018-10-02 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ Schetzer, Alana (8 May 2017).

"Sharks: How A Cull Could Ruin An Ecosystem" . University of Melbourne.

Archived from the original on 2018-10-02 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Hubbard, Chloe (April 30, 2017).

"No Shark Cull: Why Some Surfers Don't Want to Kill Great Whites Despite Lethal Attacks" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 2018-08-06 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Morris, Jessica (December 8, 2016).

"Shark Nets—Death Traps For Marine Animals" . hsi.org.au. Archived from the original on 2018-10-02 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ Fraser, Doug (October 8, 2018).

"Expert: Shark threat 'always going to be a problem' for Cape Cod" .

Cape Cod Times .

Archived from the original on 2018-10-20 . Retrieved October 25, 2018 .

^ a b Contenta, Sandro (June 16, 2014).

"How To Swim With Sharks And Not Get Eaten" .

Toronto Star .

Archived from the original on 2018-09-19 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Williamson, Jane (August 17, 2015).

"Mike Baird is right, culling sharks doesn't work—here's what we can do instead" .

Theconversation.com .

Archived from the original on 2019-01-17 . Retrieved December 22, 2018 .

^ "The Greatest Threats to Sharks" . Oceana. 2007. Archived from the original on 2009-06-03 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ Sharkwater | Movies Archived 2009-04-25 at the Wayback Machine . EW.com (2007-10-31). Retrieved on 2010-09-16.

^ "White Shark Trust - Conservation" . Greatwhiteshark.co.za.

Archived from the original on 2012-03-06 . Retrieved 2012-06-15 .

^ "Bill Summary & Status, 106th Congress (1999 - 2000), H.R.5461: Major Congressional Actions" .

THOMAS .

Library of Congress . 2000-12-21.

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved March 27, 2012 .

^ United States v. Approximately 64,695 Pounds of Shark Fins Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine , 520 F.3d 976, ( 9th Cir.

, 2008).

^ "Bill Summary & Status, 111th Congress (2009 - 2010), H.R.81: Major Congressional Actions" .

THOMAS .

Library of Congress . 2011-01-04.

Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved March 27, 2012 .

^ Shark Conservation Act of 2009 | The Humane Society of the United States . Hsus.org. Retrieved on 2010-09-16.

Archived November 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ "COUNCIL REGULATION (EC) No 1185/2003 of 26 June 2003 on the removal of fins of sharks on board vessels" . European Union. 26 June 2003.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ "REGULATION (EU) No 605/2013 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL" . 12 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ Camhi, M.D.; Valenti, S.V.; Fordham, S.V.; Fowler, S.L.; Gibson, C., eds. (February 2007).

"The Conservation Status of Pelagic Sharks and Rays" (PDF) .

Pelagic Shark Red List Workshop . Oxford, England: IUCN Shark Specialist Group.

ISBN 978-0-9561063-1-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2011 . Retrieved April 3, 2012 .

^ Jha, Alok (2009-06-25).

"Fishing puts a third of all oceanic shark species at risk of extinction" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 2013-09-06 . Retrieved 2009-07-16 .

^ Jolly, David (2010-03-23).

"U.N. Group Rejects Shark Protections" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2017-07-01 . Retrieved 2017-02-23 .

^ "Qatar. UN body flip-flops on shark protection" . Tawa News, Canwest News Service. March 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010.

^ MCGrath, Matt (11 March 2013).

" 'Historic' day for shark protection" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2013 .

^ "Greenpeace International Seafood Red list" . Greenpeace.org. 2003-03-17. Archived from the original on 2010-08-20 . Retrieved 2010-09-23 .

^ "Seafod WATCH, National Sustainable Seafood Guide July 2009" (PDF) . July 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-04-18 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ "New York Ends Shark Fin Trade - Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation to Protect Sharks and Oceans" .

The Humane Society of the United States . 26 July 2013. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 27 July 2013 .

^ Millward, Susan.

"Restaurants Currently Offering Shark Fin Soup" .

Animal Welfare Institute . Archived from the original on April 6, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ Fobar, Rachel (January 16, 2019).

"Shark fin is banned in 12 U.S. states—but it's still on the menu" .

National Geographic .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2019 . Retrieved August 9, 2019 .

^ "Laws Protecting Sharks" .

Sharksavers.org . Archived from the original on 2018-09-03 . Retrieved September 3, 2018 .

^ Foster, Joanna M. (August 4, 2011).

"Pacific Islands Band Together on a Shark Sanctuary" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2018-09-03 . Retrieved September 3, 2018 .

^ Urbina, Ian (February 17, 2016).

"Palau vs. the Poachers" .

The New York Times .

^ "Fins from endangered hammerhead sharks in Hong Kong market traced mainly to Eastern Pacific" .

phys.org . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Fields, A. T.; Fischer, G. A.; Shea, S. K. H.; Zhang, H.; Feldheim, K. A.; Chapman, D. D. (2020). "DNA Zip-coding: identifying the source populations supplying the international trade of a critically endangered coastal shark".

Animal Conservation .

23 (6): 670– 678.

Bibcode : 2020AnCon..23..670F .

doi : 10.1111/acv.12585 .

S2CID 218775112 .

^ "Sharks almost gone from many reefs" .

phys.org . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ MacNeil, M. Aaron; Chapman, Demian D.; Heupel, Michelle; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Heithaus, Michael; Meekan, Mark; Harvey, Euan; Goetze, Jordan; Kiszka, Jeremy; Bond, Mark E.; Currey-Randall, Leanne M.; Speed, Conrad W.; Sherman, C. Samantha; Rees, Matthew J.; Udyawer, Vinay; Flowers, Kathryn I.; Clementi, Gina; Valentin-Albanese, Jasmine; Gorham, Taylor; Adam, M. Shiham; Ali, Khadeeja; Pina-Amargós, Fabián; Angulo-Valdés, Jorge A.; Asher, Jacob; Barcia, Laura García; Beaufort, Océane; Benjamin, Cecilie; Bernard, Anthony T. F.; Berumen, Michael L.; et al. (July 2020).

"Global status and conservation potential of reef sharks" .

Nature .

583 (7818): 801– 806.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.583..801M .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-2519-y .

hdl : 10754/664495 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 32699418 .

S2CID 220696105 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ Pacoureau, Nathan; Rigby, Cassandra L.; Kyne, Peter M.; Sherley, Richard B.; Winker, Henning; Carlson, John K.; Fordham, Sonja V.; Barreto, Rodrigo; Fernando, Daniel; Francis, Malcolm P.; Jabado, Rima W.; Herman, Katelyn B.; Liu, Kwang-Ming; Marshall, Andrea D.; Pollom, Riley A.; Romanov, Evgeny V.; Simpfendorfer, Colin A.; Yin, Jamie S.; Kindsvater, Holly K.; Dulvy, Nicholas K. (2021). "Half a century of global decline in oceanic sharks and rays".

Nature .

589 (7843): 567– 571.

Bibcode : 2021Natur.589..567P .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-03173-9 .

hdl : 10871/124531 .

PMID 33505035 .

S2CID 231723355 .

^ Briggs, Helen (28 January 2021).

"Extinction: 'Time is running out' to save sharks and rays" .

BBC News . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

^ Richardson, Holly (27 January 2021).

"Shark, ray populations have declined by 'alarming' 70 per cent since 1970s, study finds" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

^ Dulvy, Nicholas K.; Pacoureau, Nathan; et al. (2021).

"Overfishing drives over one-third of all sharks and rays toward a global extinction crisis" .

Current Biology .

31 (21): 4773– 4787.

Bibcode : 2021CBio...31E4773D .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2021.08.062 .

PMID 34492229 .

S2CID 237443284 .

General and cited references Castro, Jose (1983).

The Sharks of North American Waters . College Station: Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 978-0-89096-143-8 .

OCLC 183037060 .

Stevens, John D. (1987).

Sharks . New York: NY Facts on File Publications.

ISBN 978-0-8160-1800-0 .

OCLC 15163749 .

Pough, F. H.; Janis, C. M.; Heiser, J. B. (2005).

Vertebrate Life (7th ed.). New Jersey: Pearson Education Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-13-127836-3 .

OCLC 54822028 .

Clover, Charles (2004).

The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat . London: Ebury Press.

ISBN 978-0-09-189780-2 .

Owen, David (2009).

Shark: In Peril in the Sea . New South Wales: Allen and Unwin.

ISBN 978-1-74175-032-4 .

Further reading Calma, Justine (16 August 2021).

"How drones are changing our view of sharks" .

The Verge .

Sharks 'critical' to restoring damaged ecosystems, finds study .

The Guardian , 22 March 2021 Musick, John A and Musick, Susanna (2011) "Sharks" Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine In: Review of the state of world marine fishery resources , pages 245–254, FAO Fisheries technical paper 569, FAO, Rome.

ISBN 978-92-5-107023-9 .

"Sharks Falling Prey To Humans' Appetites" .

National Geographic , 28 October 2010.

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Shark (fish) .

Data related to Selachimorpha at Wikispecies Selachimorpha at Wikibooks v t e Sharks Topics Outline of sharks Shark anatomy Shark tooth Egg case (Chondrichthyes) Threat display Threatened sharks Taxonomy Carcharhiniformes (Ground sharks) Heterodontiformes (Bullhead sharks) Hexanchiformes Lamniformes (Mackerel sharks) Orectolobiformes (Carpet sharks) Pristiophoriformes (Sawsharks) Squaliformes Squatiniformes (Angelsharks) † Cladoselachiformes † Hybodontiformes † Symmoriida † Xenacanthida (Xenacantiformes) List of sharks Human interaction Shark attack Australia Réunion South Africa South Australia United States Shark attack prevention Shark cage diving Shark culling Drum lines Shark net Shark tourism Related Sharks in popular culture Shark sanctuary Shark Alliance U.S. Shark Conservation Act Grey nurse shark conservation Save Our Seas Foundation Category WikiProject v t e Extant shark species Kingdom Animalia Phylum Chordata Subphylum Vertebrata Class Chondrichthyes Subclass Elasmobranchii Division Selachii Order Carcharhiniformes (Ground sharks) Hemigaleidae (Weasel sharks) Hemipristis Snaggletooth shark ( H. elongata ) Chaenogaleus Hooktooth shark ( C. macrostoma ) Hemigaleus Australian weasel shark ( H. australiensis ) Sicklefin weasel shark ( H. microstoma ) Paragaleus Whitetip weasel shark ( P. leucolomatus ) Atlantic weasel shark ( P. pectoralis ) Slender weasel shark ( P. randalli ) Straight-tooth weasel shark ( P. tengi ) Leptochariidae Leptocharias Barbeled houndshark ( L. smithii ) Proscylliidae (Finback sharks) Ctenacis Harlequin catshark ( C. fehlmanni ) Eridacnis Cuban ribbontail catshark ( E. barbouri ) Pygmy ribbontail catshark ( E. radcliffei ) African ribbontail catshark ( E. sinuans ) Proscyllium Graceful catshark ( P. habereri ) P. venustum Pseudotriakidae Gollum Slender smooth-hound ( G. attenuatus ) Pseudotriakis False catshark ( P. microdon ) Sphyrnidae (Hammerhead sharks) Eusphyra Winghead shark ( E. blochii ) Sphyrna Scalloped bonnethead ( S. corona ) Whitefin hammerhead ( S. couardi ) Scalloped hammerhead ( S. lewini ) Scoophead ( S. media ) Great hammerhead ( S. mokarran ) Bonnethead ( S. tiburo ) Smalleye hammerhead ( S. tudes ) Smooth hammerhead ( S. zygaena ) Triakidae (Houndsharks) Furgaleus Whiskery shark ( F. macki ) Galeorhinus School shark ( G. galeus ) Gogolia Sailback houndshark ( G. filewoodi ) Hemitriakis Deepwater sicklefin hound shark ( H. abdita ) Sicklefin hound shark ( H. falcata ) Japanese topeshark ( H. japanica ) Whitefin topeshark ( H. leucoperiptera ) Ocellate topeshark ( Hemitriakis Sp.A ) Hypogaleus Blacktip tope ( H. hyugaensis ) Iago Longnose houndshark ( I. garricki ) Bigeye houndshark ( I. omanensis ) Lowfin houndshark ( Iago Sp.A ) Mustelus (Smooth-hounds) M. albipinnis Gummy shark ( M. antarcticus ) Starry smooth-hound ( M. asterias ) Gray smooth-hound ( M. californicus ) Dusky smooth-hound ( M. canis ) Sharptooth smooth-hound ( M. dorsalis ) Striped smooth-hound ( M. fasciatus ) Spotless smooth-hound ( M. griseus ) Brown smooth-hound ( M. henlei ) Smalleye smooth-hound ( M. higmani ) Spotted estuary smooth-hound ( M. lenticulatus ) Sicklefin smooth-hound ( M. lunulatus ) Starspotted smooth-hound ( M. manazo ) Speckled smooth-hound ( M. mento ) M. minicanis Arabian smooth-hound ( M. mosis ) Common smooth-hound ( M. mustelus ) Narrowfin smooth-hound ( M. norrisi ) Whitespotted smooth-hound ( M. palumbes ) Blackspotted smooth-hound ( M. punctulatus ) M. ravidus Narrownose smooth-hound ( M. schmitti ) Gulf smoothhound ( M. sinusmexicanus ) Humpback smooth-hound ( M. whitneyi ) M. widodoi Scylliogaleus Flapnose houndshark ( S. quecketti ) Triakis Sharpfin houndshark ( T. acutipinna ) Spotted houndshark ( T. maculata ) Sharptooth houndshark ( T. megalopterus ) Banded houndshark ( T. scyllium ) Leopard shark ( T. semifasciata ) Carcharhinidae Large family listed below Scyliorhinidae Large family listed below Family Carcharhinidae (Requiem sharks) Carcharhinus Blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) Silvertip shark ( C. albimarginatus ) Bignose shark ( C. altimus ) Graceful shark ( C. amblyrhynchoides ) Grey reef shark ( C. amblyrhynchos ) Pigeye shark ( C. amboinensis ) Borneo shark ( C. borneensis ) Copper shark ( C. brachyurus ) Spinner shark ( C. brevipinna ) Nervous shark ( C. cautus ) Whitecheek shark ( C. dussumieri ) Silky shark ( C. falciformis ) Creek whaler ( C. fitzroyensis ) Galapagos shark ( C. galapagenisis ) Pondicherry shark ( C. hemiodon ) Finetooth shark ( C. isodon ) Smoothtooth blacktip shark ( C. leiodon ) Bull shark ( C. leucas ) Blacktip shark ( C. limbatus ) Oceanic whitetip shark ( C. longimanus ) Hardnose shark ( C. macloti ) Blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) Dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) Caribbean reef shark ( C. perezii ) Sandbar shark ( C. plumbeus ) Smalltail shark ( C. porosus ) Blackspot shark ( C. sealei ) Night shark ( C. signatus ) Spottail shark ( C. sorrah ) Australian blacktip shark ( C. tilstoni ) Galeocerdo Tiger shark ( G. cuvier ) Glyphis (River sharks) Ganges shark ( G. gangeticus ) Northern river shark ( G. garricki ) Speartooth shark ( G. glyphis ) Irrawaddy river shark ( G. siamensis ) Borneo river shark ( Glyphis sp. B ) Isogomphodon Daggernose shark ( I. oxyrhynchus ) Lamiopsis Broadfin shark ( L. temminckii ) Loxodon Sliteye shark ( L. macrorhinus ) Nasolamia Whitenose shark ( N. velox ) Negaprion Sicklefin lemon shark ( N. acutidens ) Lemon shark ( N. brevirostris ) Prionace Blue shark ( P. glauca ) Rhizoprionodon Milk shark ( R. acutus ) Brazilian sharpnose shark ( R. lalandii ) Pacific sharpnose shark ( R. longurio ) Grey sharpnose shark ( R. oligolinx ) Caribbean sharpnose shark ( R. porosus ) Australian sharpnose shark ( R. taylori ) Atlantic sharpnose shark ( R. terraenovae ) Scoliodon Spadenose shark ( S. laticaudus ) Triaenodon Whitetip reef shark ( T. obesus ) Family Scyliorhinidae (Catsharks) Apristurus Flatnose cat shark ( A. acanutus ) A. albisoma A. aphyodes Atlantic ghost catshark ( A. atlanticus ) Brown catshark ( A. brunneus ) Hoary catshark ( A. canutus ) Flaccid catshark ( A. exsanguis ) A. fedorovi Humpback cat shark ( A. gibbosus ) Longfin catshark ( A. herklotsi ) Smallbelly catshark ( A. indicus ) A. internatus Broadnose catshark ( A. investigatoris ) Japanese catshark ( A. japonicus ) Longnose catshark ( A. kampae ) Iceland catshark ( A. laurussonii ) Longhead catshark ( A. longicephalus ) Flathead catshark ( A. macrorhynchus ) Broadmouth cat shark ( A. macrostomus ) Ghost catshark ( A. manis ) Black roughscale catshark ( A. melanoasper ) Smalleye catshark ( A. microps ) Smalldorsal cat shark ( A. micropterygeus ) Largenose catshark ( A. nasutus ) Smallfin catshark ( A. parvipinnis ) A. pinguis Spatulasnout catshark ( A. platyrhynchus ) Deepwater catshark ( A. profundorum ) Broadgill catshark ( A. riveri ) Saldanha catshark ( A. saldanha ) Pale catshark ( A. sibogae ) South China catshark ( A. sinensis ) Spongehead catshark ( A. spongiceps ) Panama ghost catshark ( A. stenseni ) Asymbolus Australian spotted catshark ( A. analis ) A. funebris Western spotted catshark ( A. occiduus ) Pale spotted catshark ( A. pallidus ) A. parvus A. rubiginosus Variegated catshark ( A. submaculatus ) Gulf catshark ( A. vincenti ) Atelomycterus A. baliensis Banded sand catshark ( A. fasciatus ) Australian marbled catshark ( A. macleayi ) Coral catshark ( A. marmoratus ) Aulohalaelurus New Caledonia catshark ( A. kanakorum ) Australian blackspotted catshark ( A. labiosus ) Cephaloscyllium Whitefin swellshark ( C. albipinnum ) Circle-blotch pygmy swellshark ( C. circulopullum ) Cook's swellshark ( C. cooki ) Reticulated swellshark ( C. fasciatum ) Formosa swellshark ( C. formosanum ) Australian reticulate swellshark ( C. hicosellum ) Draughtsboard shark ( C. isabellum ) Australian swellshark ( C. laticeps ) Spotted swellshark ( C. maculatum ) Leopard-spotted swellshark ( C. pardelotum ) Painted swellshark ( C. pictum ) Sarawak pygmy swellshark ( C. sarawakensis ) Flagtail swellshark ( C. signourum ) Indian swellshark ( C. silasi ) Speckled swellshark ( C. speccum ) Balloon shark ( C. sufflans ) Blotchy swellshark ( C. umbratile ) Saddled swellshark ( C. variegatum ) Swellshark ( C. ventriosum ) Narrowbar swellshark ( C. zebrum ) Cephalurus Lollipop catshark ( C. cephalus ) Figaro Australian sawtail catshark ( F. boardmani ) Northern sawtail catshark ( F. striatus ) Galeus Antilles catshark ( G. antillensis ) Roughtail catshark ( G. arae ) Atlantic sawtail cat shark ( G. atlanticus ) Longfin sawtail cat shark ( G. cadenati ) Gecko catshark ( G. eastmani ) Slender sawtail catshark ( G. gracilis ) Longnose sawtail cat shark ( G. longirostris ) Blackmouth catshark ( G. melastomus ) Southern sawtail catshark ( G. mincaronei ) Mouse catshark ( G. murinus ) Broadfin sawtail catshark ( G. nipponensis ) Peppered catshark ( G. piperatus ) African sawtail catshark ( G. polli ) G. priapus Blacktip sawtail catshark ( G. sauteri ) Dwarf sawtail catshark ( G. schultzi ) Springer's sawtail cat shark ( G. springeri ) Halaelurus Arabian catshark ( H. alcockii ) Speckled catshark ( H. boesemani ) Blackspotted catshark ( H. buergeri ) Dusky catshark ( H. canescens ) Broadhead cat shark ( H. clevai ) New Zealand catshark ( H. dawsoni ) Bristly catshark ( H. hispidus ) Spotless catshark ( H. immaculatus ) Lined catshark ( H. lineatus ) Mud catshark ( H. lutarius ) Tiger catshark ( H. natalensis ) Quagga catshark ( H. quagga ) Haploblepharus Puffadder shyshark ( H. edwardsii ) Brown shyshark ( H. fuscus ) Natal shyshark ( H. kistnasamyi ) Dark shyshark ( H. pictus ) Holohalaelurus H. favus H. grennian Crying izak ( H. melanostigma ) African spotted catshark ( H. punctatus ) Izak catshark ( H. regani ) Parmaturus White-tip catshark ( P. albimarginatus ) White-clasper catshark ( P. albipenis ) Beige catshark ( P. bigus ) Campeche catshark ( P. campechiensis ) Velvet catshark ( P. lanatus ) McMillan's catshark ( P. macmillani ) Blackgill catshark ( P. melanobranchus ) Salamander shark ( P. pilosus ) Filetail catshark ( P. xaniurus ) Shorttail catshark ( Parmaturus sp. A ) Pentanchus Onefin catshark ( P. profundicolus ) Poroderma Pyjama catshark ( P. africanum ) Leopard catshark ( P. pantherinum ) Schroederichthys Narrowmouthed catshark ( S. bivius ) Redspotted catshark ( S. chilensis ) Narrowtail catshark ( S. maculatus ) Lizard catshark ( S. saurisqualus ) Slender catshark ( S. tenuis ) Scyliorhinus Polkadot catshark ( S. besnardi ) Boa catshark ( S. boa ) Small-spotted catshark ( S. canicula ) Yellowspotted catshark ( S. capensis ) West African catshark ( S. cervigoni ) Comoro cat shark ( S. comoroensis ) Brownspotted catshark ( S. garmani ) Freckled catshark ( S. haeckelii ) Whitesaddled catshark ( S. hesperius ) Blotched catshark ( S. meadi ) Chain catshark ( S. retifer ) Nursehound ( S. stellaris ) Izu cat shark ( S. tokubee ) Cloudy catshark ( S. torazame ) Dwarf catshark ( S. torrei ) Order Echinorhiniformes (Bramble sharks) Echinorhinidae Echinorhinus Bramble shark ( E. brucus ) Prickly shark ( E. cookei ) Order Heterodontiformes (Bullhead sharks) Heterodontidae Heterodontus Horn shark ( H. francisci ) Crested bullhead shark ( H. galeatus ) Japanese bullhead shark ( H. japonicus ) Mexican hornshark ( H. mexicanus ) Oman bullhead shark ( H. omanensis ) Port Jackson shark ( H. portusjacksoni ) Galapagos bullhead shark ( H. quoyi ) Whitespotted bullhead shark ( H. ramalheira ) Zebra bullhead shark ( H. zebra ) Order Hexanchiformes Chlamydoselachidae Chlamydoselachus Frilled shark ( C. anguineus ) Southern African frilled shark ( C. africana ) Hexanchidae (Cow sharks) Heptranchias Sharpnose sevengill shark ( H. perlo ) Hexanchus Bluntnose sixgill shark ( H. griseus ) Bigeyed sixgill shark ( H. nakamurai ) Notorynchus Broadnose sevengill shark ( N. cepedianus ) Order Lamniformes (Mackerel sharks) Alopiidae Alopias (Thresher sharks) Pelagic thresher ( A. pelagicus ) Bigeye thresher ( A. superciliosus ) Common thresher ( A. vulpinus ) Alopias sp. ( A. sp.

) Cetorhinidae Cetorhinus Basking shark ( C. maximus ) Lamnidae Carcharodon Great white shark ( C. carcharias ) Isurus Shortfin mako shark ( I. oxyrinchus ) Longfin mako shark ( I. paucus ) Lamna Salmon shark ( L. ditropis ) Porbeagle ( L. nasus ) Megachasmidae Megachasma Megamouth shark ( M. pelagios ) Mitsukurinidae Mitsukurina Goblin shark ( M. owstoni ) Odontaspididae Carcharias Grey nurse shark ( C. taurus ) Indian sand tiger ( C. tricuspidatus ) Odontaspis Smalltooth sand tiger ( O. ferox ) Bigeye sand tiger ( O. noronhai ) Pseudocarchariidae Pseudocarcharias Crocodile shark ( P. kamoharai ) Order Orectolobiformes (Carpet sharks) Brachaeluridae Brachaelurus Blind shark ( B. waddi ) Heteroscyllium Bluegrey carpetshark ( H. colcloughi ) Ginglymostomatidae (Nurse sharks) Ginglymostoma Nurse shark ( G. cirratum ) Nebrius Tawny nurse shark ( N. ferrugineus ) Pseudoginglymostoma Short-tail nurse shark ( P. brevicaudatum ) Hemiscylliidae (Bamboo sharks) Chiloscyllium Arabian carpetshark ( C. arabicum ) Burmese bamboo shark ( C. burmensis ) Bluespotted bamboo shark ( C. caerulopunctatum ) Grey bamboo shark ( C. griseum ) Hasselt's bamboo shark ( C. hasseltii ) Slender bamboo shark ( C. indicum ) Whitespotted bamboo shark ( C. plagiosum ) Brownbanded bamboo shark ( C. punctatum ) Hemiscyllium Indonesian speckled carpetshark ( H. freycineti ) H. galei Papuan epaulette shark ( H. hallstromi ) H. henryi Epaulette shark ( H. ocellatum ) Hooded carpetshark ( H. strahani ) Speckled carpetshark ( H. trispeculare ) Orectolobidae (Wobbegongs) Eucrossorhinus Tasselled wobbegong ( E. dasypogon ) Orectolobus Floral banded wobbegong ( O. floridus ) Banded wobbegong ( O. halei ) Western wobbegong ( O. hutchinsi ) Japanese wobbegong ( O. japonicus ) Spotted wobbegong ( O. maculatus ) Ornate wobbegong ( O. ornatus ) Dwarf spotted wobbegong ( O. parvimaculatus ) Network wobbegong ( O. reticulatus ) Northern wobbegong ( O. wardi ) Sutorectus Cobbler wobbegong ( S. tentaculatus ) Parascylliidae (Collared carpet sharks) Cirrhoscyllium Barbelthroat carpetshark ( C. expolitum ) Taiwan saddled carpetshark ( C. formosanum ) Saddle carpetshark ( C. japonicum ) Parascyllium Collared carpetshark ( P. collare ) Rusty carpetshark ( P. ferrugineum ) Ginger carpetshark ( P. sparsimaculatum ) Necklace carpetshark ( P. variolatum ) Rhincodontidae Rhincodon Whale shark ( R. typus ) Stegostomatidae Stegostoma Zebra shark ( S. fasciatum ) Order Pristiophoriformes (Sawsharks) Pristiophoridae Pliotrema Anna's sixgill sawshark ( P. annae ) Kaja's sixgill sawshark ( P. kajae ) Sixgill sawshark ( P. warreni ) Pristiophorus Longnose sawshark ( P. cirratus ) Tropical sawshark ( P. delicatus ) Japanese sawshark ( P. japonicus ) Philippine sawshark ( P. lanae ) African dwarf sawshark ( P. nancyae ) Shortnose sawshark ( P. nudipinnis ) Eastern Australian sawshark ( P. peroniensis ) Bahamas sawshark ( P. schroederi ) Order Squaliformes Centrophoridae (Gulper sharks) Centrophorus Needle dogfish ( C. acus ) Dwarf gulper shark ( C. atromarginatus ) Gulper shark ( C. granulosus ) Dumb gulper shark ( C. harrissoni ) Blackfin gulper shark ( C. isodon ) Lowfin gulper shark ( C. lusitanicus ) Smallfin gulper shark ( C. moluccensis ) Taiwan gulper shark ( C. niaukang ) Leafscale gulper shark ( C. squamosus ) Mosaic gulper shark ( C. tessellatus ) Little gulper shark ( C. uyato ) Deania Birdbeak dogfish ( D. calcea ) Rough longnose dogfish ( D. hystricosa ) Arrowhead dogfish ( D. profundorum ) Longsnout dogfish ( D. quadrispinosum ) Dalatiidae Euprotomicroides Taillight shark ( E. zantedeschia ) Heteroscymnoides Longnose pygmy shark ( H. marleyi ) Mollisquama Pocket shark ( M. parini ) Dalatias Kitefin shark ( D. licha ) Isistius Cookiecutter shark ( I. brasiliensis ) South China cookiecutter shark ( I. labialis ) Largetooth cookiecutter shark ( I. plutodus ) Euprotomicrus Pygmy shark ( E. bispinatus ) Squaliolus Smalleye pygmy shark ( S. aliae ) Spined pygmy shark ( S. laticaudus ) Etmopteridae Aculeola Hooktooth dogfish ( A. nigra ) Centroscyllium Highfin dogfish ( C. excelsum ) Black dogfish ( C. fabricii ) Granular dogfish ( C. granulatum ) Bareskin dogfish ( C. kamoharai ) Combtooth dogfish ( C. nigrum ) Ornate dogfish ( C. ornatum ) Whitefin dogfish ( C. ritteri ) Etmopterus (Lantern sharks) New Zealand lanternshark ( E. baxteri ) Blurred lanternshark ( E. bigelowi ) Shorttail lanternshark ( E. brachyurus ) Lined lanternshark ( E. bullisi ) E. burgessi Cylindrical lanternshark ( E. carteri ) Tailspot lanternshark ( E. caudistigmus ) Combtooth lanternshark ( E. decacuspidatus ) Pink lanternshark ( E. dianthus ) E. dislineatus Blackmouth lanternshark ( E. evansi ) Pygmy lanternshark ( E. fusus ) Broadbanded lanternshark ( E. gracilispinis ) Southern lanternshark ( E. granulosus ) Caribbean lanternshark ( E. hillianus ) Smalleye lantern shark ( E. litvinovi ) Blackbelly lanternshark ( E. lucifer ) Slendertail lanternshark ( E. molleri ) Dwarf lanternshark ( E. perryi ) African lanternshark ( E. polli ) Great lanternshark ( E. princeps ) False lanternshark ( E. pseudosqualiolus ) Smooth lanternshark ( E. pusillus ) Dense-scale lantern shark ( E. pycnolepis ) West Indian lanternshark ( E. robinsi ) Fringefin lanternshark ( E. schultzi ) Thorny lanternshark ( E. sentosus ) Velvet belly lantern shark ( E. spinax ) Splendid lanternshark ( E. splendidus ) Tasmanian lanternshark ( E. tasmaniensis ) Brown lanternshark ( E. unicolor ) Hawaiian lanternshark ( E. villosus ) Green lanternshark ( E. virens ) Miroscyllium Rasptooth dogfish ( M. sheikoi ) Trigonognathus Viper dogfish ( T. kabeyai ) Oxynotidae (Rough sharks) Oxynotus Prickly dogfish ( O. bruniensis ) Caribbean roughshark ( O. caribbaeus ) Angular roughshark ( O. centrina ) Japanese roughshark ( O. japonicus ) Sailfin roughshark ( O. paradoxus ) Somniosidae (Sleeper sharks) Centroscymnus Portuguese dogfish ( C. coelolepis ) Shortnose velvet dogfish ( C. cryptacanthus ) Roughskin dogfish ( C. owstoni ) Centroselachus Longnose velvet dogfish ( C. crepidater ) Proscymnodon Largespine velvet dogfish ( P. macracanthus ) Plunket shark ( P. plunketi ) Scymnodalatias Whitetail dogfish ( S. albicauda ) Azores dogfish ( S. garricki ) Sparsetooth dogfish ( S. oligodon ) Sherwood dogfish ( S. sherwoodi ) Scymnodon Smallmouth velvet dogfish ( S. obscurus ) Knifetooth dogfish ( S. ringens ) Somniosus Southern sleeper shark ( S. antarcticus ) Frog shark ( S. longus ) Greenland shark ( S. microcephalus ) Pacific sleeper shark ( S. pacificus ) Little sleeper shark ( S. rostratus ) Zameus Japanese velvet dogfish ( Z. ichiharai ) Velvet dogfish ( Z. squamulosus ) Squalidae (Dogfish sharks) Cirrhigaleus Roughskin spurdog ( C. asper ) Mandarin dogfish ( C. barbifer ) Squalus (Spurdogs) Spiny dogfish ( S. acanthias ) Eastern highfin spurdog ( S. albifrons ) S. acutirostris Western highfin spurdog ( S. altipinnis ) Longnose spurdog ( S. blainville ) Fatspine spurdog ( S. crassispinus ) Cuban dogfish ( S. cubensis ) Eastern longnose spurdog ( S. grahami ) Japanese spurdog ( S. japonicus ) Shortnose spurdog ( S. megalops ) Blacktailed spurdog ( S. melanurus ) Shortspine spurdog ( S. mitsukurii ) Bartail spurdog ( S. notocaudatus ) Western longnose spurdog ( S. nasutus ) Cyrano spurdog ( S. rancureli ) Pacific spiny dogfish ( S. suckleyi ) Order Squatiniformes (Angel sharks) Squatinidae Squatina Sawback angelshark ( S. aculeata ) African angelshark ( S. africana ) Eastern Australian angelshark ( Squatina albipunctata ) Argentine angelshark ( S. argentina ) Chilean angelshark ( S. armata ) Australian angelshark ( S. australis ) Pacific angelshark ( S. californica ) Sand devil ( S. dumeril ) Taiwan angelshark ( S. formosa ) Angular angel shark ( S. guggenheim ) S. heteroptera Japanese angelshark ( S. japonica ) Indonesian angelshark ( S. legnota ) Cortez angelshark ( S. mexicana ) Clouded angelshark ( S. nebulosa ) Smoothback angelshark ( S. oculata ) S. punctata Western Australian angelshark ( Squatina pseudocellata ) Angelshark ( S. squatina ) Ornate angelshark ( S. tergocellata ) Ocellated angelshark ( S. tergocellatoides ) v t e Fish About fish Diversity Ethnoichthyology Evolution Diseases and parasites Fishing Fisheries Environmental impact of fishing - as food Fear of - FishBase Fish kill Hypoxia in - Ichthyology Anatomy and physiology Age determination Anguilliformity Bone dermal intramembranous ossification Cleithrum Chromatophore Fins dorsal fin Gill branchial arch gill raker gill slit pharyngeal arch pharyngeal slit pseudobranch Glossohyal Jaw hyomandibula pharyngeal jaw Leydig's organ Mauthner cell Meristics Operculum papillare Papilla Photophore Root effect Shark cartilage Scales ganoine Spiral valve Suckermouth Swim bladder physoclisti physostome Teeth pharyngeal shark Teleost leptins Digital Library Sensory systems Ampullae of Lorenzini Barbel Hydrodynamic reception Electroreception and electrogenesis Jamming avoidance response Lateral line Otolith Capacity for pain Schreckstoff Surface wave detection Vision Weberian apparatus Reproduction Bubble nest Clasper Egg case Development Ichthyoplankton Juvenile Life history theory Milt Mouthbrooder Polyandry Pregnancy Roe Sequential hermaphroditism Spawning triggers Locomotion Fin and flipper locomotion Amphibious Walking Flying Undulatory locomotion Tradeoffs for locomotion in air and water RoboTuna Other behaviour Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Bait ball Bottom feeders Cleaner fish Corallivory Diel vertical migration Electric fish Filter feeders Forage fish Migratory Paedophagy Predatory Salmon run Sardine run Scale eaters Schooling fish Sleep Venomous Intelligence By habitat Cave Coastal Coldwater Coral reef Deep-sea Demersal Euryhaline Freshwater Groundfish Pelagic Tropical Other types Bait Coarse Diversity Game Genetically modified Hallucinogenic Oily Poisonous Rough Whitefish Commerce Farming Carp Catfish Octopus Salmonids Tilapia Wild fisheries Predatory billfish mackerel salmon tuna Forage anchovy herring sardine sprats Demersal cod flatfish pollock Major groups Jawless Hagfish Lampreys Cartilaginous Chimaeras Sharks Rays Bony Ray-finned Fleshy-finned Lists Aquarium life Blind Fish common names Fish families Glossary of ichthyology Largest Smallest Threatened rays sharks Prehistoric more lists...

Category WikiProject Taxon identifiers Selachimorpha Wikidata : Q7372 Wikispecies : Selachimorpha EoL : 46559672 iNaturalist : 551307 ITIS : 159787 NBN : NBNSYS0000186986 NCBI : 119203 Paleobiology Database : 218949 WoRMS : 368408 Selachii Wikidata : Q16600393 Wikispecies : Selachii BioLib: 15252 NBN : NHMSYS0021053482 Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wd4th
Cached time: 20250817043558
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.616 seconds
Real time usage: 2.954 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29949/1000000
Revision size: 148033/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 995204/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 32428/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 791704/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.657/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21313291/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 10/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2421.187      1 -total
 54.12% 1310.227      1 Template:Reflist
 19.34%  468.273    101 Template:Cite_web
 13.29%  321.727     44 Template:Cite_journal
  9.98%  241.550      1 Template:Automatic_taxobox
  8.32%  201.364     10 Template:Clade
  7.67%  185.692     22 Template:Cite_book
  7.17%  173.493     46 Template:Navbox
  4.43%  107.229     22 Template:Cite_news
  4.38%  105.963      1 Template:Taxonbar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43617:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043558 and revision id 1305566341. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shark&oldid=1305566341 " Categories : Sharks Commercial fish Elasmobranchii Electroreceptive animals Extant Silurian first appearances Ichthyology Predatory animals Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles with 'species' microformats Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2025 Articles containing Dutch-language text All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from August 2020 Articles containing Yucatec Maya-language text Pages with Mayan languages IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 20:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shark 155 languages Add topic

