Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Blue lava 4 languages العربية Français Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Optical phenomenon resulting from burning sulfur "Blue lava" as seen at night on Kawah Ijen , in Indonesia Blue lava , also known as ( Indonesian : Api Biru ), [ 1 ] and simply referred to as blue fire or sulfur fire , is a phenomenon that occurs when sulfur burns . It is an electric-blue flame that has the illusory appearance of lava . Despite the name, the phenomenon is actually a sulfuric fire that resembles the appearance of lava , rather than actual lava from a volcanic eruption . The most well-documented of these fires occur on Indonesia 's Kawah Ijen volcano, where they regularly burn.

Characteristics [ edit ] "Blue lava" is an electric-blue fire that burns when sulfur combusts, producing a neon-blue flame.  Sulfur burns when it comes into contact with hot air at temperatures above 360 °C (680 °F), which produces the energetic flames.

[ 2 ] Actual lava is red-orange in color, given its temperature. Truly-blue lava would require temperatures of at least 6,000 °C (10,830 °F), from Planck's law , which is much higher than any lava can naturally achieve on the surface of the Earth .

[ 3 ] The most famous of these fires occur regularly on Indonesia's Kawah Ijen volcano, on the island of Java , which has some of the highest levels of sulfur in the world and is also a site of sulfur mining . Due to the occurrence of the flames, Kawah Ijen has also been nicknamed "the Blue Volcano".

[ 2 ] The crater of Kawah Ijen is the world's largest blue flame area.

[ 1 ] Kawah Ijen has large amounts of sulfur deposits and fumaroles , and the high temperatures from the underground volcanic heat frequently combusts the sulfur on the surface of the volcano, producing the blue fires.

[ 4 ] When sulfur from within the volcano breaches the surface, it can reach temperatures up to 600 °C (1,112 °F), and the sulfur immediately encounters lower temperatures and pressures at the surface, which causes the sulfur to immediately ignite and erupt blue flames up to 5 metres (16 ft) into the air.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] At such high temperatures, the sulfur melts, which sometimes flows down the face of the volcano while carrying the flames with it, making it appear as if blue lava is flowing down the volcano.

[ 4 ] Due to the blue color of the flames, the fires are essentially visible only at nighttime, as they are otherwise indistinguishable during the daytime.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] [ 7 ] Another location in which "blue lava" is regularly seen is on Dallol mountain, in Ethiopia .

[ 8 ] The blue fires also occur in Yellowstone National Park during wildfires , when fires burn and melt the large amounts of sulfur present in the park, creating the appearance of burning blue rivers of lava during such events. Remnants of past episodes exist on the ground in the form of black lines, where fires have previously melted sulfur.

[ 7 ] Similar blue flames were observed on Kīlauea in May 2018, during the volcano's 2018 lower Puna eruption , when lava from the volcano burned methane that had been trapped underground.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Volcanoes portal Chemistry portal Physics portal Emission spectrum Flame test Volcanic gas Volcanism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Gunung Ijen - Selain Rahasia Api Biru, Inilah 4 Fakta Menarik tentang Gunung Berapi Aktif Ini" .

Tribun Travel (in Indonesian) . Retrieved 2020-06-08 .

^ a b c Jessica Miley (24 January 2018).

"The Mystery of Blue Lava and the Kawah Ijen Volcano" . Interesting Engineering . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Rakovan, J. (11 December 2015).

"Word to the Wise: Blue Lava" .

Rocks & Minerals .

91 (1).

Miami University : 83– 85.

doi : 10.1080/00357529.2016.1099138 .

S2CID 131165033 .

^ a b c Joseph Stromberg (4 February 2014).

"Why Does This Indonesian Volcano Burn Bright Blue?" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Trevor Nace (8 November 2015).

"Stunning Electric-Blue Molten Streams From Rare Volcano" .

Forbes . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ Brian Clark Howard (30 January 2014).

"Stunning Electric-Blue Flames Erupt From Volcanoes" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on March 28, 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

^ a b Anne Marie Helmenstine (2 March 2020).

"How Blue Lava Works and Where to See It" . ThoughtCo . Retrieved 10 April 2021 .

^ tourbanyuwangi.com (2019-11-08).

"Blue Fire Ijen Crater - Tour Banyuwangi" .

paket wisata banyuwangi, paket tour banyuwangi . Retrieved 2020-06-08 .

^ Doyle Rice (25 May 2018).

"Blue flames of methane spotted near Hawaii's Kilauea volcano" . USA Today . Retrieved 4 April 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Blue fire of Ijen at Wikimedia Commons Burning Blue: Indonesia’s Psychedelic Sulphur Volcano –YouTube v t e Fire History Control of fire by early humans Historic fires Native American use of fire in ecosystems Science Chain reaction Combustion Dust explosion Fire ecology Fire piston Flash point Fire protection Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Components Fuel Oxygen Heat Flame Smoke Individual fires By type By country By year Crime Arson Death by burning People Pyromanias Child Firefighter Culture Cremation Fire worship Terra preta Organizations International Flame Research Foundation The Combustion Institute Other Wildfires List of wildfires Backdraft Firefighting Firestorm Fire whirl Blue lava Ash Slash-and-burn Fire making Category Commons Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blue_lava&oldid=1292091681 " Categories : Fire Sulfur Volcanism Eruption products Volcanic degassing Hidden categories: CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Indonesian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 04:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blue lava 4 languages Add topic

