Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 NEO types 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Aten asteroid 41 languages العربية Basa Bali Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of near-Earth asteroids Common orbital subgroups of Near-Earth Objects (NEOs) The Aten asteroids are a dynamical group of asteroids whose orbits bring them into proximity with Earth . By definition, Atens are Earth-crossing asteroids ( a < 1.0 AU and Q > 0.983 AU) .

[ 1 ] The group is named after 2062 Aten , the first of its kind, discovered on 7 January 1976 by American astronomer Eleanor Helin at Palomar Observatory . As of January 2025, 2,966 Atens have been discovered, of which 271 are numbered, 14 are named, and 197 are classified as potentially hazardous asteroids .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Description [ edit ] See also: List of Aten asteroids and Category:Aten asteroids Aten asteroids are defined by having a semi-major axis (a) of less than 1.0 astronomical unit (AU), the roughly average distance from the Earth to the Sun . They also have an aphelion (Q; furthest distance from the Sun) greater than 0.983 AU.

[ 1 ] This defines them as Earth-crossing asteroids as the orbit of Earth varies between 0.983 and 1.017 AU.

Asteroids' orbits can be highly eccentric. Nearly all known Aten asteroids have an aphelion greater than 1 AU. Observation of objects inferior to the Earth's orbit is difficult, and this difficulty may contribute to sampling bias in the apparent preponderance of eccentric Atens. Aten asteroids account for only about 7.4% of the known near-Earth asteroid population .

[ 4 ] Many more Apollo-class asteroids are known than Aten-class asteroids, possibly because of the sampling bias.

The shortest semi-major axis for any known Aten asteroid is 0.580 AU, for object 2016 XK 24 .

[ 3 ] The Aten asteroid with the smallest known perihelion is also the one with the highest known eccentricity : (137924) 2000 BD 19 has an orbit with an eccentricity of 0.895, which takes it from a perihelion of 0.092 AU, well within Mercury 's orbit, to an aphelion of 1.66 AU, which is greater than the semi-major axis of Mars (1.53 AU).

Aten asteroids are generally named after Egyptian deities .

[ 5 ] NEO types [ edit ] Definition of NEO subgroups in AU [ 1 ] Group q a Q ECA Amors > 1.017 >1.0 – N Apollos < 1.017 >1.0 – Y Atens – <1.0 > 0.983 Y Atiras – <1.0 < 0.983 N For all NEOs q is < 1.3 AU; The orbit of Earth varies between 0.983 and 1.017 AU See also [ edit ] Alinda asteroid Amor asteroid Apollo asteroid Atira asteroid List of minor planets References [ edit ] ^ a b c "NEO Basics" . NASA/JPL CNEOS . Retrieved 17 May 2018 .

^ "Small-Body Database Query" .

Solar System Dynamics - Jet Propulsion Laboratory . NASA - California Institute of Technology . Retrieved 17 January 2025 .

^ a b "List Of Aten Minor Planets (by perihelion distance)" . Minor Planet Center. 17 May 2017 . Retrieved 17 May 2017 .

^ a b "Discovery Statistics – Cumulative Totals" . NASA/JPL CNEOS. 10 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 .

^ Phait, Phil (19 April 2021), "Apophis and Stargate" , Bad Astronomy Newsletter , no. 315 , retrieved 11 August 2025 v t e Asteroids Main Notable asteroids Physical characteristics dynamic method Impact avoidance Tracking Gravitational keyhole Earth-crosser Close approaches Binary moon contact Active Asteroid pair Palomar–Leiden survey Contact binary Dark comet Distribution Trojans Venus trojan Earth trojans Mars trojans Jupiter trojans Saturn trojan Uranus trojans Neptune trojans Interior to Earth Vulcanoids Mercury-crossers Venus-crossers Near-Earth Aten Amor Apollo Atira Earth-crossers Between Earth and the main belt Mars crossers Asteroid belt Kirkwood gap Active asteroids Outer Solar System, does not include distant minor planets Jupiter-crossers Saturn-crossers Uranus-crossers Neptune-crossers Centaurs Exoasteroids Classification Orbital Group Family (list) Spectral Tholen C-group B-type F-type G-type C-type S-type X-group M-type E-type P-type small classes A-type D-type J-type T-type Q-type R-type V-type SMASS C-group B-type C-type Cg Ch Cgh Cb S-group A-type Q-type R-type K-type L-type S-type Sa Sq Sr Sk Sl X-group X-type Xe Xc Xk small types T-type D-type Ld-type O-type V-type Exploration Asteroids visited by spacecraft Mining Capture Colonization Lists Minor planets Lost Discovering observatories Space missions Related Asteroid Day Asteroids in fiction Asteroids in astrology occultation Comet Minor planet Category v t e Small Solar System bodies Minor planets Designation Groups List Moon Meanings of names Asteroid Active Aten asteroid Asteroid belt Family Jupiter trojan Near-Earth Spectral types Distant minor planet Centaur Neptune trojan Damocloid Trans-Neptunian object Detached Kuiper belt Oort cloud Scattered disc Comets Extinct Great Halley-type Hyperbolic Long-period Lost Near-parabolic Periodic Sungrazing Other Cosmic dust Meteoroids Space debris Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aten_asteroid&oldid=1305403007 " Category : Aten asteroids Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aten asteroid 41 languages Add topic

