Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Contributions 3 Works 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Georges Politzer 19 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Kurdî Magyar مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher, Marxist theoretician and resistance member The native form of this personal name is Politzer György . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is missing information about his philosophy.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( March 2020 ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Georges Politzer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2020 ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Georges Politzer ( French: [pɔlitsɛʁ] ; born Politzer György , Hungarian: [ˈpolitsɛr ˈɟørɟ] ; 3 May 1903 – 23 May 1942) was a Hungarian-born French philosopher and Marxist theoretician of Hungarian Jewish origin, affectionately referred to by some as the "red-headed philosopher" ( philosophe roux ). He was a native of Oradea , a city in present-day Romania (then Nagyvárad, Kingdom of Hungary ). He was murdered in Fort Mont-Valérien in Suresnes in the Holocaust .

Biography [ edit ] Politzer had already been a militant by the time of his involvement in the Hungarian insurrection of 1919, when he was 17, and by joining the Hungarian Communist Party during the Hungarian Soviet Republic , led by Béla Kun . He went into exile during the White Terror that preceded the establishment of a right-wing government under the regency of Admiral Miklós Horthy .

[ 1 ] After meeting Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi in Vienna , he settled in Paris in 1921. He joined the French Communist Party between 1929 and 1931.

During the early 1930s, the party founded the Workers' University of Paris ( Université Ouvrière de Paris ), which lasted until its dissolution by German occupation in 1939. During his tenure at the university, Politzer was entrusted with and given charge of a course on dialectical materialism .

Meanwhile, he occupied the post of professor of philosophy at Lycée Marcelin Berthelot in Saint-Maur-des-Fossés .

Mobilized to Paris in 1940, he remained on the side of the French Communist Party's secret command. Demobilized in July 1940, he oversaw the edition of a clandestine bulletin. After his comrade and friend Paul Langevin , a physicist of world renown, was arrested in October 1940, Politzer published the first edition of The Free University (L'Université Libre) , which told of the imprisonment of scholars and denounced the extortions committed by invading fascists during World War II . He worked with other writers like Jacques Decour , Jacques Solomon and Valentin Feldman . All were executed by the Nazis in 1942.

In February 1942, Politzer's operations were stopped; he was arrested along with his wife, Mai, who was also a Communist and a member of La Résistance , for violating the law banning the Communist Party. He underwent torture, was turned over to the Nazis on 20 March 1942 and underwent execution by firing squad at their hands on 23 May of that year just after he had secretly published a French academic journal. His wife was transported to Auschwitz , where she was murdered in March 1943.

Contributions [ edit ] A disciple of Marx and Lenin , Politzer was interested in psychology , preaching aspects of it and considered traditional psychology as abstract. He also took an interest in the nascent Freudian theory and its uses before eventually distancing himself from it.

Works [ edit ] Against Bergson and some other writers, Philosophical Writings (Contre Bergson et quelques autres) , 1924-1939 Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom , French translation of Schelling , 1926 Critique of the Foundations of Psychology (Critique des Fondements de la Psychologie) , 1928 Bergsonism, a Philosophical Hoax (La fin d'une parade philosophique: Le bergsonisme) , 1929, under the name of François Arouet The Great Problems of Contemporary Philosophy (Les Grands Problèmes de la Philosophie Contemporaine) , 1938 Philosophy and Myths (La Philosophie et les Mythes) , 1939 Philosophy of the Enlightment and Modern Thought (La Philosophie des Lumières et la Pensée moderne) , 1939 What is Rationalism? (Qu'est-ce que le rationalisme?) , 1939 The End of Psychoanalysis (La Fin de la Psychanalyse) , 1939 In the Cellar of the Blind, Chronicles on Nowadays Obscurantism (Dans la cave de l'aveugle, chronique de l'obscurantisme contemporain) , 1939 Blood and Gold (Sang et Or) or Gold Vanquished by Blood (L'Or Vaincu par le Sang) , November 1940 Revolution and Counter-revolution in the 20th Century (Révolution et Contre-révolution au XXè Siècle) , Éditions Sociales, March 1941 Antisemitism, Racism and the Jewish Problem (L'antisémitisme, le racisme, le problème juif) , 1941 Obscurantism in the 20th century (L'Obscurantisme au 20ème siècle) , 1941 A Course on Marxism (Cours de Marxisme) , 1935-1936 Elementary Principles of Philosophy (Principes Élémentaires de Philosophie) , 1946, notes taken in the course taught at l'Université Ouvrière from 1935 to 1936 Crisis of Nowadays Psychology (La Crise de la Psychologie contemporaine) , 1947 Foundamental Principles of Philosophy (Principes Fondamentaux de Philosophie) , edited by Guy Besse and Maurice Caveing, 1954 Writings 1 Philosophy and Myths (Écrits 1 La Philosophie et les Mythes) , Éditions Sociales, 1973 Writings 2 The Foundations of Psychology (Écrits 2 Les Fondements de la Psychologie) , Éditions Sociales See also [ edit ] Jacques Solomon Jacques Decour Valentin Feldman Paul Langevin Charlotte Delbo List of Holocaust victims References [ edit ] Biography External links [ edit ] Media related to Georges Politzer at Wikimedia Commons Works Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX ^ "Glossary of People: Po" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Georges_Politzer&oldid=1297909613 " Categories : 1903 births 1942 deaths People from Oradea French political philosophers Marxist theorists French Marxists 20th-century Hungarian Jews Jews in the French resistance Jewish philosophers Jewish socialists 20th-century French philosophers Communist members of the French Resistance World War II resistance press activists Resistance members killed by Nazi Germany Communists executed by Nazi Germany French people executed by Nazi Germany Hungarian people executed by Nazi Germany Executed philosophers French male writers French military personnel of World War II People executed by Nazi Germany by firing squad Deaths by firearm in France People executed by Nazi Germany occupation forces Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from March 2020 Articles needing additional references from March 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages with French IPA Pages with Hungarian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 08:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Georges Politzer 19 languages Add topic

