Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Mathematics 2.2 Astronomy 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Work cited Toggle the table of contents Al-Mahani 17 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Kurdî Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian mathematician and astronomer Al-Mahani ابوعبدالله محمد بن عیسی ماهانی Born Mahan Died 880 Nationality Persian Scientific career Fields Mathematics and astronomy Abu-Abdullah Muhammad ibn Īsa Māhānī ( Persian : ابوعبدالله محمد بن عیسی ماهانی , flourished c. 860 and died c. 880) was a Persian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] mathematician and astronomer born in Mahan , (in today Kermān , Iran ) and active in Baghdad , Abbasid Caliphate . His known mathematical works included his commentaries on Euclid 's Elements , Archimedes ' On the Sphere and Cylinder and Menelaus' Sphaerica , [ 3 ] as well as two independent treatises. He unsuccessfully tried to solve a problem posed by Archimedes of cutting a sphere into two volumes of a given ratio, which was later solved by 10th century mathematician Abū Ja'far al-Khāzin . His only known surviving work on astronomy was on the calculation of azimuths . He was also known to make astronomical observations, and claimed his estimates of the start times of three consecutive lunar eclipses were accurate to within half an hour.

Biography [ edit ] Historians know little of Al-Mahani's life due to lack of sources.

[ 4 ] He was born in Mahan , Persia (hence the Nisba Al-Mahani ).

[ 4 ] He was active in the 9th century CE or 3rd century AH , lived in Baghdad c. 860 and died c. 880.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] From a reference in Ibn Yunus ' Hakimite Tables , he was known to make astronomical observations between 853 and 866, allowing historians to estimate the time of his life and activities.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Works [ edit ] Mathematics [ edit ] His works on mathematics covered the topics of geometry, arithmetic, and algebra. Some of his mathematical work might have been motivated by problems he encountered in astronomy. The 10th century catalogue Al-Fihrist mentions al-Mahani's contributions in mathematics but not those in astronomy.

[ 6 ] He also worked on current mathematical problems at his time.

[ 4 ] He wrote commentaries on Greek mathematical works: Euclid's Elements , Archimedes' On the Sphere and Cylinder and Menelaus of Alexandria's Sphaerica .

[ 4 ] In his commentaries he added explanations, updated the language to use "modern" terms of his time, and reworked some of the proofs.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] He also wrote a standalone treatise Fi al-Nisba ("On Relationship") and another on the squaring of parabola .

[ 7 ] His commentaries on the Elements covered Books I, V, X and XII; only those on Book V and parts of those on book X and XII survive today. In the Book V commentary, he worked on ratio, proposing a theory on the definition of ratio based on continued fractions that was later discovered independently by al-Nayrizi .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In the Book X commentary, he worked on irrational numbers, including quadratic irrational numbers and cubic ones. He expanded Euclid's definition of magnitudes—which included only geometrical lines —by adding integers and fractions as rational magnitudes as well as square and cubic roots as irrational magnitudes. He called square roots "plane irrationalities" and cubic roots "solid irrationalities", and classified the sums or differences of these roots, as well as the results of the roots' additions or subtractions from rational magnitudes, also as irrational magnitudes. He then explained Book X using those rational and irrational magnitudes instead of geometric magnitudes like in the original.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] His commentaries of the Sphaerica covered book I and parts of book II, none of which survive today. His edition was later updated by Ahmad ibn Abi Said al-Harawi (10th century). Later, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1201–1274) dismissed Al-Mahani and Al-Harawi's edition and wrote his own treatment of the Sphaerica , based on the works on Abu Nasr Mansur . Al-Tusi's edition became the most widely known edition of the Sphaerica in the Arabic-speaking world.

[ 4 ] [ 9 ] Al-Mahani also attempted to solve a problem posed by Archimedes in On the Sphere and Cylinder , book II, chapter 4: how to divide a sphere by a plane into two volumes of a given ratio. His work led him to an equation, known as "Al-Mahani's equation" in the Muslim world: x 3 + c 2 b = c x 2 {\displaystyle x^{3}+c^{2}b=cx^{2}} . However, as documented later by Omar Khayyam , "after giving it lengthy meditation", he eventually failed to solve the problem. The problem was then considered unsolvable until 10th century Persian mathematician Abu Ja'far al-Khazin solved it using conic sections .

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 11 ] Astronomy [ edit ] His astronomical observations of conjunctions as well as solar and lunar eclipses was cited in the zij (astronomical tables) of Ibn Yunus (c. 950 – 1009). Ibn Yunus quoted Al-Mahani as saying that he calculated their timings with an astrolabe . He claimed his estimates of the start times of three consecutive lunar eclipses were accurate to within half an hour.

[ 4 ] [ 9 ] He also wrote a treatise, Maqala fi ma'rifat as-samt li-aiy sa'a aradta wa fi aiy maudi aradta ("On the Determination of the Azimuth for an Arbitrary Time and an Arbitrary Place"), his only known surviving work on astronomy. In it, he provided two graphical methods and an arithmetic one of calculating the azimuth —the angular measurement of a heavenly object's location. The arithmetic method corresponds to the cosine rule in spherical trigonometry , and was later used by Al-Battani (c. 858 – 929).

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] He wrote another treatise, whose title, On the Latitude of the Stars , is known but its content is entirely lost. According to later astronomer Ibrahim ibn Sinan (908–946), Al-Mahani also wrote a treatise on calculating the ascendant using a solar clock .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] List of pre-modern Iranian scientists and scholars References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Meri, Josef W. (2005-10-31).

Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-135-45603-0 .

^ On science and the construction of identities : remembering Ibn al-Haytham (965–1039) page 99 : "He neatly resolved the problem of al-Mahanī, a Persian mathematician of the 9th century" ^ * Roshdi Rashed and Athanase Papadopoulos, 2017 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Dold-Samplonius 2008 , p. 141.

^ Sesiano 1993 , p. 141.

^ a b c O'Connor & Robertson 1999 .

^ a b c d Sesiano 1993 , p. 405.

^ a b c Dold-Samplonius 2008 , p. 142.

^ a b c d Dold-Samplonius 2008b .

^ Matvievskaya 1987 , p. 259.

^ Sarton 1927 , p. 598.

Work cited [ edit ] Dold-Samplonius, Yvonne (2008). "Al‐Māhānī". In Helaine Selin (ed.).

Al-Mahani .

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures .

New York : Springer . pp.

141– 142.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-4425-0_9320 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 .

Dold-Samplonius, Yvonne (2008b) [1970-80].

"Al-Māhānī, Abū 'Abd Allāh Muḥammad Ibn 'Īsā" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

Charles Scribner's Sons and Encyclopedia.com .

Matvievskaya, Galina (1987). "The Theory of Quadratic Irrationals in Medieval Oriental Mathematics".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

500 (1): 253– 277.

Bibcode : 1987NYASA.500..253M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb37206.x .

O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F (1999).

"Abu Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Isa Al-Mahani" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics archive . School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews .

Sarton, George (1927). "Al-Mahani".

Introduction to the History of Science . Vol. I: From Homer to Omar Khayyam.

Baltimore : William & Wilkins Company for Carnegie Institution of Washington . pp.

597– 598.

Sesiano, J. (1993). "Muhammad b. Isa b. Ahmad al-Mahani". In C.E. Bosworth; E. von Donzel; W.P. Heinrichs; Ch. Pellat (eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam , New Edition . Vol. VII: Mif—Naz.

Leiden and London : Brill . p. 405.

ISBN 978-90-04-09419-2 .

Roshdi Rashed and Athanase Papadopoulos, Menelaus'  Spherics:  Early Translation and al-Mahani'/al-Harawi's version (Critical edition of Menelaus' Spherics from the Arabic manuscripts, with historical and mathematical commentaries), De Gruyter, Series: Scientia Graeco-Arabica,  21,  2017, 890 pages.

ISBN 978-3-11-057142-4 v t e Mathematics in Iran Mathematicians Before 20th Century Abu al-Wafa' Buzjani Jamshid al-Kashi ( al-Kashi's theorem ) Omar Khayyam ( Khayyam-Pascal's triangle , Khayyam-Saccheri quadrilateral , Khayyam's Solution of Cubic Equations ) Al-Mahani Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Al-Nayrizi Kushyar Gilani Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Al-Isfahani Al-Isfizari Al-Khwarizmi ( Al-Jabr ) Najm al-Din al-Qazwini al-Katibi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Al-Biruni Modern Maryam Mirzakhani Caucher Birkar Sara Zahedi Farideh Firoozbakht ( Firoozbakht's conjecture ) S. L. Hakimi ( Havel–Hakimi algorithm ) Siamak Yassemi Freydoon Shahidi ( Langlands–Shahidi method ) Hamid Naderi Yeganeh Esmail Babolian Ramin Takloo-Bighash Lotfi A. Zadeh ( Fuzzy mathematics , Fuzzy set , Fuzzy logic ) Ebadollah S. Mahmoodian Reza Sarhangi ( The Bridges Organization ) Siavash Shahshahani Gholamhossein Mosaheb Amin Shokrollahi Mohammad Mehdi Zahedi Mohsen Hashtroodi Hossein Zakeri Amir Ali Ahmadi Prize Recipients Fields Medal Maryam Mirzakhani (2014) Caucher Birkar (2018) EMS Prize Sara Zahedi (2016) Satter Prize Maryam Mirzakhani (2013) Organizations Iranian Mathematical Society Institutions Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 VIAF 2 3 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Academics zbMATH MathSciNet Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Mahani&oldid=1274326362 " Categories : 880s deaths 9th-century Iranian mathematicians 9th-century Iranian astronomers Astronomers from the Abbasid Caliphate Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate People from Kerman province Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 6 February 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Mahani 17 languages Add topic

