Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Reichstag fire 1.2 March 1933 election 2 Preparations and negotiations 3 Text 4 Signatories 5 Passage Toggle Passage subsection 5.1 Party positions 5.2 Manoeuvring 5.3 Speeches 5.4 Voting 5.5 Results 6 Consequences 7 Legal fate Toggle Legal fate subsection 7.1 Consultation and deliberation 7.2 Possible violations 7.3 Renewals 7.4 In the Federal Republic of Germany 8 Validity 9 In popular culture 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Enabling Act of 1933 34 languages Alemannisch العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transfer of the Reichstag's power to the government under Hitler Enabling Act of 1933 Hitler's Reichstag speech promoting the bill; Because of the Reichstag fire , the meeting was held at the Kroll Opera House Reichstag Long title Law to Remedy the Distress of People and Reich Citation RGBl. I S. 141 Territorial extent Weimar Republic → Nazi Germany Enacted by Reichstag Enacted by Reichsrat Signed by President Paul von Hindenburg Signed 23 March 1933 Commenced 23 March 1933 Repealed 20 September 1945 Legislative history First chamber: Reichstag Introduced by Hitler cabinet Passed 23 March 1933 Voting summary 444 voted for 94 voted against 109 absent Second chamber: Reichsrat Passed 23 March 1933 Voting summary 66 voted for None voted against Repealed by Control Council Law No. 1 – Repealing of Nazi Laws Status: Repealed Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Literature The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1903) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " 25-point Program " (1920) The International Jew (1920s) Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Hitlers Zweites Buch (1928) Michael (1929) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Gelöbnis treuester Gefolgschaft (1933) I Fight (1942) Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Aspects Catholic Church persecution Germany Poland Christmas Esotericism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottgläubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religion under Nazism Hitler's views Symbolism Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Germany portal Politics portal v t e The Enabling Act of 1933 ( German : Ermächtigungsgesetz , officially titled Gesetz zur Behebung der Not von Volk und Reich lit.

' Law to Remedy the Distress of People and Reich ' ) [ 1 ] was a law that gave the German Cabinet —most importantly, the chancellor , Adolf Hitler —the power to make and enforce laws without the involvement of the Reichstag or President Paul von Hindenburg . By allowing the chancellor to override the checks and balances in the constitution, the Enabling Act of 1933 was a pivotal step in the transition from the democratic Weimar Republic to the totalitarian dictatorship of Nazi Germany .

Background [ edit ] On 30 January 1933, Adolf Hitler, leader of the Nazi Party (NSDAP), was appointed as Chancellor, the head of the German government.

[ 2 ] Hitler immediately asked President von Hindenburg to dissolve the Reichstag. A general election was scheduled for 5 March 1933.

Reichstag fire [ edit ] On 27 February 1933, the Reichstag building of the German parliament caught fire .

[ 3 ] Acting as chancellor, Hitler immediately accused the Communists of perpetrating the arson as part of a larger effort to overthrow the German government. He persuaded Hindenburg to enact the Reichstag Fire Decree , [ 4 ] which abolished most civil liberties, including the right to speak, assemble and protest, and the right to due process. A state of emergency was declared on the basis of the decree, which enabled a violent crackdown against the Nazis' political enemies, in particular the Communist Party .

[ 5 ] Amid the ongoing repression, Hitler contended that the Reichstag Fire Decree was nonetheless insufficient and demanded a more sweeping measure.

[ 6 ] He submitted to the Reichstag a proposal for an enabling law that would grant effectively untrammeled power to his cabinet.

[ 7 ] March 1933 election [ edit ] For the general election of 5 March 1933 , the Nazis were allied with other nationalist and conservative factions.

[ 8 ] At a secret meeting on 20 February, major German industrialists had agreed to finance the Nazis' election campaign.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The main residual opposition was the Social Democrats . On election day Germans voted in an atmosphere of extreme voter intimidation , perpetrated mainly by the Nazi Sturmabteilung (SA) militia.

The NSDAP emerged from the election with five million more votes than in the previous election, but failed to gain an absolute majority in parliament.

[ 11 ] It remained dependent on the 8% of seats won by its coalition partner, the German National People's Party (DNVP), to attain a 52% majority.

In the first post-election cabinet meeting on 15 March, Hitler declared his intention to pass an Enabling Act [ citation needed ] along the lines of the one previously proposed, in order to give the NSDAP complete freedom of action.

Preparations and negotiations [ edit ] The Enabling Act would allow the National Ministry (essentially the cabinet) to enact legislation, including laws deviating from or altering the constitution, without the consent of the Reichstag, for a period of four years. The law was thus itself considered a constitutional amendment. It therefore required a two-thirds super-majority support from a quorum of at least two-thirds of all members of the Reichstag.

Despite the elimination of the Communists and heavy pressure on the rest of the opposition, the bill's passage was not a certainty. To pass it, the Nazis used a strategy of coercion, bribery, and manipulation of parliamentarians.

The Social Democrats and the Communists were expected to vote against. The government had already arrested all Communist and some Social Democrat deputies under the Reichstag Fire Decree. The conservative parties representing the middle class, the Junkers and business interests were expected to vote for the law.

A two-thirds majority would therefore be in reach with the votes of the Catholic Centre Party . Hitler negotiated with the Centre Party's chairman, Ludwig Kaas , a Catholic priest, and finalized an agreement on 22 March. Kaas agreed to support the law in exchange for assurances of his party's continued existence, the protection of Catholic civil liberties and Catholic schools, and the retention of civil servants affiliated with the party.

Some historians, such as Klaus Scholder , have maintained that Hitler also promised to negotiate a Reichskonkordat with the Holy See , a treaty that formalized the position of the Catholic Church in Germany on a national level. Kaas was a close associate of Cardinal Pacelli, then Vatican Secretary of State (and later Pope Pius XII ). Pacelli had been pursuing a German concordat as a key policy for some years, but the instability of Weimar governments, as well as the opposition of some parties to a treaty, had blocked the project.

[ 12 ] The day after the Enabling Act vote, Kaas went to Rome in order to, in his own words, "investigate the possibilities for a comprehensive understanding between church and state".

[ 13 ] No evidence has surfaced for a link between the Enabling Act and the Reichskonkordat signed on 20 July 1933.

Text [ edit ] Enabling act of 1933 printed in the Reich Law Gazette As with most of the laws passed in the process of Gleichschaltung , the Enabling Act is quite short, especially considering its implications. The full text, in German [ 14 ] and English, follows: Gesetz zur Behebung der Not von Volk und Reich Law to Remedy the Distress of the People and the Reich Der Reichstag hat das folgende Gesetz beschlossen, das mit Zustimmung des Reichsrats hiermit verkündet wird, nachdem festgestellt ist, daß die Erfordernisse verfassungsändernder Gesetzgebung erfüllt sind: The Reichstag has enacted the following law, which is hereby proclaimed with the assent of the Reichsrat , it having been established that the requirements for a constitutional amendment have been fulfilled: Artikel 1 Article 1 Reichsgesetze können außer in dem in der Reichsverfassung vorgesehenen Verfahren auch durch die Reichsregierung beschlossen werden. Dies gilt auch für die in den Artikeln 85 Abs. 2 und 87 der Reichsverfassung bezeichneten Gesetze.

In addition to the procedure prescribed by the constitution, laws of the Reich may also be enacted by the government [ 15 ] of the Reich. This includes the laws referred to by Articles 85 Paragraph 2 and Article 87 of the constitution.

[ 16 ] Artikel 2 Article 2 Die von der Reichsregierung beschlossenen Reichsgesetze können von der Reichsverfassung abweichen, soweit sie nicht die Einrichtung des Reichstags und des Reichsrats als solche zum Gegenstand haben. Die Rechte des Reichspräsidenten bleiben unberührt.

Laws enacted by the government of the Reich may deviate from the constitution as long as they do not affect the institutions of the Reichstag and the Reichsrat. The rights of the President remain unaffected.

Artikel 3 Article 3 Die von der Reichsregierung beschlossenen Reichsgesetze werden vom Reichskanzler ausgefertigt und im Reichsgesetzblatt verkündet. Sie treten, soweit sie nichts anderes bestimmen, mit dem auf die Verkündung folgenden Tage in Kraft. Die Artikel 6 8 bis 77 der Reichsverfassung finden auf die von der Reichsregierung beschlossenen Gesetze keine Anwendung.

Laws enacted by the Reich government shall be issued by the Chancellor and announced in the Reich Law Gazette . They shall take effect on the day following the announcement, unless they prescribe a different date. Articles 68 to 77 of the Constitution do not apply to laws enacted by the Reich government.

[ 17 ] Artikel 4 Article 4 Verträge des Reiches mit fremden Staaten, die sich auf Gegenstände der Reichsgesetzgebung beziehen, bedürfen für die Dauer der Geltung dieser Gesetze nicht der Zustimmung der an der Gesetzgebung beteiligten Körperschaften. Die Reichsregierung erläßt die zur Durchführung dieser Verträge erforderlichen Vorschriften.

Treaties of the Reich with foreign states, which relate to matters of Reich legislation, shall for the duration of the validity of these laws not require the consent of the legislative authorities. The Reich government shall enact the legislation necessary to implement these agreements.

Artikel 5 Article 5 Dieses Gesetz tritt mit dem Tage seiner Verkündung in Kraft. Es tritt mit dem 1. April 1937 außer Kraft; es tritt ferner außer Kraft, wenn die gegenwärtige Reichsregierung durch eine andere abgelöst wird.

This law enters into force on the day of its proclamation. It expires on 1 April 1937; it expires furthermore if the present Reich government is replaced by another.

Articles 1 and 4 gave the government the right to draw up the budget, approve treaties, and enact any laws whatsoever without input from the Reichstag. By the rules of pre-1933 German legal interpretation, and post-1945 if such a law were not now unconstitutional, this would mean that such laws would henceforth be decided by a majority vote in the Cabinet. This was not followed.

[ citation needed ] In the years immediately preceding, the government had relied on Article 48 emergency decrees. These had to be made by the President, alongside ordinary laws which he simply enacted. In the passing of Enabling-Act-based laws, the President had no role to play at all. Until Hitler effectively assumed the President's role in 1934, laws were passed without any contribution by the head of state. This was a situation unique in German history.

Signatories [ edit ] The signatories of the Enabling Act (and their fates) were: [ 18 ] Reich President Paul von Hindenburg (died of lung cancer , 16 months later) Reich Chancellor Adolf Hitler (committed suicide to avoid Allied , specifically Soviet capture) Reich Minister of the Interior Frick (executed after Nuremberg conviction) Reich Minister for Foreign Affairs Baron von Neurath (15 year Nuremberg sentence) Reich Minister of Finances Count Schwerin von Krosigk (10 year Nuremberg sentence) Passage [ edit ] See also: 23 March 1933 Reichstag speech Page 1 of the Enabling Act Page 2, with signatures, of the Enabling Act Late on 23 March, the Reichstag assembled at the Kroll Opera House , its temporary home since the Reichstag fire.

SA men were positioned inside and outside the chamber.

[ 19 ] Party positions [ edit ] The KPD had not been formally banned despite the Nazis' virulent anti-Communist rhetoric. A violent uprising was still feared, and it was hoped that the KPD's presence on the ballot would siphon off votes from the SPD.

[ citation needed ] However, since the election of 6 March, the party was subject to virulent police repression on the grounds of its purported involvement in the Reichstag fire.

[ 20 ] It was therefore widely understood that the KPD deputies would not be allowed to take their seats in parliament.

The SPD's expected opposition was partly neutralized by the Reichstag Fire Decree, which had been used to detain a number of [ quantify ] SPD deputies. Other SPD [ quantify ] parliamentarians had fled into exile.

Debate within the Centre Party had continued until the day of the vote. Ludwig Kaas advocated voting in favour of the act, touting promised written guarantees from Hitler. Former Chancellor Heinrich Brüning wanted the bill to be rejected. The majority sided with Kaas, and Brüning agreed to maintain party cohesion by voting for the law.

[ 19 ] Manoeuvring [ edit ] The Reichstag, led by its president, Hermann Göring , changed its rules of procedure to make it easier to pass the bill. Under the Weimar Constitution , a quorum of two-thirds of the entire Reichstag membership was required to be present in order to pass a law amending the constitution. To sidestep this potential obstruction, Göring declared that any deputy who was "absent without excuse" was to be considered as present.

[ citation needed ] In this case, 432 of the Reichstag's 647 deputies would normally be required present. Göring reduced this figure to 378 by not counting the 81 KPD deputies.

Speeches [ edit ] Hitler spoke in favour of the proposed law.

The speech recapitulated the supposed historical responsibility of the Weimar Republic in Germany's crisis, and then listed grievances that would be addressed by the Enabling Act. In a pitch to the Centre Party, Hitler emphasised the importance of Christianity in German culture and incorporated Ludwig Kaas's requested guarantees almost verbatim. His speech concluded with reassurances about the continuity of Weimar institutions, but an appeal to the inadequacy of parliamentary government: "Some of the [government's] planned measures require the approval of the majority necessary for constitutional amendments. The performance of these tasks and their completion is necessary. It would be inconsistent with the aim of the national uprising and it would fail to suffice for the intended goal were the Government to negotiate with and request the approval of the Reichstag for its measures in each given case." [ 21 ] The Centre's Ludwig Kaas spoke to voice his party's support for the bill amid "concerns put aside". He had still not received the written guarantee he had negotiated but had been assured it was being "typed up". It was never received.

[ 19 ] [ page needed ] Heinrich Brüning remained silent.

Only SPD leader Otto Wels spoke against the Enabling Act. He defended the Social Democrats' record in rebuilding Germany following the First World War, and dismissed the Nazis' claimed need for special powers. Defying direct intimidation, Otto Wels declared his party's continued allegiance to Germany's institutions: "The Weimar Constitution is not a socialist constitution. But we stand by the principles enshrined in, the principles of a state based on the rule of law, of equal rights, of social justice. In this historic hour, we German Social Democrats solemnly pledge ourselves to the principles of humanity and justice, of freedom and socialism. No Enabling Act gives you the power to destroy ideas that are eternal and indestructible." [ 22 ] Voting [ edit ] As voting proceeded, SPD deputies were actively intimidated by the Nazi SA men, who were present throughout the proceedings.

[ 23 ] Results [ edit ] All parties except the SPD voted in favour of the Enabling Act. With the KPD banned and 26 SPD deputies arrested or in hiding, the final tally was 444 in favour of the Enabling Act against 94 opposed (all Social Democrats). The Reichstag adopted the bill with the support of 83% of the deputies present. Even if all SPD deputies had been present, it would have passed with 78.7% support.

Voting on the Enabling Act Party Deputies For Against Absent Nazi Party NSDAP 288 288 — — Social Democratic Party SPD 120 — 94 26 Communist Party KPD 81 — — 81 Centre 73 72 — 1 National People's Party DNVP 52 52 — — Bavarian People's Party BVP 19 19 — — State Party DStP 5 5 — — Christian Social People's Service CSVD 4 4 — — People's Party DVP 2 1 — 1 Farmers' Party DBP 2 2 — — Landbund 1 1 — — Total 647 444 (68.62%) 94 (14.53%) 109 (16.85%) In the evening of the same day, the Reichsrat gave its assent, unanimously and without prior debate, and the Enabling Act was signed into law by President Paul von Hindenburg.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ excessive citations ] Unless extended by the Reichstag, the act would expire after four years.

Consequences [ edit ] The Enabling Act completed the effect of the Reichstag Fire Decree. It transformed Hitler's government into a legal dictatorship and laid the groundwork for his totalitarian regime. Thus empowered, Hitler could begin German rearmament and achieve his aggressive foreign policy aims, which ultimately resulted in World War II .

The Reichstag effectively became the rubber stamp parliament that Hitler sought.

[ 29 ] The German conservative elite, including the vice-chancellor Franz von Papen , having underestimated the determination of the Nazis to monopolize state power, were soon marginalized by the Nazi regime.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] By mid-March 1933, the government began sending communists, trade union leaders, and other political dissidents to Dachau , the first Nazi concentration camp.

[ 32 ] On 14 July 1933, the Law Against the Formation of Parties made the Nazi Party the only legally permitted party in Germany. With that, Hitler fulfilled what he had promised in earlier campaign speeches: "I set for myself one aim ... to sweep these thirty parties out of Germany!" [ 33 ] Legal fate [ edit ] The Weimar Constitution of 1919, as amended by the Enabling Act, remained technically in effect.

Consultation and deliberation [ edit ] During the negotiations between the government and the political parties, it had been agreed that the government should inform the Reichstag parties of laws passed under the Enabling Act. For that purpose, a working committee was set up [ citation needed ] , co-chaired by Hitler and Centre Party chairman Kaas. However, the committee met only three times, without any major impact, and had become a dead letter even before all other parties were banned.

Although the Act had formally given legislative powers to the government as a whole, those powers were, for all intents and purposes, exercised by Hitler himself. After the passage of the Act, there were no longer serious deliberations in Cabinet meetings. After 1934, its meetings became more and more infrequent, and it did not meet in full after 1938.

Possible violations [ edit ] The " Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich " (30 January 1934), passed by the Reichstag, dissolved the state parliaments, effectively rendering irrelevant the Reichsrat, which represented the states. Two weeks later (14 February) the Reichsrat itself was abolished by the Cabinet, in apparent contradiction of Article 2 of the Enabling Act, which stated that laws passed under the Enabling Act must "not affect" the Reichsrat. Moreover, Article 63 of the Weimar Constitution requires that "the states shall be represented in the Reichsrat by members of their ministries". However, Article 4 of the Law of the Reconstruction of the Reich reads: "The Reich Government may issue new constitutional laws." (See Law on the Abolition of the Reichsrat § Constitutional legitimacy .) In August 1934, President Hindenburg died, and Hitler seized the president's powers for himself in accordance with the Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich , passed the previous day. The move was confirmed by a referendum later that month. But Article 2 of the Enabling Act stated that the president's powers were to remain "undisturbed" (or "unaffected", depending on the translation). Furthermore, a 1932 amendment to the constitution had made the president of the High Court of Justice, not the chancellor, first in the line of succession to the presidency—and even then on an interim basis pending new elections.

[ 19 ] This ostensible violation of Article 2 was never challenged in court.

Renewals [ edit ] The Enabling Act was renewed twice, first in 1937 and then in 1941 [ citation needed ] . Its renewal was practically assured because all other parties were banned. Voters were presented with a single list of Nazis and Nazi-approved candidates under far-from-secret conditions.

In 1942, the Reichstag passed a law giving Hitler power of life and death over every citizen, effectively extending the provisions of the Enabling Act for the duration of the war.

[ 34 ] In the Federal Republic of Germany [ edit ] The Enabling Act was formally declared to be repealed by the Allied Control Council in Control Council Law No. 1 , following the surrender of Germany at the end of World War II.

[ 35 ] Germany's Basic Law (constitution) of 1949 stipulates that only bodies that are constitutionally endowed with legislative power can enact laws. This theoretically precludes legislation such as the 1933 Enabling Act.

Article 9 of the 1949 constitution allows for social groups to be labeled verfassungsfeindlich ("hostile to the constitution") and to be proscribed by the federal government. Political parties can be labeled enemies to the constitution only by the Bundesverfassungsgericht ( Federal Constitutional Court ) according to Art. 21 II. This clause makes clear that even a popular majority cannot be allowed to install a totalitarian or autocratic regime such as with the Enabling Act of 1933, which would violate the principles of the German constitution.

Validity [ edit ] In his 2003 book, The Coming of the Third Reich , British historian Richard J. Evans argued that the Enabling Act was legally invalid. He contended that Göring had no right to arbitrarily reduce the quorum required to bring the bill up for a vote. While the Enabling Act only required the support of two-thirds of those present and voting, two-thirds of the entire Reichstag's membership had to be present in order for the legislature to consider a constitutional amendment.

According to Evans, while Göring was not required to count the KPD deputies in order to get the Enabling Act passed, he was required to "recognize their existence" by counting them for purposes of the quorum needed to call it up, making his refusal to do so "an illegal act". Even if the Communists had been present and voting, the session's atmosphere was so intimidating that the Act would have still passed with at least 68.7% support.

He also argued that the act's passage in the Reichsrat was tainted by the overthrow of the state governments under the Reichstag Fire Decree; as Evans put it, the states were no longer "properly constituted or represented", making the Enabling Act's passage in the Reichsrat "irregular".

[ 20 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The 2003 film Hitler: The Rise of Evil contains a scene portraying the passage of the Enabling Act.

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Streitbare Demokratie References [ edit ] ^ Rabinbach, Anson; Gilman, Sander L. (2013).

The Third Reich Sourcebook . University of California Press. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0520276833 .

^ "Enabling Act Exhibition" (PDF) .

German Bundestag .

^ "The Reichstag fire – Nazi rise to power – National 5 History Revision" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

^ "The Reichstag Fire Decree (1933)" .

Nazi Germany . 25 July 2012 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 .

^ Kellerhoff, Sven (2016).

The Reichstag Fire: The Case Against the Nazi Conspiracy . Stroud: History Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Reichstag Fire Decree" . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved 30 August 2022 .

^ Pinfield, Nick (2015).

A/AS Level History for AQA Democracy and Nazism: Germany, 1918–1945 Student Book . Cambridge University Press. p. 98.

^ Jones, Larry (June 2011).

"Franz von Papen, Catholic Conservatives, and the Establishment of the Third Reich, 1933–1934" .

Journal of Modern History .

83 (2): 272– 318.

doi : 10.1086/659103 .

S2CID 143231402 . Retrieved 12 April 2022 .

^ Kahn, Daniela (2006).

Die Steuerung der Wirtschaft durch Recht im nationalsozialistischen Deutschland. Das Beispiel der Reichsgruppe Industrie . Klostermann.

ISBN 978-3-465-04012-5 .

^ Rüdiger Jungbluth (2002).

Die Quandts. Ihr leiser Aufstieg zur mächtigsten Wirtschaftsdynastie Deutschlands . Campus Verlag.

ISBN 3-593-36940-0 .

^ "The 1933 election and Enabling Act – Consolidation of power – WJEC – GCSE History Revision" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 12 April 2022 .

^ Klaus Scholder "The Churches and the Third Reich" volume 1 pp. 160–61 ^ Letter from Kaas to von Bergen, German ambassador to the Vatican, translation quoted in Scholder, p. 247 ^ Uwe Brodersen, Gesetze des NS-Staates, p. 22 ^ The word government , as used here, means just the chancellor and the cabinet, not the entire national government as it is used in the United States.

^ Article 85 outlined the process by which the Reichstag and Reichsrat approved the Reich budget. Article 87 restricted government borrowing.

^ Articles 68 to 77 stipulated the procedures for enacting legislation in the Reichstag.

^ "The "Enabling Act" (March 24, 1933)" .

German History in Documents and Images . German History in Documents and Images (GHDI) . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ a b c d William Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich Touchstone Edition, New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990 ^ a b Evans, Richard J.

(2003).

The Coming of the Third Reich . New York: Penguin Press .

ISBN 978-0141009759 .

^ Domarus, M.; Hitler, A.; Gilbert, M.F. (1990).

Hitler: Speeches and Proclamations 1932-1945. 1932-1934. Vol. 1 (PDF) . Tauris. pp.

275– 285.

ISBN 978-1-85043-206-7 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 .

^ "Speech by the Social Democrat Otto Wels against the Passage of the "Enabling Act" (March 23, 1933)" .

German History in Documents and Images (GHDI) .

^ Martin Collier, From Kaiser to Fuhrer: Germany, 1900–45, p. 131 ^ Wheaton, Eliot Barculo (1968).

The Nazi Revolution 1933–35 . p. 269.

^ "The Reichstag Fire and the Enabling Act of March 23, 1933" .

Britannica Blog . Archived from the original on 11 March 2019 . Retrieved 30 March 2017 .

^ von Lüpke-Schwarz, Marc (23 March 2013).

"The law that 'enabled' Hitler's dictatorship" .

Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 9 April 2020 .

^ Mason, K. J.

Republic to Reich: A History of Germany 1918–1945 . McGraw-Hill.

^ Kitson, Alison (2001).

Germany, 1858–1990: Hope, Terror, and Revival . Oxford University Press. pp.

153– 154.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Edinger, Lewis J. (April 1953).

"German Social Democracy and Hitler's 'National Revolution' of 1933: A Study in Democratic Leadership" .

World Politics .

5 (3): 330– 367.

doi : 10.2307/2009137 .

ISSN 1086-3338 .

JSTOR 2009137 .

S2CID 153745010 .

^ "The role of the conservative elite in the Nazi rise to power – The Holocaust Explained: Designed for schools" . 10 April 1933 . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

^ Beck, Hermann (2010).

The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: TheMachtergreifungin a New Light (new ed.). Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-84545-680-1 .

JSTOR j.ctt9qdcpj .

^ "Communists to be interned in Dachau" .

The Guardian . 21 March 1933 . Retrieved 12 July 2021 .

^ Nationalbibliothek, Österreichische.

"ÖNB-ALEX – Deutsches Reichsgesetzblatt Teil I 1867–1945" .

alex.onb.ac.at (in German) . Retrieved 14 October 2016 .

^ "Hitler Seizes Life and Death Rule of Nazis" .

Chicago Tribune . 27 April 1942 . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

^ "Control Council Law No. 1 - Repealing of Nazi Laws" University of Wisconsin website ^ Stanley, Alessandra (16 May 2003).

"TV WEEKEND; Architect of Atrocity, The Formative Years" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

v t e Constitutions of Germany Constitution of 1815 Constitution of 1849 Constitution of 1867 Constitution of January 1871 Constitution of April 1871 Constitution of 1919 Enabling Act of 1933 Basic Law of 1949 East Germany : 1949 1968 v t e Nazi Party Leader Anton Drexler (1919–1921) Adolf Hitler (1921–1945) Martin Bormann (1945) History Adolf Hitler's rise to power Beer Hall Putsch Brown House, Munich Denazification Enabling Act of 1933 German Workers' Party National Socialist Program Nazism Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Röhm scandal SA Thule Society Party offices Amt Rosenberg Hitler Youth Hitler's Chancellery Nazi Party Chancellery Office of Colonial Policy Office of Military Policy Office of Racial Policy Office of Foreign Affairs NSDAP/AO SS SS Education Office Publications Völkischer Beobachter Das Schwarze Korps Das Reich Innviertler Heimatblatt Arbeitertum Der Angriff Panzerbär Der Stürmer Kampfverlag Notable members Artur Axmann Houston Stewart Chamberlain Kurt Daluege Richard Walther Darré Rudolf Diels Karl Dönitz Dietrich Eckart Adolf Eichmann Hans Frank Roland Freisler Wilhelm Frick Walther Funk Joseph Goebbels Hermann Göring Ernst Hanfstaengl Rudolf Hess Reinhard Heydrich Heinrich Himmler Rudolf Höss Ernst Kaltenbrunner Robert Ley Josef Mengele Konstantin von Neurath Joachim von Ribbentrop Ernst Röhm Alfred Rosenberg Bernhard Rust Fritz Todt Baldur von Schirach Arthur Seyss-Inquart Albert Speer Gregor Strasser Otto Strasser Julius Streicher Derivatives Black Front ( Strasserism ) / German Social Union Deutsche Reichspartei / The Homeland Socialist Reich Party Third Way (Germany) Related articles Adolf Hitler Schools Munich Documentation Centre National Political Institutes of Education Nazi concentration camps Nazi Germany Nazi songs Horst-Wessel-Lied Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party Samoan branch of the Nazi Party Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Enabling_Act_of_1933&oldid=1306267432 " Categories : 1933 in Germany 1933 in law 1933 in politics Constitutional amendments Emergency laws in Germany Government of Nazi Germany Law of Nazi Germany Legal history of Germany Repealed German legislation March 1933 in Europe Political repression in Nazi Germany Democratic backsliding in the interwar period Law of the Weimar Republic Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2019 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2016 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from March 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Enabling Act of 1933 34 languages Add topic

