Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Life and accomplishments 3 Works and translations 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Boetius of Dacia 22 languages Català Čeština Corsu Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 13th-century Danish philosopher Not to be confused with the Roman Boethius from the early 6th century.

For other people of the same name, see Boethius (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Boetius de Dacia (also spelled Boethius de Dacia ) was a 13th-century Danish philosopher of the Dominican Order .

Name [ edit ] The rendering of his name Danske Bo (" Bo the Dane") into Medieval Latin as Boetius de Dacia reflects a medieval practice of using Dacia as the Latin name for Denmark—a result of confusion between Dania (Denmark) and the antique Dacia in near the Black Sea .

[ 1 ] Life and accomplishments [ edit ] Boetius was born in the first half of the 13th century.  Not much is known of his early life. The attempt to connect him to known persons from Denmark or Sweden has been unsuccessful.

[ 2 ] [ non-primary source needed ] All that is known is that he went to France to teach philosophy at the University of Paris . At the university, he associated with Siger of Brabant . He continued to teach for some time as arts masters rather than quickly moving on to study in the theology faculty or finding non-academic employment. He shared this unusual career path with Siger and others like Roger Bacon and Jean Buridan . He was condemned by Stephen Tempier in 1277 for being a leading member of the Averroist movement .

[ 3 ] Boetius fled Paris with Siger and appealed to Pope Nicholas III . He was detained at the pontifical curia at Orvieto . He went on to join the Dominicans in Denmark.

Boetius was a follower of Aristotle and Averroes and a leading figure in the modists dogma. He wrote on logic , natural philosophy , metaphysics , and ethics , though some of his works have not survived. Some of his writings include; Modi Significandi , Super librum Perihermenias, and Quaestiones super librum De animalibus, where he comments on these topics at length .

[ 4 ] His central position was that philosophy had to follow where the arguments led, regardless of their conflict with religious faith. For him, philosophy was the supreme human activity, and in this world only philosophers attained wisdom. In his book On the Highest Good, or On the Life of the Philosopher he offers a fervently Aristotelian description of man's highest good as the rational contemplation of truth and virtue. Among the controversial conclusions that he reached are the impossibility of creation ex nihilo , the eternity of the world and of the human race, and that there could be no resurrection of the dead .

Despite his radical views, Boetius remained a Christian ; he attempted to reconcile his religious beliefs with his philosophical positions by assigning the investigation of the world and of human nature to philosophy, while to religion he assigned supernatural revelation and divine miracles . He was condemned for holding the doctrine of " double truth ", though he was careful to avoid calling philosophical conclusions that ran contrary to religion true simpliciter : In each branch of knowledge, one must be careful to qualify one's conclusions.

[ 5 ] The conclusions that the philosopher reaches are true "according to natural causes and principles" ( De Aeternitate Mundi , p. 351).

[ non-primary source needed ] Much like his early life, researchers have not been able to find exactly when Boetius died or what he did after 1277. "The Stams Catalogue" (14th Century) is a collection of literature from Dominican writers that includes Boethius, so there is some evidence suggesting he became a friar after his career in liberal arts.

[ 6 ] Works and translations [ edit ] Boethii Daci Opera: Modi significandi sive quaestiones super Priscianum maiorem , edited by John Pinborg & Henry Roos with the collaboration of Severino Skovgaard Jensen, Hauniae (Copenhague), G. E. C. Gad, Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 4 , 1969.

Quaestiones de generatione et corruptione – Quaestiones super libros physicorum , edited by Géza Sajó,  Hauniae (Copenhague), G. E. C. Gad, Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 5 , 1976.

Topica – Opuscola , Pars 1.

Quaestiones super Librum Topicorum , edited by Nicolas George Green-Pedersen and John Pinborg; Pars 2.

Opuscula: De aeternitate mundi. De summo bono. De somniis , edited by Nicolas George Green-Pedersen, Hauniae (Copenhague), G. E. C. Gad, Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 6 , 1976.

Quaestiones super IV Meteorologicorum , edited by Gianfranco Fioravanti, Hauniae (Copenhague), G. E. C. Gad, Corpus Philosophorum Danicorum Medii Aevi, 8 , 1979.

Boethius of Dacia, On the Supreme Good; on the Eternity of the World; on Dreams. Edited by John F. Wippel, Mediaeval Sources in Translation. Toronto, Ont. Canada: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1987.

Boetius of Dacia, "The Sophisma 'Every Man Is of Necessity an Animal'", in Norman Kretzmann and Eleonore Stump [edd. & trans.] The Cambridge Translations of Medieval Philosophical texts. Volume One: Logic and the Philosophy of Language (1988, Cambridge University Press; ISBN 0-521-28063-X ) Notes [ edit ] ^ Jakobsen, Johnny Grandjean Gøgsig (2012).

"Why Dacia?" .

www.jggj.dk . Retrieved 2024-09-15 .

^ Boethius de Dacia, Verdens evighed , Det lille forlag, 2001, p. 8 (in Danish) ^ Maurer, Armand (1955-01-01).

"Boetius of Dacia and the Double Truth" .

Mediaeval Studies .

17 : 233– 239.

doi : 10.1484/J.MS.2.306768 .

ISSN 0076-5872 .

^ Ebbesen, Sten (2020), "Boethius of Dacia" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-09-18 ^ Lindberg, David Charles (1992).

The beginnings of western science: the European scientific tradition in philosophical, religious and institutional context, 600 B.C. to A.D. 1450 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 235.

ISBN 978-0-226-48231-6 .

^ Ebbesen, Sten (2020), "Boethius of Dacia" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-09-18 References [ edit ] G. L. Bursill-Hall, Speculative Grammars of the Middle Ages: The Doctrine of the partes orationis of the Modistae , Mouton: The Hague, 1971.

[ ISBN missing ] John Marenbon, Later Medieval Philosophy (1150–1350) , New York: Routledge, 1991 ISBN 041506807X .

Armand A. Maurer, "Boetius of Dacia", in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , ed.

Paul Edwards , Collier Macmillan, 1967.

[ ISBN missing ] External links [ edit ] Sten Ebbesen.

"Boethius of Dacia" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boetius_of_Dacia&oldid=1299819361 " Categories : Scholastic philosophers Danish philosophers Academic staff of the University of Paris 13th-century philosophers 13th-century births Latin commentators on Aristotle 13th-century writers in Latin 13th-century Danish people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2017 Pages with missing ISBNs Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boetius of Dacia 22 languages Add topic

