Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Italy in the Middle Ages 2.2 Spain in the early modern period 2.3 The 19th and 20th centuries 2.4 Persecution in Francoist Spain 2.5 After Spanish transition to democracy 3 Statistics 4 Spanish historical revisionism 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Anti-Catalan sentiment 15 languages Aragonés Català Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Galego Հայերեն עברית Lombard Português Русский Shqip کوردی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feeling or expression of hate towards Catalan people Spanish-language graffiti reading Putos catalanes ('Fucking Catalans ') on a SabadellCAM bank office in Valencia , 2012 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Catalan sentiment is the collective name given to various  trends in Spain , France and Italy that expresses disdain, discrimination, or hatred for Catalonia , to Catalans , Catalan culture , Catalan nationalism , Catalan language or its history . It can also be referred to as Anti-Catalanism ( Catalan : anticatalanisme , IPA: [ˌantikətələˈnizmə] ) or Catalanophobia .

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] In a historical context, anti-Catalanism expresses itself as a hostile attitude towards the Catalan language , people , traditions or anything identified with Catalonia. In a political context it may express itself as the reaction to a perceived intrusion of Catalan political nationalism into the area. In its most extreme circumstances, this may also be referred as Catalanophobia , though it is not a phobia per se. Several political movements, known for organising boycotts of products from Catalonia, are also actively identified with anti-Catalanism. Anti-Catalan sentiment often expresses the denial of the existence, in any degree or form, of Catalan national identity , whether in the past or in the present.

Sometimes, Catalans abroad or within Catalonia have experienced verbal harassment or denial of provision of goods and services, often in reaction to the use of Catalan language.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Italy in the Middle Ages [ edit ] Historian Antoni Simon states that between the 12th and 15th centuries, the Crown of Aragon 's military expansion into Sicily , Sardinia and southern Italy and the entry of Catalan merchants into these markets generated a deep sense of hostility against the Catalans - often identified as Spaniards. Reflections can be found in the literary works of Dante Alighieri , Giovanni Boccaccio , Francesco Petrarca , Luigi Alamanni , Pietro Aretino or Serafino Aquilano . He states that it was an anti-Catalan sentiment that was more cultural-linguistic than political-territorial, due to the protests over the election of Alfonso de Borja in 1455 as Pope Calixtus III for being "barbaric and Catalan".

Spain in the early modern period [ edit ] The dynastic union of the Crown of Castile with the Crown of Aragon took place through the Catholic Monarchs . The Castilian hegemony in the newly established Monarchy of Spain left the peripheral realms under a royal government located in Madrid since 1561, a government composed of people mainly of Castilian origin.

At the beginning of the 16th century, King Ferdinand II of Aragon was called, in a derogatory manner, "viejo catalanote" ("old Catalan fool") by the Castilian nobility, being expelled from Castile and seen as an intruder after the death of Queen Isabella I of Castile .

[ 4 ] Political map of Spain (1850), divided into four parts: The Fully constitutional Spain (brown), most of the former Crown of Castile ; Assimilated Spain (green), the former Crown of Aragon , including the Catalan-speaking lands ; Foral Spain (blue), the Basque-speaking territories; and Colonial Spain (yellow) In accordance with the Nueva Planta decree of 1716 promulgated by Philip V after the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1714), most of the public legislation and institutions of the Principality of Catalonia was abolished, [ 5 ] leading to the marginalization of the Catalan language and culture, favoring instead the Spanish language . The administrative use of the Catalan language was replaced it with Spanish. While theoretically the replacement solely affected the Royal Audience, the king provided with secret instructions to the royal officers in Catalan territory: they "will take the utmost care to introduce the Castilian language, for which purpose he will give the most temperate and disguised measures so that the effect is achieved, without the care being noticed." [ 6 ] The Nueva Planta decrees were royal measures aimed at suppressing those who were defeated during the Succession War, and it initiated the creation of a French-style Spanish centralized state in accordance with the laws of Castile , and for the first time founded the Kingdom of Spain. This centralization took quite some time during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, reaching maximum levels during the dictatorship of Franco and the White Terror .

The 19th and 20th centuries [ edit ] The Four Columns of Montjuïc (Barcelona), which symbolized the four red stripes of the Catalan flag , being demolished in 1928 by Primo de Rivera's dictatorship , when various public symbols of Catalan identity were systematically removed in order to avoid being noticed during the 1929 International Exposition In the 19th century, the Spanish economy was largely dominated by agricultural production such as cereals from Castile, intended for sale on European markets. In these regions, the bourgeoisie and the landowners, supported by the central state, were favorable to free trade policy. On the contrary, the Catalan bourgeoisie was largely industrial and a producer of textiles , therefore interested in significant customs duties. This fight mobilized most of Catalan society. This struggle creates “in the rest of Spain the image of a selfish and interested Catalonia, determined to achieve its ends even at the expense of any Spanish interest”.

Anti-Catalan sentiments could be found in a pogrom in Argentina , during the Argentinian Tragic Week , in 1919. It was called to attack Jews and Catalans indiscriminately, possibly due to the influence of Spanish nationalism .

[ 7 ] Persecution in Francoist Spain [ edit ] See also: Language policies of Francoist Spain The dictatorship of Francisco Franco (1939-1975), not only saw the suppression of democratic freedoms, but also the Catalan language and culture were crushed at an unprecedented level, being excluded from the education system and relegated to the family sphere.

Castillian (Spanish) became the only language of education, administration, business and the media. During the Spanish Civil War period, despite the presence of Catalans serving in the Rebel army , the rhetorical use of Catalanophobia by the Rebel faction led directly to menaces and outbreaks of ethnic conflict of genocidal nature, as Paul Preston points out in "The Spanish Holocaust": [ 8 ] "In the days following the occupation of Lleida (...) republican prisoners identified as Catalans were executed without trial. Whoever they heard speaking in Catalan was very likely to end up arrested. The arbitrary brutality of the anti-Catalan repression reached such a point that Franco himself had to issue an order stipulating that mistakes that could later be regretted should be avoided”..."There are examples of the murder of peasants for no other apparent reason than that of speaking Catalan." Even the Falange member Maximiano García recorded the extreme forms of Catalanophobia from the Rebel Faction: "You could frequently hear in certain media the statement that Catalonia should be sown with salt. It reaches such high levels of xenophobia that it would be General Franco himself who would issue an order to stop the genocide that was being committed." On 15 January 1939 Tarragona fell to Franco's troops and the victors celebrated a solemn Catholic mass in the cathedral led by the cleric of the cathedral of Salamanca José Artero who in his homily said: "Catalan scum! You are not worthy of the sun that shines on you." Arrests and summary trials immediately began.

[ 9 ] On 26 January Franco's troops took Barcelona. According to the testimony of the British military attaché to Franco's government, the first ones to enter the Catalan capital were the troops of the Navarre Brigades of General Solchaga "not because they have fought better, but because they hate better. Especially when the object of hatred is Catalonia or a Catalan." Leaflet of the Francoist Spanish Syndical Organization from 1942 advocating against the use of the other languages spoken in Spain apart from Spanish, calling "barbarics" those who use them. It says, in Spanish: "Speak well. Be patriotic - Don't be barbaric. It is expected from a respectable gentleman to speak our official language, that is to say, Spanish. It is to be a patriot. Long live Spain, and discipline, and our Cervantine language." Scholars Rafael Aracil, Joan Oliver and Antoni Segura considered that until 1951, the persecution of Catalan language was "total".

[ 10 ] In some places students had to denounce fellow students who spoke Catalan.

[ 10 ] During this period, The Catalan language was also prohibited on tombstones.

[ 10 ] Between 1939 and 1943 book printing in Catalan virtually disappeared.

[ 11 ] With the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945, some of the harsh mesures began to be lifted and, while Spanish language remained the sole promoted one, limited number of Catalan literature began to be tolerated. However, works aimed at young people were restricted to limit the learning of the written language. Later on, opening of the regime allowed a small change in the marginalization of the language, such as the broadcast in 1964 of the first television program in Catalan on TVE ( Teatre català ) and the Nova Cançó (New Song) (1961) movement, though there still were limits such as the ban on Joan Manuel Serrat singing in Catalan at the Eurovision Song Contest in 1968.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In 1968, in a discussion about cultural activity in Catalan language, Catalan businessman J.B. Cendrós tried to get the then Franco's Minister Manuel Fraga Iribarne to lift the order to withdraw from circulation the first edition of the "Illustrated History of Catalonia". To the contrary, Fraga ended up glorifying the various times that Spain had militarily attacked Catalonia and that they were ready to do it again if necessary.

After Spanish transition to democracy [ edit ] A Catalan-language sign in Valencia city calling for a boycott of Catalan products Spanish writer Gonzalo Torrente Ballester opposed the return of the "Salamanca papers" to Catalonia, alleging the " right of conquest " In 1992 the police operation known as " Operation Garzón " saw the arrest of 45 Catalan pro-independence activists and politicians on the eve of the Summer Olympics held in Barcelona , under the accusation to be members of the armed Catalan pro-independence organisation Terra Lliure without real proof. 25 of the arrested were kept in solitary confinement. They denounced torture at the hands of the Spanish police [ 14 ] and threats of violence and rape to them and their families, as well as constant Anti-Catalan and Catalanophobic insults.

[ 15 ] The regrowth of anti-Catalan sentiment in Spain during the first decade of the 21st century was marked, among other reasons, by the reform of the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia and the demands from Catalan society for the return of the " Salamanca Papers ", a series of documents massively confiscated from individuals and organizations in Catalonia during the Spanish Civil War by Franco's army in order to enact a harsh repression.

In 2006 the Spanish conservative People's Party (PP) launched an advertising campaign against "the pact of the Catalan Statute and the grievances for Andalusia". However, 14 articles from the Statute of Autonomy of Catalonia that the PP deemed as unconstitutionals had an identical wording in the Statute of Autonomy of Andalusia , which was fully supported by the party chaired by Mariano Rajoy .

[ 16 ] On the other hand, in the autonomous community of Valencia , anti-Catalanism has been part of the strategy of the political right since the democratic transition, being instrumental the Valencian right-wing regionalist movement known as " Blaverism ". On 11 April 1993, the pro-Catalan independence and anti-fascist Valencian activist Guillem Agulló was assassinated by a group of neo-nazis and Spanish nationalists in Montanejos . Family members and left-wing and pro-independence organizations denounced that the motive for the crime had been political, since the young people who intervened in the murder were known for their Spanish and fascist ideology and that they also knew of the anti-fascist ideology of Agulló.

[ 17 ] In the 2010s, some organizations and fake news blogs such as Dolça Catalunya , closely linked to the Spanish far-right and the ultra-Catholicism, have maintained and become a vehicle of anti-Catalanism, pseudohistory and language secessionism .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The language and culture of a population of around 10 million Catalan-Valencian speakers is virtually non-existent in the Spanish media. At the same time, the media and social networks are a vehicle for the dissemination of a subtle or explicit Catalanophobia [ 22 ] [ 23 ] accompanying banal Spanish nationalism.
The incorporation of varying degrees of Catalanophobia into the banal nationalism of large sections of Spanish society is sublimated in cries of attack such as "a por ellos, oé" by the population [ 24 ] [ 25 ] but also by the Spanish law enforcement forces, during the police suppression of the 2017 Catalan independence referendum .

[ 26 ] Statistics [ edit ] The reality of those feelings has been expressed in studies carried out by different opinion institutes. Constantly, Catalans appeared as the least valued people in Spain; after them would generally be the Basques. In 2020, the Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió carried out a survey asking about the likes and dislikes of Spaniards. According to the results of the report, Catalonia is the autonomous community that, by far, generate the least sympathy from the rest.

[ 27 ] Spanish historical revisionism [ edit ] Anti-Catalanism can be found in the debates concerning the history of Catalonia and its relationship with the history of Spain, generally in non-academic spaces, also being part of banal nationalism. Mostly based on the remaining clichés from Spanish romantic historiography of Castilian basis, promoted and later consolidated by the Francoist dictatorship , Spanish pseudo-historical arguments towards Catalonia seek to minimize or deny any role, external visibility or political organization specific to the Catalan people in the past.

[ 28 ] It became particularly widespread during the first decades of the 21st century due to the increasing demands for Catalan self-determination, being often used as a tool to deny any possible historical legitimization of Catalan demands.

[ 29 ] The dissemination of pseudo-historical arguments was facilitated by media and individuals opposed to Catalonia's self-determination and by those linked to the political right, as well as the diffusion by social networks .

Some of the recurrent topics are: Confusion between the concepts of Crown of Aragon and one of its components, the Kingdom of Aragon , thus denying the composite structure of the first one. The direct consequence of this statement is the denial or relativization of the existence of the Principality of Catalonia , under the assumption that the term was just a geographic expression void of any political significance, while claiming that the Catalan counties were an integral part of the Kingdom of Aragon.

Attribution to Catalonia's institutions and leadership of the early modern age an outdated and oligarchic political behaviour.

Attribution of the economic growth and industrialization of Catalonia exclusively or mainly to the economic policy of the Bourbon dynasty after the War of the Spanish Succession . This assumptions tend to ignore endogenous factors, such as the previous economic growth of the 17th century, already studied by modern scholars.

Accusations against Catalan president Lluís Companys (1933-1940) of being the direct responsible for the execution of individuals opposed to the Republican faction during the Spanish Civil War in Catalonia .

[ 30 ] Denial of historical persecution and minorization of the Catalan language.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Catalanophobia .

Black legend Lerrouxism Polaco (slur) State nation Vergonha History of political Catalanism References [ edit ] ^ «Catalanofòbia» , Diec2, Barcelona, Edicions 62, 2007, pàgina 334, ISBN 978-84-412-1454-5 o ISBN 978-84-297-5977-8 ^ Ribalaygue, Jordi (16 July 2022).

"Augmenten les denúncies per discriminació del català a Barcelona" . TotBarcelona . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ Tardà Fernàndez, Joan (19 September 2019).

"Dos casos de discriminació per parlar en català en dos dies" .

El Temps . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ Coll i Alentorn, Miquel (1992).

Història . L'Abadia de Montserrat. p. 217.

ISBN 9788478262991 .

^ "The deplorable history of the Catalans, from their first engaging in the war, to the time of their reduction. With the motives, declarations, and engagements, on which they first took arms. The letters, treaties, &c. Relating thereto" . 1714.

^ de la Cierva, Ricardo (1981).

Historia general de España: Llegada y apogeo de los Borbones . Planeta. p. 78.

ISBN 8485753003 .

^ Levy, Richard S.; Bell, Dean Phillip; Donahue, William Collins; Madigan, Kevin, eds. (2005).

Antisemitism: a historical encyclopedia of prejudice and persecution . Vol. 1.

^ Preston, Paul (2011).

The Spanish Holocaust . Base. p. 63.

ISBN 978-84-15267-23-2 .

^ Solé, Villarroya, repressió 239 ^ a b c Aracil et al., Mundo actual 273 ^ Manent, Albert; Crexell, Joan (1988).

Bibliografia catalana dels anys més difícils (1939-1943) . Barcelona: Publicacions de l'Abadia de Montserrat, S.A. p. 14.

ISBN 8472029379 .

^ Solé, Villarroya, repressió 217 ^ Pujol Berché, Mercè (2013).

"Política lingüística: lengua, cultura e identidad, el ejemplo de Cataluña" .

Amnis .

doi : 10.4000/amnis.2061 .

ISSN 1764-7193 .

^ Cardús, Pere (2017-06-29).

"Ramon Piqué: 'A la sala d'interrogatoris, m'estrenyien la bossa al cap i em feien agenollar' " .

VilaWeb . Retrieved 2022-11-07 .

^ Redacció (2021-07-04).

"El fill d'un dels independentistes torturats a l'Operació Garzón recorda el relat esfereïdor del seu pare" .

VilaWeb . Retrieved 2022-11-05 .

^ "Actuación diferente del PP en Cataluña y Andalucía" . El País. 2 July 2007 . Retrieved 22 May 2024 .

^ peiró, empar.

"«El mataren per independentista» - 21 juliol 2009" .

El Punt Avui (in Catalan) . Retrieved 2024-02-11 .

^ Canela, Joan; Zaballa, Bel; Carrera, Mar; Rovira i Elisenda Laborda, Elisenda Rovira; Laborda, Elisenda (2017-03-20).

"El prejudici fet notícia. Estudi Observatori del discurs d'odi als mitjans de comunicació.Estudi 2016-2017" (PDF) .

Grup de Periodistes Ramon Barnils (in Catalan). Barcelona.

^ Salvador, Xavier (2019-09-08).

"Los nombres clave de 'Dolça Catalunya' " (in Spanish).

Crónica Global . Retrieved 2022-07-25 .

^ " 'Dolça Catalunya': de la sátira al nacionalismo a la "agitación política radical" " .

Metrópoli Abierta (in Spanish). 2019-09-08 . Retrieved 2022-07-25 .

^ Conde, Macarena Hernández; García, Manuel Fernández (2019-03-22).

"Partidos emergentes de la ultraderecha: ¿fake news, fake outsiders? Vox y la web Caso Aislado en las elecciones andaluzas de 2018" .

Teknokultura. Revista de Cultura Digital y Movimientos Sociales (in Spanish).

16 (1): 33– 53.

doi : 10.5209/TEKN.63113 .

ISSN 1549-2230 .

S2CID 199318451 .

^ "Telecinco pregunta en su web: "¿Preferirías un hijo negro, homosexual o catalán?" " . La Vanguardia. 19 October 2011 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ "Eliminen les referències a Catalunya de la versió espanyola del nou film de Nicolas Cage" . Vilaweb. 2022-04-05 . Retrieved 2023-04-27 .

^ "Vídeo: "A por ellos, oé": así despiden por toda España a la Policía enviada a Cataluña" (in Spanish). El Confidencial. 2017.

^ "El hilo que recuerda cómo se arengaba a los policías del 1-O al grito de "a por ellos, oé" " (in Spanish). Público. 2018.

^ "Un estudi inèdit analitza cas per cas la gravetat dels 1.066 ferits de l'1-O" . Vilaweb. 2019.

^ "¿Existe la catalanofobia? Analizamos las simpatías en España" . RTVE. 18 November 2020 . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ Baydal & Palomo 2020 , p. 83 ^ Baydal & Palomo 2020 , p. 85 ^ d'Armengol, Antoni (16 October 2021).

"Per què el franquisme atribueix 8.000 morts a Lluís Companys en la guerra civil" . 324. 3Cat . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Aracil Martí, Rafael; Oliver i Puigdomènech, Joan; Segura i Mas, Antoni (1998).

El mundo actual. De la Segunda Guerra Mundial a nuestros días (in Spanish). Publicacions i Edicions de la Universitat de Barcelona.

ISBN 978-8483380062 .

Solé i Sabaté, Josep Maria; Villarroya i Font, Joan (1993).

Cronologia de la repressió de la llengua i la cultura catalanes (1936-1975) (in Catalan). Curial.

ISBN 9788472569577 .

Ferrer, Francesc (2000).

Catalanofòbia. El pensament anticatalà a través de la història . Barcelona: Edicions 62.

ISBN 84-297-4657-9 .

Baydal, Vicent; Palomo, Cristian (2020).

Pseudohistòria contra Catalunya. De l'espanyolisme a la Nova Història . Vic: Ed. Eumo.

ISBN 978-84-9766-689-3 .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Catalan nationalism and independence movement Events ¡Cu-Cut! incident 1918-1919 autonomy campaign Plot of Prats de Molló Catalan Republic (1931) Events of 6 October Operation Garzón Fresno Case 2009–2011 independence referendums support 2010 autonomy protest 2012 independence demonstration 2013 Catalan Way 2014 Catalan Way 2014 referendum 2015 Free Way 2016 We are ready 2017–2018 constitutional crisis 2017 National Day for Yes 2017 Yes Campaign 2017 Operation Anubis 2017 independence referendum reactions 2017 Catalan general strike 2017 Wake Up Europe!

2017 Catalan election 2019 trial of independence leaders 2019–2020 protests 2019 Catalan general strike Concepts Catalan Countries Principality of Catalonia Northern Catalonia Republican Generalitat Anti-Catalan sentiment Federalism Documents Bases de Manresa (1892) Draft Constitution of the Catalan Republic (1928) Declaration of Sovereignty (23 Jan 2013) White Paper on the National Transition of Catalonia (Sep 2014) Initiation of the Process of Independence (9 Nov 2015) Let Catalans Vote (May 2017) Law on the Referendum on Self-determination (6 Sep 2017) Law of juridical transition (8 Sep 2017) Catalan declaration of independence (10/27 Oct 2017) People Valentí Almirall Enric Prat de la Riba Josep Puig i Cadafalch Francesc Macià Lluís Companys Joan Comorera Josep Irla Josep Tarradellas Jordi Pujol Guillem Agulló Josep-Lluís Carod-Rovira Artur Mas Oriol Junqueras Muriel Casals Carme Forcadell Jordi Sànchez Jordi Cuixart Carles Puigdemont Roger Torrent Anna Gabriel Quim Torra Elisenda Paluzie Pere Aragonès Lluís Llach Organisations Pro-independence Association of Municipalities for Independence Assemblea Nacional Catalana Òmnium Cultural Committees for the Defense of the Republic Estat Català Socialist Party of National Liberation † Catalan European Democratic Party † Republican Left of Catalonia Sobiranistes Junts per Catalunya DC MES Popular Unity Candidacy Endavant Poble Lliure Més per Mallorca PSM Més per Menorca PSMe Catalan Solidarity for Independence Reagrupament Republican Left of the Valencian Country Democratic Tsunami Catalan Alliance Catalan Communist Party † Autonomist and federalist Assembly of Catalonia † Catalan Action † Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia † Democratic Convergence of Catalonia † Democratic Union of Catalonia † Catalonia in Common Proposta per les Illes Youth Young Republican Left of Catalonia Nationalist Youth of Catalonia Arran La Forja Maulets † Sign † marks defunct organisations .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Catalan_sentiment&oldid=1306241147 " Categories : Anti-Catalanism Anti-national sentiment Spanish nationalism Discrimination in Spain Discrimination in France Linguistic discrimination Hidden categories: CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with excerpts Articles containing Catalan-language text Pages with Catalan IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 18:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Catalan sentiment 15 languages Add topic

