Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Donations 3 Europe 4 Africa 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents American Center for Law & Justice 4 languages Català Deutsch Español Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Far-right organization based in the United States American Center for Law & Justice Formation 1990 Headquarters Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Founder Pat Robertson Key people Jay Sekulow , Jordan Sekulow Website aclj.org The American Center for Law & Justice ( ACLJ ) is a politically conservative , Christian-based legal organization in the United States. It is headquartered in Washington, D.C.

, and associated with Regent University School of Law in Virginia Beach, Virginia .

The ACLJ was founded in 1990 by law school graduate and evangelical minister Pat Robertson with the stated "mandate to protect religious and constitutional freedoms". ACLJ generally pursues constitutional issues and conservative Christian ideals in courts of law.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The leaders of the ACLJ also occasionally engage in public debates to present their perspective on legal and constitutional issues.

The ACLJ is described as being "committed to ensuring the ongoing viability of freedom and liberty in the United States and around the world" by "focusing on U.S. constitutional law, European Union law and human rights law" to protect "universal, God-given and inalienable rights," according to Charity Navigator , which also issued a "Low Concern" advisory for the District of Columbia branch [ 6 ] and a "Moderate Concern" for the Virginia Beach branch [ 7 ] about the group after The Washington Post reported that ACLJ has paid Donald Trump 's personal attorney Jay Sekulow and his family millions of dollars.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The ACLJ arose in part as a right-leaning political answer to the American Civil Liberties Union , which has a different interpretation of First Amendment protection of religious rights.

[ 10 ] The name and acronym, ACLJ, were chosen to contrast with the ACLU.

[ 10 ] It has attracted much media attention for its lawsuits, such as its campaign to oppose changes to the constitution of Kenya that, according to the group, would permit abortion and Islamic law , [ 11 ] [ 12 ] and its attempts to block the construction of an Islamic cultural center near the former site of the World Trade Center .

[ 13 ] The ACLJ supported blocking the construction of the center through New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission .

In November 2010, the ACLJ asked that the U.S. Justice Department investigate the Congressional Muslim Staffer Association 's weekly prayer session on Capitol Hill , alleging that the organization demonstrated "a pattern of inviting Islamic extremists with ties to terrorism to participate in these events".

[ 14 ] In 2018, ACLJ attorney Jay Sekulow was on President Donald Trump 's personal legal team.

[ 15 ] Another Sekulow client at the time was the American Christian pastor Andrew Brunson , in detention and facing charges in Turkey.

[ 16 ] The ACLJ is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025 , [ 17 ] a collection of conservative and right-wing policy proposals from the Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican nominee win the 2024 presidential election .

[ 18 ] Donations [ edit ] Since 2011, donations to ACLJ are routed through Sekulow's family-run Christian Advocates Serving Evangelism (CASE), [ 19 ] [ 20 ] and many "transactions that benefit members of the Sekulow family are disclosed on the CASE returns, but not the ACLJ's." [ 21 ] [ 20 ] ACLJ's and CASE's tax returns show that between 1998 and 2011 they paid more than $33 million to Sekulow, members of his family, and businesses owned or co-owned by them.

[ 21 ] from 2011 to 2015, the two charities paid $5.5 million to Sekulow and members of his family, and $23 million to their businesses.

[ 19 ] Sekulow is half-owner of the for-profit corporation Constitutional Litigation and Advocacy Group [ 19 ] whose governor and executive officer is Stuart Roth, [ 22 ] one of his partners in the law firm and real estate business that declared bankruptcy in 1986.

[ 23 ] From 2011 to 2016, the ACLJ paid the group $23 million, "its largest outside expense." [ 19 ] Europe [ edit ] In 1997 Jay Sekulow and Thomas Patrick Monaghan, chief counsel and senior counsel of the ACLJ, respectively, set up the European Center for Law and Justice (ECLJ) in Strasbourg as part of the ACLJ's international strategy. Sekulow is chief counsel for the ECLJ. The following year the ACLJ set up the Slavic Center for Law and Justice (SCLJ) in Moscow. Both organizations on the European mainland have a full-time staff of religious rights attorneys.

[ 24 ] The ECLJ is active in the United Nations organization and in the Council of Europe , and represents the interests of some Christians in the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

Africa [ edit ] The ACLJ is one of several American Christian groups that are promoting conservative Christian laws in Africa, supporting controversial movements regarding LGBT rights , including support in Uganda for criminalizing homosexuality.

[ 25 ] Criticism [ edit ] The ACLJ has been criticized by the ACLU for its stance on putting prayer in public school , and by Americans United for conflating support of separation of church and state with being anti-religious .

[ 26 ] The Human Rights Campaign is critical of the ACLJ's finances citing that the organization does not meet "10 out of 20 of the Better Business Bureau ’s standards for charity accountability" and that ACLJ obfuscates how much Sekulow earns from the organization.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Pharmacists for Life International References [ edit ] ^ "US Groups Scrutinize Abortion Details in Kenya's Draft Constitution | East Africa" . .voanews.com. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021 . Retrieved October 4, 2010 .

^ "No public school graduation ceremony at megachurch: Judge" .

USA Today . June 1, 2010.

^ "Bill O'Reilly: The FBI and the IRS" .

Fox News . 2013-07-05 . Retrieved 2018-03-26 .

^ "Kenya: The 'Yes' Camp Has It Right" . allAfrica.com. June 3, 2010 . Retrieved October 4, 2010 .

^ "About the American Center for Law and Justice" . ACLJ . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ "Charity Navigator - Rating for American Center for Law and Justice - District of Columbia" .

Charity Navigator . Retrieved May 17, 2020 .

^ "Charity Navigator - Rating for American Center for Law and Justice" .

Charity Navigator . Retrieved May 17, 2020 .

^ "Trump attorney Jay Sekulow's family has been paid millions from charities they control" .

The Washington Post . June 27, 2017 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 .

^ "Charities steered $65M to Trump lawyer Sekulow and family" .

Associated Press . January 31, 2020 . Retrieved May 17, 2020 .

^ a b "ACLJ vs. ACLU: Battling Acronyms" .

The Christian Science Monitor . February 7, 1994 . Retrieved 2018-03-26 .

^ "Kenya's draft constitution under attack from religious NGO" .

BBC . May 4, 2010 . Retrieved August 15, 2010 .

^ Wadhams, Nick (June 29, 2010).

"The Battle Over Kenya's New Constitution" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 2023-05-16 .

^ "New York Mosque plans face lawsuit" .

The Daily Telegraph . August 5, 2010 . Retrieved August 15, 2010 .

^ "Conservative Group Calls on Justice Dept. to Investigate Muslim Prayers on Capitol Hill" .

Fox News . April 7, 2010.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2010 . Retrieved November 13, 2010 .

^ Swaine, Jon (2018-07-24).

"Trump lawyer uses government action on abortion to raise cash for own group" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2019-06-28 .

^ Toobin, Jeffrey, "How Rudy Giuliani turned into Trump's clown" , The New Yorker, September 10, 2018 ed. Retrieved 18-09-03.

^ "Advisory Board" .

The Heritage Foundation .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa (August 29, 2023).

"Conservative Groups Draw Up Plan to Dismantle the US Government and Replace It with Trump's Vision" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ a b c d Davis, Aaron C.; Boburg, Shawn (June 27, 2017).

"Trump attorney Jay Sekulow's family has been paid millions from charities they control" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ a b "Donor Alert: 'ACLJ' Is Two Charities Dominated by One Family" .

CharityWatch . July 19, 2017 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ a b Smietana, Bob (September 5, 2012).

"Tenn. lawyer's family, firm collect millions from charities" .

The Tennessean via. USA Today . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ "Constitutional Litigation and Advocacy Group P.C." OpenCorporates . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Williamson, Elizabeth (December 1, 2019).

"Trump's Other Personal Lawyer: Close to the Right, but Far From Giuliani" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 2, 2019 .

^ European Center for Law and Justice , About ECLJ Archived 2010-07-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kaoma, Kapya (5 November 2012).

"Major Christian Right Actors Seek to Criminalize Homosexuality in Africa" .

Political Research Associates .

Archived from the original on 2019-09-18 . Retrieved 16 November 2021 .

^ Andrews, James H. (7 February 1994).

"How Other Rights Groups View the ACLJ" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ "10 Things You Should Know About the American Center For Law And Justice" .

Human Rights Campaign . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

(dead link) ^ "American Center for Law and Justice" .

give.org . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

(dead link) ^ Smietana, Bob (5 September 2011).

"Tenn. lawyer's family, firm collect millions from charities" . USA Today . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

(dead link) External links [ edit ] American Center for Law & Justice Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Center_for_Law_%26_Justice&oldid=1306139231 " Categories : 1990 establishments in Washington, D.C.

American Christian political organizations Anti-abortion organizations in the United States Conservative organizations in the United States Civil liberties advocacy groups in the United States Government watchdog groups in the United States Legal advocacy organizations in the United States Organizations established in 1990 Non-profit organizations based in Washington, D.C.

Pat Robertson Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Center for Law & Justice 4 languages Add topic

