Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 TechnoFeminism book Toggle TechnoFeminism book subsection 1.1 Overview 2 Academic contexts Toggle Academic contexts subsection 2.1 Angela Haas 2.2 De Hertogh et al.

2.3 Kerri Elise Hauman 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Technofeminism 3 languages فارسی Français Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of feminism exploring the role gender plays in technology Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Technofeminism is a theoretical and practical framework that explores the intersections between technology, gender , and power. Rooted in feminist thought, it critically examines how technology shapes, reinforces, or disrupts gender inequalities and seeks to envision more equitable futures through technological design and use.

The term is widely attributed to Judy Wajcman , a sociologist and feminist scholar. Wajcman introduced the concept in her influential 2004 book, TechnoFeminism.

[ 1 ] Historically, technofeminism is closely linked to cyberfeminism , a concept which emerged in the early 1990s. The origins of cyber- and technofeminism are strongly attributed to the references of Donna Haraway 's A Cyborg Manifesto .

[ 2 ] Since the 1990s, numerous feminist movements developed, addressing feminism and technology in various ways, and through different perspectives. Networks, ideas and concepts can overlap.

Technofeminism is often examined in conjunction with intersectionality , a term coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw which analyzes the relationships among various identities, such as race , socioeconomic status , sexuality , gender, and more.

[ 3 ] TechnoFeminism book [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] TechnoFeminism Author Judy Wajcman Language English Genre Academic Publisher Polity Press Publication date 2004 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print ( hardback & paperback ), e-book ) Pages 148 ISBN 0-7456-3043-X TechnoFeminism is a book by academic sociologist Judy Wajcman which reframes the relationship between gender and technologies, and presents a feminist reading of the woman-machine relationship. It argues against a technocratic ideology, posing instead a thesis of society and technology being mutually constitutive. She supports this with examples of feminist history related to reproductive technologies and automation. It is considered a key contributor to the rise of feminist technoscience as a field.

Reception According to a review in the American Journal of Sociology , Wajcman convincingly argues that "analyses of everything from transit systems to pap smears must include a technofeminist awareness of men's and women's often different positions as designers, manufacturing operatives, salespersons, purchasers, profiteers, and embodied users of such technologies." [ 4 ] In the journal Science, Technology and Human Values , Sally Wyatt notes that the "theoretical insights from feminist technoscience (can and should) be useful for empirical research as well as for political change and action" and that one way of moving towards this is "return to production and work as research sites because so much work in recent years has focused on consumption, identity, and representation." [ 5 ] Editions Adding to the print edition, which has been reprinted several times, E-book editions of TechnoFeminism were released in 2013. The book has been translated into Spanish as El Tecnofeminismo .

[ 6 ] Academic contexts [ edit ] Scholars, such as Lori Beth De Hertogh , Liz Lane , Jessica Oulette , and Angela Haas , have spoken out about the lack of technofeminist scholarship, especially in the context of overarching technological research.

[ 3 ] A primary concern of technofeminism is the relationship between historical and societal norms, and technology design and implementation.

[ 7 ] Technofeminist scholars actively work to illuminate the often unnoticed inequities ingrained in systems and come up with solutions to combat them.

[ 7 ] They also research how technology can be used for positive ends, especially for marginalized groups .

[ 7 ] Angela Haas [ edit ] Angela Haas focuses on technofeminism as a predecessor of "digital cultural rhetorics research", the focus of her scholarship.

[ 7 ] The interactions between these two fields have led scholars to analyze the intersectional nature of technology, and how this intersectionality results in tools that do not serve all users.

[ 7 ] Haas also explores how marginalized groups interact with digital technologies. Specific areas analyzed include how revealing aspects of one's identity influences their ability to exist online.

[ 7 ] Although at times digital spaces do not cater to marginalized groups, one example being the idea that someone who identifies as homosexual is perceived as "sexual in every situation", which alters how the online community they are a part of interacts with them.

[ 7 ] However, at times, technology can be renewed to serve women and marginalized groups.

[ 7 ] Haas uses the example of the vibrator to prove this point.

[ 7 ] While it is now associated with female empowerment, the tool was originally used to control women suffering from "hysteria".

[ 7 ] De Hertogh et al.

[ edit ] Lori Beth De Hertogh, Liz Lane, and Jessica Ouellette expanded upon previous scholars' work, placing it within the specific context of the "Computers and Composition" journal.

[ 3 ] In their work, the scholars analyzed frequencies of the term "technofeminism/t" and associated words in the "Computers and Composition" journal.

[ 3 ] Unfortunately, the occurrences were limited, leading the scholars to call for increased use of the term "technofeminism" in scholarly materials and increased intersectional frameworks in mainstream technology literature.

[ 3 ] Kerri Elise Hauman [ edit ] Kerri Hauman explores technofeminist themes in her PhD dissertation, specifically discussing how feminism exists in digital spaces.

[ 8 ] Using the example of "Feministing", a blog serving those invested in "feminist activism", Hauman applies various rhetorical frameworks (such as invitational rhetoric and rhetorical ecologies) to understand how online platforms can further social justice initiatives in some ways, but promote the exclusion of disadvantaged groups in others.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Digital rhetoric Feminist technoscience Cyberfeminism References [ edit ] ^ Wajcman, Judy (2004).

TechnoFeminism . Cambridge, UK: Polity.

ISBN 0745630448 .

^ Sollfrank, Cornelia (2020).

The beautiful warriors. Technofeminist Practice in the 21st Century . Minor Compositions. p. 3.

ISBN 9781570273650 .

^ a b c d e De Hertogh, Lori; Lane, Liz; Ouellette, Jessica (2019-01-01).

" "Feminist Leanings:" Tracing Technofeminist and Intersectional Practices and Values in Three Decades of Computers and Composition" .

Computers and Composition .

^ McCaughey, Martha (2006-05-01). "TechnoFeminism by Judy Wajcman".

American Journal of Sociology .

111 (6): 1982– 1983.

doi : 10.1086/506222 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

^ Wyatt, Sally (Summer 2005). "Book Review: He, She and IT Revisited: New Perspectives on Gender in the Information Society; TechnoFeminism".

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

30 (3): 433– 436.

doi : 10.1177/0162243904273483 .

S2CID 144873993 .

^ WorldCat list of formats and editions ^ a b c d e f g h i j Haas, Angela M. (2018), "Toward a Digital Cultural Rhetoric" , The Routledge Handbook of Digital Writing and Rhetoric , Routledge, pp.

412– 422, doi : 10.4324/9781315518497-39 , ISBN 978-1-315-51849-7 , retrieved 2022-02-24 ^ a b Hauman, Kerri (2013-01-01).

"Community-Sponsored Literate Activity and Technofeminism: Ethnographic Inquiry of Feministing" .

English Ph.D. Dissertations .

Further reading [ edit ] Farquharson, Karen "Book review: 'TechnoFeminism', by Judy Wajcman" Australian Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society , Vol. 2, no. 2 (2004), pp. 156–157 Sarah M. Brown "TechnoFeminism (review)" NWSA Journal Volume 19, Number 3, Fall 2007 pp. 225–227 Amanda du Preez (2 October 2009).

Gendered Bodies and New Technologies: Rethinking Embodiment in a Cyber-era . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 131.

ISBN 978-1-4438-1541-3 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technofeminism&oldid=1296559292 " Categories : 2004 non-fiction books Books about the Internet Books about feminism Women and science Politics and technology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 18:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technofeminism 3 languages Add topic

