Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subdisciplines 2 History of polymer science 3 Nobel prizes related to polymer science 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Polymer science 6 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subfield of materials science concerned with polymers Polymer science Properties Architecture Tacticity Morphology Degradation Phase behavior Mark–Houwink theory UCST LCST Flory–Huggins solution theory Coil–globule transition Synthesis Chain polymerization Radical polymerization RDRP ] ATRP RAFT Nitroxide-mediated radical polymerization Step polymerization Condensation polymerization Addition polymerization Classification Functional type Polyolefin Polyethylene Polypropylene Polyisobutylene Polyurethane Polyester Polycarbonate Vinyl polymers PVC PVA PVAc Polystyrene Structure Homopolymer Copolymer Gels Hydrogels Self-healing hydrogels Characterization GPC FTIR X-ray crystallography DSC NMR TGA DMA Rheology Rheometry Viscometry Scientists Flory Heeger MacDiarmid Shirakawa Natta Edwards de Gennes Ziegler Staudinger Goodyear Baekeland Hayward Braconnot Applications Industrial production Extrusion Blow molding Applied coatings Protective Coatings 3D printing Consumer products Tires Whitewalls Cookware and bakeware Bakelite Food Container Vinyl record Kevlar Plastic bottle Plastic bag v t e Polymer science or macromolecular science is a subfield of materials science concerned with polymers , primarily synthetic polymers such as plastics and elastomers .  The field of polymer science includes researchers in multiple disciplines including chemistry , physics , and engineering .

Subdisciplines [ edit ] This science comprises three main sub-disciplines: Polymer chemistry or macromolecular chemistry is concerned with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers.

Polymer physics is concerned with the physical properties of polymer materials and engineering applications. Specifically, it seeks to present the mechanical, thermal, electronic and optical properties of polymers with respect to the underlying physics governing a polymer microstructure. Despite originating as an application of statistical physics to chain structures, [ 1 ] polymer physics has now evolved into a discipline in its own right.

Polymer characterization is concerned with the analysis of chemical structure, morphology, and the determination of physical properties in relation to compositional and structural parameters.

History of polymer science [ edit ] The first modern example of polymer science is Henri Braconnot 's work in the 1830s.  Henri, along with Christian Schönbein and others, developed derivatives of the natural polymer cellulose , producing new, semi-synthetic materials, such as celluloid and cellulose acetate .  The term "polymer" was coined in 1833 by Jöns Jakob Berzelius , though Berzelius did little that would be considered polymer science in the modern sense. In the 1840s, Friedrich Ludersdorf and Nathaniel Hayward independently discovered that adding sulfur to raw natural rubber ( polyisoprene ) helped prevent the material from becoming sticky.  In 1844 Charles Goodyear received a U.S. patent for vulcanizing natural rubber with sulfur and heat.

Thomas Hancock had received a patent for the same process in the UK the year before. This process strengthened natural rubber and prevented it from melting with heat without losing flexibility.  This made practical products such as waterproofed articles possible. It also facilitated practical manufacture of such rubberized materials. Vulcanized rubber represents the first commercially successful product of polymer research.  In 1884 Hilaire de Chardonnet started the first artificial fiber plant based on regenerated cellulose , or viscose rayon , as a substitute for silk , but it was very flammable.

[ 2 ] In 1907 Leo Baekeland invented the first synthetic plastic, a thermosetting phenol – formaldehyde resin called Bakelite .

[ 3 ] Despite significant advances in polymer synthesis, the molecular nature of polymers was not understood until the work of Hermann Staudinger in 1922.

[ 4 ] Prior to Staudinger's work, polymers were understood in terms of the association theory or aggregate theory, which originated with Thomas Graham in 1861. Graham proposed that cellulose and other polymers were colloids , aggregates of molecules having small molecular mass connected by an unknown intermolecular force.

Hermann Staudinger was the first to propose that polymers consisted of long chains of atoms held together by covalent bonds . It took over a decade for Staudinger's work to gain wide acceptance in the scientific community, work for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1953.

The World War II era marked the emergence of a strong commercial polymer industry. The limited or restricted supply of natural materials such as silk and rubber necessitated the increased production of synthetic substitutes, such as nylon [ 5 ] and synthetic rubber .

[ 6 ] In the intervening years, the development of advanced polymers such as Kevlar and Teflon have continued to fuel a strong and growing polymer industry.

The growth in industrial applications was mirrored by the establishment of strong academic programs and research institutes.  In 1946, Herman Mark established the Polymer Research Institute at Brooklyn Polytechnic , the first research facility in the United States dedicated to polymer research.  Mark is also recognized as a pioneer in establishing curriculum and pedagogy for the field of polymer science.

[ 7 ] In 1950, the POLY division of the American Chemical Society was formed, and has since grown to the second-largest division in this association with nearly 8,000 members. Fred W. Billmeyer, Jr., a Professor of Analytical Chemistry had once said that "although the scarcity of education in polymer science is slowly diminishing but it is still evident in many areas. What is most unfortunate is that it appears to exist, not because of a lack of awareness but, rather, a lack of interest." [ 8 ] Nobel prizes related to polymer science [ edit ] 2005 (Chemistry) Robert Grubbs , Richard Schrock , Yves Chauvin for olefin metathesis.

[ 9 ] 2002 (Chemistry) John Bennett Fenn , Koichi Tanaka , and Kurt Wüthrich for the development of methods for identification and structure analyses of biological macromolecules .

[ 10 ] 2000 (Chemistry) Alan G. MacDiarmid , Alan J. Heeger , and Hideki Shirakawa for work on conductive polymers , contributing to the advent of molecular electronics .

[ 11 ] 1991 (Physics) Pierre-Gilles de Gennes for developing a generalized theory of phase transitions with particular applications to describing ordering and phase transitions in polymers.

[ 12 ] 1974 (Chemistry) Paul J. Flory for contributions to theoretical polymer chemistry.

[ 13 ] 1963 (Chemistry) Giulio Natta and Karl Ziegler for contributions in polymer synthesis.  ( Ziegler-Natta catalysis ).

[ 14 ] 1953 (Chemistry) Hermann Staudinger for contributions to the understanding of macromolecular chemistry.

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ McLeish (2009) p. 6811.

^ "Types of Polymer" .

Plastics Historical Society . Archived from the original on 2009-04-02.

^ "Bakelite: The World's First Synthetic Plastic" .

National Historic Chemical Landmarks . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012 . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ "Hermann Staudinger: Foundation of Polymer Science" .

National Historic Chemical Landmarks . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013 . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ "Foundation of Polymer Science: Wallace Carothers and the Development of Nylon" .

National Historic Chemical Landmarks . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on February 23, 2013 . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ "U.S. Synthetic Rubber Program" .

National Historic Chemical Landmarks . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on February 23, 2013 . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ "Herman Mark and the Polymer Research Institute" .

National Historic Chemical Landmarks . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013 . Retrieved June 25, 2012 .

^ Fred W. Billmeyer, Jr., (1984), Third Edition, Textbook of Polymer Science, A Wiley-Interscience Publication. preface to the second edition ^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2005" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2002" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2000" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1991" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1974" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1963" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1953" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

McLeish T.C.B.

(2009) Polymer Physics. In: Meyers R. (eds) Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science. Springer, New York, NY.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-30440-3_409 Asua, José M. (August 2007).

Polymer Reaction Engineering (Hardcover - 392 pages) . Wiley, John & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-4051-4442-1 .

External links [ edit ] List of scholarly journals pertaining to polymer science v t e Branches of materials science Main classes Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science and Polymer engineering Material independent Characterization Computational Fundamental aspects Informatics Domains Crystallography Surface science Tribology Microelectronics Interdisciplinary Chemistry Solid-state chemistry Polymer chemistry Mineralogy Mining engineering Nuclear engineering Physics Condensed-matter physics Polymer physics Soft-matter physics Solid-state physics Category Common Material v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polymer_science&oldid=1221074740 " Categories : Soft matter Materials science Polymers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 April 2024, at 18:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polymer science 6 languages Add topic

