Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Contaminants Toggle Contaminants subsection 2.1 Contaminants with an origin in sewage 2.1.1 Pathogens 2.2 Organic compounds 2.3 Inorganic contaminants 2.4 Pharmaceutical pollutants 2.5 Solid waste and plastics 3 Types of surface water pollution Toggle Types of surface water pollution subsection 3.1 Marine pollution 3.2 Nutrient pollution 3.3 Thermal pollution 3.4 Biological pollution 4 Groundwater pollution 5 Pollution from point sources Toggle Pollution from point sources subsection 5.1 Sewage 5.2 Industrial wastewater 5.3 Oil spills 6 Pollution from nonpoint sources Toggle Pollution from nonpoint sources subsection 6.1 Agriculture 6.2 Atmospheric contributions (air pollution) 7 Sampling, measurements, analysis 8 Impacts Toggle Impacts subsection 8.1 Ecosystems 8.2 Public health and waterborne diseases 8.3 Eutrophication from nitrogen pollution 8.4 Ocean acidification 9 Prevalence Toggle Prevalence subsection 9.1 By country 10 Control and reduction Toggle Control and reduction subsection 10.1 Pollution control philosophy 10.2 Sanitation and sewage treatment 10.3 Industrial wastewater treatment 10.4 Agricultural wastewater treatment 10.5 Management of erosion and sediment control 10.6 Control of urban runoff (storm water) 10.7 Legislation 10.7.1 Philippines 10.7.2 United Kingdom 10.7.3 United States 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Water pollution 72 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Contamination of water bodies "Clean water" redirects here. For water that is safe to drink, see Drinking water .

Garbage floating in water, Circular Quay , Sydney , Australia Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Water pollution (or aquatic pollution ) is the contamination of water bodies , with  a negative impact on their uses.

[ 1 ] : 6 It is usually a result of human activities. Water bodies include lakes , rivers , oceans , aquifers , reservoirs and groundwater . Water pollution results when contaminants mix with these water bodies. Contaminants can come from one of four main sources. These are sewage discharges, industrial activities, agricultural activities, and urban runoff including stormwater .

[ 2 ] Water pollution may affect either surface water or groundwater . This form of pollution can lead to many problems. One is the degradation of aquatic ecosystems . Another is spreading water-borne diseases when people use polluted water for drinking or irrigation .

[ 3 ] Water pollution also reduces the ecosystem services such as drinking water provided by the water resource .

Sources of water pollution are either point sources or non-point sources .

[ 4 ] Point sources have one identifiable cause, such as a storm drain , a wastewater treatment plant , or an oil spill . Non-point sources are more diffuse. An example is agricultural runoff .

[ 5 ] Pollution is the result of the cumulative effect over time. Pollution may take many forms. One would is toxic substances such as oil, metals, plastics, pesticides , persistent organic pollutants , and industrial waste products. Another is stressful conditions such as changes of pH , hypoxia or anoxia, increased temperatures, excessive turbidity , or changes of salinity ). The introduction of pathogenic organisms is another. Contaminants may include organic and inorganic substances. A common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers.

Control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans as well as legislation.

Technology solutions can include improving sanitation , sewage treatment , industrial wastewater treatment , agricultural wastewater treatment , erosion control , sediment control and control of urban runoff (including stormwater management).

Definition A practical definition of water pollution is: "Water pollution is the addition of substances or energy forms that directly or indirectly alter the nature of the water body in such a manner that negatively affects its legitimate uses." [ 1 ] : 6 Water is typically referred to as polluted when it is impaired by anthropogenic contaminants. Due to these contaminants, it either no longer supports a certain human use, such as drinking water , or undergoes a marked shift in its ability to support its biotic communities, such as fish.

Contaminants Contaminants with an origin in sewage Further information: Waterborne diseases § Diseases by type of pathogen , and Sewage § Pathogens The following compounds can all reach water bodies via raw sewage or even treated sewage discharges: Various chemical compounds found in personal hygiene and cosmetic products.

Disinfection by-products found in chemically disinfected drinking water (whilst these chemicals can be a pollutant in the water distribution network , they are fairly volatile and therefore not usually found in environmental waters).

[ 6 ] Hormones (from animal husbandry and residue from human hormonal contraception methods) and synthetic materials such as phthalates that mimic hormones in their action. These can have adverse impacts even at very low concentrations on the natural biota and potentially on humans if the water is treated and utilized for drinking water.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Insecticides and herbicides , often from agricultural runoff.

Pathogens like Hepatovirus A (HAV may be present in treated wastewater outflows and receiving water bodies but is largely removed during further treatment of drinking water [ 10 ] ) Inadequately treated wastewater can convey nutrients, pathogens, heterogenous suspended solids and organic fecal matter.

[ 1 ] : 6 Poster to teach people in South Asia about human activities leading to the pollution of water sources Pollutants and their effects* Pollutant Main representative parameter Possible effect of the pollutant Suspended solids Total suspended solids Aesthetic problems Sludge deposits Pollutants adsorption Protection of pathogens Biodegradable organic matter Biological oxygen demand (BOD) Oxygen consumption Death of fish Septic conditions Nutrients Nitrogen Phosphorus Excessive algae growth Toxicity to fish ( ammonia ) Illnesses in new-born infants ( blue baby syndrome from nitrate ) Pollution of groundwater Pathogens Coliforms, such as E. coli , may not be pathogenic in and of themselves, but are used as an indicator of co-occurring pathogens that should take slightly less time to die or degrade [ 1 ] : 51 Helminth eggs [ 1 ] : 55 [ 11 ] Waterborne diseases Non-biodegradable organic matter Pesticides Some detergents Others Toxicity (various) Foam ( detergents ) Reduction of oxygen transfer (detergents) Non- biodegradability Bad odors (e.g.: phenols ) Inorganic dissolved solids Total dissolved solids Conductivity Excessive salinity – harm to plantations ( irrigation ) Toxicity to plants (some ions) Problems with soil permeability ( sodium ) * Sources of these pollutants are household and industrial wastewater, urban runoff and stormwater drainage from agricultural areas [ 1 ] : 7 Pathogens Bacteria, viruses, protozoans and parasitic worms are examples of pathogens that can be found in wastewater.

[ 1 ] : 47 In practice, indicator organisms are used to investigate pathogenic pollution of water because the detection of pathogenic organisms in water sample is difficult and costly, because of their low concentrations. The indicators ( bacterial indicator ) of fecal contamination of water samples most commonly used are total coliforms (TC) or fecal coliforms (FC), the latter also referred to as thermotolerant coliforms, such as Escherichia coli .

[ 1 ] : 52–53 Pathogens can produce waterborne diseases in either human or animal hosts.

[ 12 ] Some microorganisms sometimes found in contaminated surface waters that have caused human health problems include Burkholderia pseudomallei , Cryptosporidium parvum , Giardia lamblia , Salmonella , norovirus and other viruses, and parasitic worms including the Schistosoma type.

[ 13 ] The source of high levels of pathogens in water bodies can be from human feces (due to open defecation ), sewage, blackwater , or manure that has found its way into the water body. The cause for this can be lack of sanitation procedures or poorly functioning on-site sanitation systems ( septic tanks , pit latrines ), sewage treatment plants without disinfection steps, sanitary sewer overflows and combined sewer overflows (CSOs) [ 14 ] during storm events and intensive agriculture (poorly managed livestock operations).

Organic compounds Organic substances that enter water bodies are often toxic .

[ 15 ] : 229 Petroleum hydrocarbons, including fuels ( gasoline , diesel fuel , jet fuels, and fuel oil ) and lubricants (motor oil), and fuel combustion byproducts, from oil spills or storm water runoff [ 16 ] Volatile organic compounds , such as improperly stored industrial solvents . Problematic species are organochlorides such as polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs) and trichloroethylene , a common solvent.

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are persistent organic pollutants .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Inorganic contaminants Bauxite residue is an industrial waste that is dangerously alkaline and can lead to water pollution if not managed appropriately (photo from Stade , Germany).

Muddy river polluted by sediment Inorganic water pollutants include: Ammonia from food processing waste Heavy metals from motor vehicles (via urban storm water runoff ) [ 16 ] [ 19 ] and acid mine drainage Nitrates and phosphates , from sewage and agriculture ( see nutrient pollution ) Silt ( sediment ) in runoff from construction sites or sewage, logging, slash and burn practices land clearing sites Salt: Freshwater salinization is the process of salty runoff contaminating freshwater ecosystems .

[ 20 ] Human-induced salinization is termed as secondary salinization, with the use of de-icing road salts as the most common form of runoff.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Pharmaceutical pollutants This section is an excerpt from Environmental impact of pharmaceuticals and personal care products .

[ edit ] The environmental effect of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) is being investigated since at least the 1990s. PPCPs include substances used by individuals for personal health or cosmetic reasons and the products used by agribusiness to boost growth or health of livestock. More than twenty million tons of PPCPs are produced every year.

[ 23 ] The European Union has declared pharmaceutical residues with the potential of contamination of water and soil to be "priority substances".

[3] PPCPs have been detected in water bodies throughout the world. More research is needed to evaluate the risks of toxicity , persistence, and bioaccumulation , but the current state of research shows that personal care products impact the environment and other species, such as coral reefs [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] and fish.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] PPCPs encompass environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants (EPPPs) and are one type of persistent organic pollutants . They are not removed in conventional sewage treatment plants but require a fourth treatment stage which not many plants have.

[ 23 ] In 2022, the most comprehensive study of pharmaceutical pollution of the world's rivers found that it threatens "environmental and/or human health in more than a quarter of the studied locations". It investigated 1,052 sampling sites along 258 rivers in 104 countries, representing the river pollution of 470 million people. It found that "the most contaminated sites were in low- to middle-income countries and were associated with areas with poor wastewater and waste management infrastructure and pharmaceutical manufacturing " and lists the most frequently detected and concentrated pharmaceuticals.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants , which can include various pharmaceutical drugs and their metabolites ( see also drug pollution ), such as antidepressant drugs, antibiotics or the contraceptive pill .

Metabolites of illicit drugs (see also wastewater epidemiology ), for example methamphetamine and ecstasy.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Solid waste and plastics Solid waste and plastics in the Lachine Canal , Canada Further information: Sewage § Solid waste , Plastic pollution , and Marine plastic pollution Solid waste can enter water bodies through untreated sewage, combined sewer overflows, urban runoff, people discarding garbage into the environment, wind carrying municipal solid waste from landfills and so forth. This results in macroscopic pollution– large visible items polluting the water– but also microplastics pollution that is not directly visible. The terms marine debris and marine plastic pollution are used in the context of pollution of oceans.

Microplastics persist in the environment at high levels, particularly in aquatic and marine ecosystems , where they cause water pollution.

[ 33 ] 35% of all ocean microplastics come from textiles/clothing, primarily due to the erosion of polyester, acrylic, or nylon-based clothing, often during the washing process.

[ 34 ] Stormwater, untreated sewage and wind are the primary conduits for microplastics from land to sea. Synthetic fabrics, tyres, and city dust are the most common sources of microplastics. These three sources account for more than 80% of all microplastic contamination.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Types of surface water pollution Surface water pollution includes pollution of rivers, lakes and oceans. A subset of surface water pollution is marine pollution which affects the oceans.

Nutrient pollution refers to contamination by excessive inputs of nutrients .

Globally, about 4.5 billion people do not have safely managed sanitation as of 2017, according to an estimate by the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation .

[ 37 ] Lack of access to sanitation is concerning and often leads to water pollution, e.g. via the practice of open defecation : during rain events or floods, the human feces are moved from the ground where they were deposited into surface waters. Simple pit latrines may also get flooded during rain events.

As of 2022, Europe and Central Asia account for around 16% of global microplastics discharge into the seas, [ 35 ] [ 38 ] and although management of plastic waste and its recycling is improving globally, the absolute amount of plastic pollution continues to increase unabated due to the large amount of plastic that is being produced and disposed of.

[ 39 ] Even if sea plastic pollution were to stop entirely, microplastic contamination of the surface ocean would be projected to continue to increase.

[ 39 ] Marine pollution This section is an excerpt from Marine pollution .

[ edit ] Marine pollution occurs when substances used or spread by humans, such as industrial , agricultural , and residential waste ; particles ; noise ; excess carbon dioxide ; or invasive organisms enter the ocean and cause harmful effects there. The majority of this waste (80%) comes from land-based activity, although marine transportation significantly contributes as well.

[ 40 ] It is a combination of chemicals and trash, most of which comes from land sources and is washed or blown into the ocean. This pollution results in damage to the environment , to the health of all organisms, and to economic structures worldwide.

[ 41 ] Since most inputs come from land, via rivers , sewage , or the atmosphere , it means that continental shelves are more vulnerable to pollution.

Air pollution is also a contributing factor, as it carries iron, carbonic acid, nitrogen , silicon, sulfur, pesticides , and dust particles into the ocean.

[ 42 ] The pollution often comes from nonpoint sources such as agricultural runoff , wind-blown debris , and dust. These nonpoint sources are largely due to runoff that enters the ocean through rivers, but wind-blown debris and dust can also play a role, as these pollutants can settle into waterways and oceans.

[ 43 ] Pathways of pollution include direct discharge, land runoff, ship pollution , bilge pollution , dredging (which can create dredge plumes ), atmospheric pollution and, potentially, deep sea mining .

Nutrient pollution This section is an excerpt from Nutrient pollution .

[ edit ] Nutrient pollution caused by Surface runoff of soil and fertilizer during a rain storm Nutrient pollution is a form of water pollution caused by too many nutrients entering the water. It is a primary cause of eutrophication of surface waters (lakes, rivers and coastal waters ), in which excess nutrients, usually nitrogen or phosphorus , stimulate algal growth.

[ 44 ] Sources of nutrient pollution include surface runoff from farms, waste from septic tanks and feedlots , and emissions from burning fuels. Raw sewage , which is rich in nutrients, also contributes to the issue when dumped in water bodies. Excess nitrogen causes environmental problems such as harmful algal blooms , hypoxia , acid rain , nitrogen saturation in forests, and climate change .

[ 45 ] Thermal pollution The Brayton Point Power Station in Massachusetts discharged heated water to Mount Hope Bay until 2011.

This section is an excerpt from Thermal pollution .

[ edit ] Thermal pollution , sometimes called "thermal enrichment", is the degradation of water quality by any process that changes ambient water temperature . Thermal pollution is the rise or drop in the temperature of a natural body of water caused by human influence . Thermal pollution, unlike chemical pollution, results in a change in the physical properties of water . A common cause of thermal pollution is the use of water as a coolant by power plants and industrial manufacturers.

[ 46 ] Urban runoff — stormwater discharged to surface waters from rooftops, roads, and parking lots—and reservoirs can also be a source of thermal pollution.

[ 47 ] Thermal pollution can also be caused by the release of very cold water from the base of reservoirs into warmer rivers.

Elevated water temperatures decrease oxygen levels (due to lower levels of dissolved oxygen , as gases are less soluble in warmer liquids), which can kill fish (which may then rot) and alter food chain composition, reduce species biodiversity , and foster invasion by new thermophilic species.

[ 48 ] : 179 [ 15 ] : 375 Biological pollution The introduction of aquatic invasive organisms is a form of water pollution as well. It causes biological pollution .

[ 49 ] Groundwater pollution This section is an excerpt from Groundwater pollution .

[ edit ] Groundwater pollution (also called groundwater contamination) occurs when pollutants are released to the ground and make their way into groundwater . This type of water pollution can also occur naturally due to the presence of a minor and unwanted constituent, contaminant, or impurity in the groundwater, in which case it is more likely referred to as contamination rather than pollution . Groundwater pollution can occur from on-site sanitation systems, landfill leachate, effluent from wastewater treatment plants , leaking sewers, petrol filling stations , hydraulic fracturing (fracking) or from over application of fertilizers in agriculture . Pollution (or contamination) can also occur from naturally occurring contaminants, such as arsenic or fluoride .

[ 50 ] Using polluted groundwater causes hazards to public health through poisoning or the spread of disease ( water-borne diseases ).

In many areas of the world, groundwater pollution poses a hazard to the wellbeing of people and ecosystems. One-quarter of the world's population depends on groundwater for drinking, yet concentrated recharging is known to carry short-lived contaminants into carbonate aquifers and jeopardize the purity of those waters.

[ 51 ] Pollution from point sources Point source water pollution refers to contaminants that enter a waterway from a single, identifiable source, such as a pipe or ditch . Examples of sources in this category include discharges from a sewage treatment plant, a factory, or a city storm drain .

The U.S.

Clean Water Act (CWA) defines point source for regulatory enforcement purposes ( see United States regulation of point source water pollution ).

[ 52 ] The CWA definition of point source was amended in 1987 to include municipal storm sewer systems, as well as industrial storm water, such as from construction sites.

[ 53 ] Sewage Sewage typically consists of 99.9% water and 0.1% solids.

[ 54 ] Sewage contributes many classes of nutrients that lead to Eutrophication . It is a major source of phosphate for example.

[ 55 ] Sewage is often contaminated with diverse compounds found in personal hygiene , cosmetics , pharmaceutical drugs (see also drug pollution ), and their metabolites [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Water pollution due to environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants can have wide-ranging consequences. When sewers overflow during storm events this can lead to water pollution from untreated sewage. Such events are called sanitary sewer overflows or combined sewer overflows .

A polluted river draining an abandoned copper mine on Anglesey Industrial wastewater Perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS) is a global pollutant that has been found in drinking water. It appears not to biodegrade.

[ 56 ] Further information: Industrial wastewater treatment Industrial processes that use water also produce wastewater. This is called industrial wastewater . Using the US as an example, the main industrial consumers of water (using over 60% of the total consumption) are power plants, petroleum refineries, iron and steel mills, pulp and paper mills, and food processing industries.

[ 2 ] Some industries discharge chemical wastes, including solvents and heavy metals (which are toxic) and other harmful pollutants.

Industrial wastewater could add the following pollutants to receiving water bodies if the wastewater is not treated and managed properly: Heavy metals , including mercury , lead , and chromium Organic matter and nutrients such as food waste : Certain industries (e.g.

food processing , slaughterhouse waste, paper fibers, plant material, etc.) discharge high concentrations of BOD, ammonia nitrogen and oil and grease.

[ 57 ] : 180 [ 15 ] Inorganic particles such as sand , grit, metal particles, rubber residues from tires, ceramics , etc.; Toxins such as pesticides , poisons , herbicides , etc.

Pharmaceuticals , endocrine disrupting compounds, hormones, perfluorinated compounds, siloxanes, drugs of abuse and other hazardous substances [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Microplastics such as polyethylene and polypropylene beads, polyester and polyamide [ 61 ] Thermal pollution from power stations and industrial manufacturers Radionuclides from uranium mining , processing nuclear fuel , operating nuclear reactors , or disposal of radioactive waste .

Some industrial discharges include persistent organic pollutants such as per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS).

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Oil spills This section is an excerpt from Oil spill .

[ edit ] An oil spill is the release of a liquid petroleum hydrocarbon into the environment, especially the marine ecosystem , due to human activity, and is a form of pollution . The term is usually given to marine oil spills, where oil is released into the ocean or coastal waters , but spills may also occur on land. Oil spills can result from the release of crude oil from tankers , offshore platforms , drilling rigs , and wells . They may also involve spills of refined petroleum products , such as gasoline and diesel fuel , as well as their by-products. Additionally, heavier fuels used by large ships, such as bunker fuel , or spills of any oily refuse or waste oil , contribute to such incidents. These spills can have severe environmental and economic consequences.

Pollution from nonpoint sources This section is an excerpt from Nonpoint source pollution .

[ edit ] Nonpoint source (NPS) pollution refers to diffuse contamination (or pollution ) of water or air that does not originate from a single discrete source. This type of pollution is often the cumulative effect of small amounts of contaminants gathered from a large area. It is in contrast to point source pollution which results from a single source. Nonpoint source pollution generally results from land runoff , precipitation, atmospheric deposition , drainage , seepage , or hydrological modification (rainfall and snowmelt) where tracing pollution back to a single source is difficult.

[ 62 ] Nonpoint source water pollution affects a water body from sources such as polluted runoff from agricultural areas draining into a river, or wind-borne debris blowing out to sea. Nonpoint source air pollution affects air quality, from sources such as smokestacks or car tailpipes . Although these pollutants have originated from a point source, the long-range transport ability and multiple sources of the pollutant make it a nonpoint source of pollution; if the discharges were to occur to a body of water or into the atmosphere at a single location, the pollution would be single-point.

Agriculture Agriculture is a major contributor to water pollution from nonpoint sources. The use of fertilizers as well as surface runoff from farm fields, pastures and feedlots leads to nutrient pollution.

[ 63 ] In addition to plant-focused agriculture, fish-farming is also a source of pollution. Additionally, agricultural runoff often contains high levels of pesticides.

[ 2 ] Atmospheric contributions (air pollution) Air deposition is a process whereby air pollutants from industrial or natural sources settle into water bodies. The deposition may lead to polluted water near the source, or at distances up to a few thousand miles away. The most frequently observed water pollutants resulting from industrial air deposition are sulfur compounds, nitrogen compounds, mercury compounds, other heavy metals, and some pesticides and industrial by-products. Natural sources of air deposition include forest fires and microbial activity.

[ 64 ] Acid rain is caused by emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide , which react with the water molecules in the atmosphere to produce acids.

[ 65 ] Some governments have made efforts since the 1970s to reduce the release of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide into the atmosphere. The main source of sulfur and nitrogen compounds that result in acid rain are anthropogenic , but nitrogen oxides can also be produced naturally by lightning strikes and sulphur dioxide is produced by volcanic eruptions .

[ 66 ] Acid rain can have harmful effects on plants, aquatic ecosystems and infrastructure.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere have increased since the 1850s due anthropogenic influences ( emissions of greenhouse gases ).

[ 69 ] This leads to ocean acidification and is another form of water pollution from atmospheric contributions.

[ 70 ] Sampling, measurements, analysis Environmental scientists preparing water autosamplers Further information: Water quality § Sampling and measurement , Environmental monitoring , Analysis of water chemistry , Water sampling station , and Regulation and monitoring of pollution § Water pollution Water pollution may be analyzed through several broad categories of methods: physical, chemical and biological. Some methods may be conducted in situ , without sampling, such as temperature. Others involve collection of samples, followed by specialized analytical tests in the laboratory. Standardized, validated analytical test methods, for water and wastewater samples have been published.

[ 71 ] Common physical tests of water include temperature, Specific conductance or electrical conductance (EC) or conductivity, solids concentrations (e.g., total suspended solids (TSS)) and turbidity . Water samples may be examined using analytical chemistry methods. Many published test methods are available for both organic and inorganic compounds. Frequently used parameters that are quantified are pH , BOD, [ 72 ] : 102 chemical oxygen demand (COD), [ 72 ] : 104 dissolved oxygen (DO), total hardness , nutrients ( nitrogen and phosphorus compounds, e.g.

nitrate and orthophosphates ), metals (including copper, zinc , cadmium , lead and mercury ), oil and grease, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), surfactants and pesticides .

The use of a biomonitor or bioindicator is described as biological monitoring . This refers to the measurement of specific properties of an organism to obtain information on the surrounding physical and chemical environment.

[ 73 ] Biological testing involves the use of plant, animal or microbial indicators to monitor the health of an aquatic ecosystem . They are any biological species or group of species whose function, population, or status can reveal what degree of ecosystem or environmental integrity is present.

[ 74 ] One example of a group of bio-indicators are the copepods and other small water crustaceans that are present in many water bodies. Such organisms can be monitored for changes (biochemical, physiological, or behavioral) that may indicate a problem within their ecosystem.

This section is an excerpt from Water quality § Sample collection .

[ edit ] The complexity of water quality as a subject is reflected in the many types of measurements of water quality indicators. Some measurements of water quality are most accurately made on-site, because water exists in equilibrium with its surroundings . Measurements commonly made on-site and in direct contact with the water source in question include temperature , pH , dissolved oxygen , conductivity , oxygen reduction potential (ORP) , turbidity , and Secchi disk depth.

Impacts Oxygen depletion , resulting from nitrogen pollution and eutrophication , is a common cause of fish kills.

Ecosystems Water pollution is a major global environmental problem because it can result in the degradation of all aquatic ecosystems – fresh, coastal, and ocean waters.

[ 75 ] The specific contaminants leading to pollution in water include a wide spectrum of chemicals , pathogens, and physical changes such as elevated temperature. While many of the chemicals and substances that are regulated may be naturally occurring ( calcium , sodium , iron, manganese , etc.) the concentration usually determines what is a natural component of water and what is a contaminant. High concentrations of naturally occurring substances can have negative impacts on aquatic flora and fauna. Oxygen-depleting substances may be natural materials such as plant matter (e.g. leaves and grass) as well as human-made chemicals. Other natural and anthropogenic substances may cause turbidity (cloudiness) which blocks light and disrupts plant growth, and clogs the gills of some fish species.

[ 76 ] Fecal sludge collected from pit latrines is dumped into a river at the Korogocho slum in Nairobi, Kenya Public health and waterborne diseases Further information: WASH § Health aspects A study published in 2017 stated that "polluted water spread gastrointestinal diseases and parasitic infections and killed 1.8 million people" (these are also referred to as waterborne diseases).

[ 77 ] Persistent exposure to pollutants through water are environmental health hazards, which can increase the likelihood for one to develop cancer or other diseases.

[ 78 ] Eutrophication from nitrogen pollution Nitrogen pollution can cause eutrophication, especially in lakes. Eutrophication is an increase in the concentration of chemical nutrients in an ecosystem to an extent that increases the primary productivity of the ecosystem. Subsequent negative environmental effects such as anoxia (oxygen depletion) and severe reductions in water quality may occur.

[ 1 ] : 131 This can harm fish and other animal populations.

This section is an excerpt from Eutrophication .

[ edit ] Eutrophication is a general term describing a process in which nutrients accumulate in a body of water, resulting in an increased growth of organisms that may deplete the oxygen in the water; ie. the process of too many plants growing on the surface of a river, lake, etc., often because chemicals that are used to help crops grow have been carried there by rain.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Eutrophication may occur naturally or as a result of human actions. Manmade, or cultural, eutrophication occurs when sewage , industrial wastewater , fertilizer runoff , and other nutrient sources are released into the environment.

[ 81 ] Such nutrient pollution usually causes algal blooms and bacterial growth, resulting in the depletion of dissolved oxygen in water and causing substantial environmental degradation .

[ 82 ] Many policies have been introduced to combat eutrophication, including the United Nations Development Program (UNDP)'s sustainability development goals.

[ 83 ] Ocean acidification Ocean acidification is another impact of water pollution. Ocean acidification is the ongoing decrease in the pH value of the Earth's oceans, caused by the uptake of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) from the atmosphere.

[ 69 ] Prevalence Water pollution is a problem in developing countries as well as in developed countries .

By country For example, water pollution in India and China is widespread. About 90 percent of the water in the cities of China is polluted.

[ 84 ] v t e Water pollution by country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Australia Bangladesh Belgium Brazil Canada Chile China Colombia Croatia Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Georgia Ghana Guatemala Haiti Honduras India Indonesia Iran Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Kuwait Lebanon Liberia Libya Mexico Mongolia Nepal New Zealand Nicaragua Pakistan Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Uganda United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Zimbabwe Control and reduction View of secondary treatment reactors (activated sludge process) at the Blue Plains Advanced Wastewater Treatment Plant , Washington, D.C., United States. Seen in the distance are the sludge digester building and thermal hydrolysis reactors.

Pollution control philosophy One aspect of environmental protection is mandatory regulations, which are only part of the solution. Other important tools in pollution control include environmental education, economic instruments, market forces, and stricter enforcement. Standards can be "precise" (for a defined quantifiable minimum or maximum value for a pollutant), or "imprecise" which would require the use of Best available technology (BAT) or Best practicable environmental option (BPEO). Market-based economic instruments for pollution control can include charges, subsidies, deposit or refund schemes, the creation of a market in pollution credits, and enforcement incentives.

[ 85 ] Moving towards a holistic approach in chemical pollution control combines the following approaches: Integrated control measures, trans-boundary considerations, complementary and supplementary control measures, life-cycle considerations , the impacts of chemical mixtures.

[ 85 ] Control of water pollution requires appropriate infrastructure and management plans. The infrastructure may include wastewater treatment plants , for example sewage treatment plants and industrial wastewater treatment plants.

Agricultural wastewater treatment for farms, and erosion control at construction sites can also help prevent water pollution. Effective control of urban runoff includes reducing speed and quantity of flow.

Water pollution requires ongoing evaluation and revision of water resource policy at all levels (international down to individual aquifers and wells).

Sanitation and sewage treatment Further information: Sanitation , WASH , and Water issues in developing countries Plastic waste on the big drainage, and air pollution in the far end of the drainage in Ghana Municipal wastewater can be treated by centralized sewage treatment plants, decentralized wastewater systems , nature-based solutions [ 86 ] or in onsite sewage facilities and septic tanks. For example, waste stabilization ponds can be a low cost treatment option for sewage.

[ 1 ] : 182 UV light (sunlight) can be used to degrade some pollutants in waste stabilization ponds (sewage lagoons).

[ 87 ] The use of safely managed sanitation services would prevent water pollution caused by lack of access to sanitation.

[ 37 ] Well-designed and operated systems (i.e., with secondary treatment stages or more advanced tertiary treatment) can remove 90 percent or more of the pollutant load in sewage.

[ 88 ] Some plants have additional systems to remove nutrients and pathogens. While such advanced treatment techniques will undoubtedly reduce the discharges of micropollutants , they can also result in large financial costs, as well as environmentally undesirable increases in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 89 ] Sewer overflows during storm events can be addressed by timely maintenance and upgrades of the sewerage system . In the US, cities with large combined systems have not pursued system-wide separation projects due to the high cost, [ 90 ] but have implemented partial separation projects and green infrastructure approaches.

[ 91 ] In some cases municipalities have installed additional CSO storage facilities [ 92 ] or expanded sewage treatment capacity.

[ 93 ] Industrial wastewater treatment This section is an excerpt from Industrial wastewater treatment .

[ edit ] Industrial wastewater treatment describes the processes used for treating wastewater that is produced by industries as an undesirable by-product. After treatment, the treated industrial wastewater (or effluent) may be reused or released to a sanitary sewer or to a surface water in the environment. Some industrial facilities generate wastewater that can be treated in sewage treatment plants . Most industrial processes, such as petroleum refineries , chemical and petrochemical plants have their own specialized facilities to treat their wastewaters so that the pollutant concentrations in the treated wastewater comply with the regulations regarding disposal of wastewaters into sewers or into rivers, lakes or oceans .

[ 94 ] : 1412 This applies to industries that generate wastewater with high concentrations of organic matter (e.g. oil and grease), toxic pollutants (e.g. heavy metals, volatile organic compounds ) or nutrients such as ammonia .

[ 95 ] : 180 Some industries install a pre-treatment system to remove some pollutants (e.g., toxic compounds), and then discharge the partially treated wastewater to the municipal sewer system.

[ 96 ] : 60 Agricultural wastewater treatment This section is an excerpt from Agricultural wastewater treatment .

[ edit ] Agricultural wastewater treatment is a farm management agenda for controlling pollution from confined animal operations and from surface runoff that may be contaminated by chemicals or organisms in fertilizer , pesticides , animal slurry , crop residues or irrigation water. Agricultural wastewater treatment is required for continuous confined animal operations like milk and egg production. It may be performed in plants using mechanized treatment units similar to those used for industrial wastewater . Where land is available for ponds, settling basins and facultative lagoons may have lower operational costs for seasonal use conditions from breeding or harvest cycles.

[ 97 ] : 6–8 Animal slurries are usually treated by containment in anaerobic lagoons before disposal by spray or trickle application to grassland.

Constructed wetlands are sometimes used to facilitate treatment of animal wastes.

Management of erosion and sediment control Silt fence installed on a construction site Sediment from construction sites can be managed by installation of erosion controls , such as mulching and hydroseeding , and sediment controls , such as sediment basins and silt fences .

[ 98 ] Discharge of toxic chemicals such as motor fuels and concrete washout can be prevented by use of spill prevention and control plans, and specially designed containers (e.g. for concrete washout) and structures such as overflow controls and diversion berms.

[ 99 ] Erosion caused by deforestation and changes in hydrology (soil loss due to water runoff) also results in loss of sediment and, potentially, water pollution.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Control of urban runoff (storm water) This section is an excerpt from Urban runoff § Prevention and mitigation .

[ edit ] Effective control of urban runoff involves reducing the velocity and flow of stormwater, as well as reducing pollutant discharges. Local governments use a variety of stormwater management techniques to reduce the effects of urban runoff. These techniques, called best management practices for water pollution (BMPs) in some countries, may focus on water quantity control, while others focus on improving water quality, and some perform both functions.

[ 102 ] Pollution prevention practices include low impact development (LID) or green infrastructure techniques - known as Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) in the UK, and Water-Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD) in Australia and the Middle East - such as the installation of green roofs and improved chemical handling (e.g. management of motor fuels & oil, fertilizers, pesticides and roadway deicers ).

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Runoff mitigation systems include infiltration basins , bioretention systems, constructed wetlands , retention basins , and similar devices.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Share of water bodies with good water quality in 2020. A water body is classified as "good" quality if at least 80% of monitoring values meet target quality levels, see also SDG 6 , Indicator 6.3.2.

Legislation Philippines In the Philippines, Republic Act 9275, otherwise known as the Philippine Clean Water Act of 2004, [ 107 ] is the governing law on wastewater management. It states that it is the country's policy to protect, preserve and revive the quality of its fresh, brackish and marine waters, for which wastewater management plays a particular role.

[ 107 ] United Kingdom In 2024, The Royal Academy of Engineering released a study into the effects wastewater on public health in the United Kingdom.

[ 108 ] The study gained media attention, with comments from the UKs leading health professionals, including Sir Chris Whitty . Outlining 15 recommendations for various UK bodies to dramatically reduce public health risks by increasing the water quality in its waterways , such as rivers and lakes.

After the release of the report, The Guardian newspaper interviewed Whitty, who stated that improving water quality and sewage treatment should be a high level of importance and a "public health priority". He compared it to eradicating cholera in the 19th century in the country following improvements to the sewage treatment network.

[ 109 ] The study also identified that low water flows in rivers saw high concentration levels of sewage , as well as times of flooding or heavy rainfall. While heavy rainfall had always been associated with sewage overflows into streams and rivers, the British media went as far to warn parents of the dangers of paddling in shallow rivers during warm weather.

[ 110 ] Whitty's comments came after the study revealed that the UK was experiencing a growth in the number of people that were using coastal and inland waters recreationally. This could be connected to a growing interest in activities such as open water swimming or other water sports .

[ 111 ] Despite this growth in recreation, poor water quality meant some were becoming unwell during events.

[ 112 ] Most notably, the 2024 Paris Olympics had to delay numerous swimming-focused events like the triathlon due to high levels of sewage in the River Seine .

[ 113 ] United States This section is an excerpt from Water pollution in the United States § Current regulations .

[ edit ] The Clean Water Act is the primary federal law in the United States governing water pollution in surface waters.

[ 114 ] The 1972 CWA amendments established a broad regulatory framework for improving water quality. The law defines procedures for pollution control and developing criteria and standards for pollutants in surface water.

[ 115 ] The law authorizes the Environmental Protection Agency to regulate surface water pollution in the United States, in partnership with state agencies. Prior to 1972 it was legal to discharge wastewater to surface waters without testing for or removing water pollutants. The CWA was amended in 1981 and 1987 to adjust the federal proportion of construction grant funding for local governments, regulate municipal storm sewer discharges and to later establish the Clean Water State Revolving Fund . The fund provides low-interest loans to improve municipal sewage treatment systems and finance other water quality improvements.

[ 116 ] See also Water portal Environment portal Aquatic toxicology Environmental impact of pesticides § Water Human impacts on the environment Phytoremediation Pollution Trophic state index (water quality indicator for lakes) VOC contamination of groundwater Water resources management Water security References ^ a b c d e f g h i j Von Sperling, Marcos (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online . Biological Wastewater Treatment.

6 . IWA Publishing.

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISBN 978-1-78040-208-6 .

^ a b c Eckenfelder Jr WW (2000).

Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology .

John Wiley & Sons .

doi : 10.1002/0471238961.1615121205031105.a01 .

ISBN 978-0-471-48494-3 .

^ "Water Pollution" .

Environmental Health Education Program . Cambridge, MA: Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health . July 23, 2013.

Archived from the original on September 18, 2021 . Retrieved September 18, 2021 .

^ Schaffner, Monika; Bader, Hans-Peter; Scheidegger, Ruth (August 15, 2009).

"Modeling the contribution of point sources and non-point sources to Thachin River water pollution" .

Science of the Total Environment .

407 (17): 4902– 4915.

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2009.05.007 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

^ Moss B (February 2008).

"Water pollution by agriculture" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

363 (1491): 659– 666.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2007.2176 .

PMC 2610176 .

PMID 17666391 .

^ Alexandrou L, Meehan BJ, Jones OA (October 2018). "Regulated and emerging disinfection by-products in recycled waters".

The Science of the Total Environment .

637– 638: 1607– 1616.

Bibcode : 2018ScTEn.637.1607A .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.04.391 .

PMID 29925195 .

S2CID 49355478 .

^ "Environment Agency (archive) – Persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic PBT substances" .

Environment Agency . Archived from the original on August 4, 2006 . Retrieved November 14, 2012 .

^ Natural Environmental Research Council – River sewage pollution found to be disrupting fish hormones Archived April 27, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . Planetearth.nerc.ac.uk. Retrieved on 2012-12-19.

^ "Endocrine Disruption Found in Fish Exposed to Municipal Wastewater" . Reston, VA: US Geological Survey . Archived from the original on October 15, 2011 . Retrieved November 14, 2012 .

^ Takuissu GR, Kenmoe S, Ebogo-Belobo JT, Kengne-Ndé C, Mbaga DS, Bowo-Ngandji A, et al. (2023).

"Occurrence of Hepatitis A Virus in Water Matrices: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis" .

International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health .

20 (2) 1054: 1054.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph20021054 .

PMC 9859052 .

PMID 36673812 .

^ Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater, Volume 4 Excreta and Greywater Use in Agriculture (third ed.). Geneva: World Health Organization . 2006.

ISBN 92-4-154685-9 .

^ Harrison RM (2013). Harrison RM (ed.).

Pollution: Causes, effects, and control (5th ed.). Cambridge, UK: Royal Society of Chemistry .

doi : 10.1039/9781782626527 .

ISBN 978-1-78262-560-5 .

OCLC 1007100256 .

^ Schueler, Thomas R. "Microbes and Urban Watersheds: Concentrations, Sources, & Pathways." Reprinted in The Practice of Watershed Protection.

Archived January 8, 2013, at the Wayback Machine 2000. Center for Watershed Protection. Ellicott City, MD.

^ Report to Congress: Impacts and Control of CSOs and SSOs (Report).

EPA . August 2004. EPA 833-R-04-001.

^ a b c Laws EA (2018).

Aquatic Pollution: An Introductory Text (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 978-1-119-30450-0 – via Google Books .

^ a b Burton Jr GA, Pitt R (2001). "2".

Stormwater Effects Handbook: A Toolbox for Watershed Managers, Scientists, and Engineers . New York: CRC /Lewis Publishers.

ISBN 0-87371-924-7 . Archived from the original on May 19, 2009 . Retrieved January 26, 2009 .

^ a b Johnson MS, Buck RC, Cousins IT, Weis CP, Fenton SE (March 2021).

"Estimating Environmental Hazard and Risks from Exposure to Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs): Outcome of a SETAC Focused Topic Meeting" .

Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry .

40 (3): 543– 549.

doi : 10.1002/etc.4784 .

PMC 8387100 .

PMID 32452041 .

^ a b Sinclair GM, Long SM, Jones OA (November 2020). "What are the effects of PFAS exposure at environmentally relevant concentrations?".

Chemosphere .

258 127340.

Bibcode : 2020Chmsp.25827340S .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.127340 .

PMID 32563917 .

S2CID 219974801 .

^ Schueler, Thomas R. "Cars Are Leading Source of Metal Loads in California." Reprinted in The Practice of Watershed Protection.

Archived March 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine 2000. Center for Watershed Protection. Ellicott City, MD.

^ Kaushal SS, Likens GE, Pace ML, Utz RM, Haq S, Gorman J, Grese M (January 2018).

"Freshwater salinization syndrome on a continental scale" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

115 (4): E574 – E583 .

Bibcode : 2018PNAS..115E.574K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1711234115 .

PMC 5789913 .

PMID 29311318 .

^ Evans DM, Villamagna AM, Green MB, Campbell JL (August 2018). "Origins of stream salinization in an upland New England watershed".

Environmental Monitoring and Assessment .

190 (9) 523.

Bibcode : 2018EMnAs.190..523E .

doi : 10.1007/s10661-018-6802-4 .

PMID 30116969 .

S2CID 52022441 .

^ Cañedo-Argüelles M, Kefford B, Schäfer R (December 2018).

"Salt in freshwaters: causes, effects and prospects - introduction to the theme issue" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

374 (1764).

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2018.0002 .

PMC 6283966 .

PMID 30509904 .

^ a b Wang J, Wang S (November 2016). "Removal of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) from wastewater: A review".

Journal of Environmental Management .

182 : 620– 640.

Bibcode : 2016JEnvM.182..620W .

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.07.049 .

PMID 27552641 .

^ Shinn H (2019).

"The Effects of Ultraviolet Filters and Sunscreen on Corals and Aquatic Ecosystems: Bibliography" .

NOAA Central Library .

doi : 10.25923/hhrp-xq11 .

^ Downs CA, Kramarsky-Winter E, Segal R, Fauth J, Knutson S, Bronstein O, et al. (February 2016).

"Toxicopathological Effects of the Sunscreen UV Filter, Oxybenzone (Benzophenone-3), on Coral Planulae and Cultured Primary Cells and Its Environmental Contamination in Hawaii and the U.S. Virgin Islands" .

Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology .

70 (2): 265– 88.

Bibcode : 2016ArECT..70..265D .

doi : 10.1007/s00244-015-0227-7 .

PMID 26487337 .

S2CID 4243494 .

^ Downs CA, Kramarsky-Winter E, Fauth JE, Segal R, Bronstein O, Jeger R, et al. (March 2014). "Toxicological effects of the sunscreen UV filter, benzophenone-2, on planulae and in vitro cells of the coral, Stylophora pistillata".

Ecotoxicology .

23 (2): 175– 91.

Bibcode : 2014Ecotx..23..175D .

doi : 10.1007/s10646-013-1161-y .

PMID 24352829 .

S2CID 1505199 .

^ Niemuth NJ, Klaper RD (September 2015).

"Emerging wastewater contaminant metformin causes intersex and reduced fecundity in fish" .

Chemosphere .

135 : 38– 45.

Bibcode : 2015Chmsp.135...38N .

doi : 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.03.060 .

PMID 25898388 .

^ Larsson DG, Adolfsson-Erici M, Parkkonen J, Pettersson M, Berg AH, Olsson PE, Förlin L (April 1, 1999). "Ethinyloestradiol — an undesired fish contraceptive?".

Aquatic Toxicology .

45 (2): 91– 97.

Bibcode : 1999AqTox..45...91L .

doi : 10.1016/S0166-445X(98)00112-X .

ISSN 0166-445X .

^ "Pharmaceuticals in rivers threaten world health - study" .

BBC News . February 15, 2022 . Retrieved March 10, 2022 .

^ Wilkinson, John L.; Boxall, Alistair B. A.; et al. (February 14, 2022).

"Pharmaceutical pollution of the world's rivers" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

119 (8) e2113947119.

Bibcode : 2022PNAS..11913947W .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2113947119 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 8872717 .

PMID 35165193 .

^ a b Knight K (2021).

"Freshwater methamphetamine pollution turns brown trout into addicts" .

Journal of Experimental Biology .

224 (13): jeb242971.

doi : 10.1242/jeb.242971 .

ISSN 0022-0949 .

^ a b De Lorenzo, D (June 18, 2021).

"MDMA Gangs Are Literally Polluting Europe" .

Vice World News . Brooklyn, NY: Vice Media Group .

^ "Development solutions: Building a better ocean" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved August 19, 2020 .

^ Resnick B (September 19, 2018).

"More than ever, our clothes are made of plastic. Just washing them can pollute the oceans" .

Vox . Retrieved October 4, 2021 .

^ a b European Investment Bank (February 27, 2023).

"Microplastics and Micropollutants in Water: Contaminants of Emerging Concern" . Retrieved April 12, 2024 .

^ "Microplastics from textiles: towards a circular economy for textiles in Europe — European Environment Agency" .

www.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved March 24, 2023 .

^ a b WHO and UNICEF (2017) Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines . Geneva: World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), 2017 ^ Ferris, Robert (January 13, 2016).

"Half of plastic trash in oceans comes from 5 countries" .

CNBC . Retrieved March 24, 2023 .

^ a b Ritchie, Hannah ; Samborska, Veronika; Roser, Max (2023).

"Plastic Pollution" .

Our World in Data . Retrieved April 12, 2024 .

^ Sheppard, Charles, ed. (2019).

World seas: an Environmental Evaluation . Vol. III, Ecological Issues and Environmental Impacts (Second ed.). London: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-805204-4 .

OCLC 1052566532 .

^ "Marine Pollution" .

Education | National Geographic Society . Retrieved June 19, 2023 .

^ Duce, Robert; Galloway, J.; Liss, P. (2009).

"The Impacts of Atmospheric Deposition to the Ocean on Marine Ecosystems and Climate WMO Bulletin Vol 58 (1)" .

World Meteorological Organization . Archived from the original on December 18, 2023 . Retrieved September 22, 2020 .

^ "What is the biggest source of pollution in the ocean?" .

National Ocean Service (US) . Silver Spring, MD: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved September 21, 2022 .

^ Walters, Arlene, ed. (2016).

Nutrient Pollution From Agricultural Production: Overview, Management and a Study of Chesapeake Bay . Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-63485-188-6 .

^ "Reactive Nitrogen in the United States: An Analysis of Inputs, Flows, Consequences, and Management Options, A Report of the Science Advisory Board" (PDF) . Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). EPA-SAB-11-013. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 19, 2013.

^ "Brayton Point Station Power Plant, Somerset, MA: Final NPDES Permit" . Boston, MA: United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). May 21, 2021.

^ "Protecting Water Quality from Urban Runoff" . Washington, D.C.: EPA. February 2003. Fact Sheet. EPA 841-F-03-003. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016.

^ Goel PK (2006).

Water pollution: causes, effects and control (Rev. 2nd ed.). New Delhi: New Age International.

ISBN 81-224-1839-2 .

OCLC 85857626 .

^ Olenin S, Minchin D, Daunys D (2007). "Assessment of biopollution in aquatic ecosystems".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

55 ( 7– 9): 379– 394.

Bibcode : 2007MarPB..55..379O .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2007.01.010 .

PMID 17335857 .

^ Adelana, Segun Michael (2014).

Groundwater: Hydrogeochemistry, Environmental Impacts and Management Practices . Nova Science Publishers, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-63321-791-1 .

OCLC 915416488 .

^ Hartmann, Andreas; Jasechko, Scott; Gleeson, Tom; Wada, Yoshihide; Andreo, Bartolomé; Barberá, Juan Antonio; Brielmann, Heike; Bouchaou, Lhoussaine; Charlier, Jean-Baptiste; Darling, W. George; Filippini, Maria (May 18, 2021).

"Risk of groundwater contamination widely underestimated because of fast flow into aquifers" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

118 (20): e2024492118.

Bibcode : 2021PNAS..11824492H .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2024492118 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 8158018 .

PMID 33972438 .

^ United States. Clean Water Act (CWA), section 502(14), 33 U.S.C.

§ 1362 (14).

^ U.S. CWA section 402(p), 33 U.S.C.

§ 1342(p) ^ Scholz M (2016). "Sewage Treatment".

Wetlands for Water Pollution Control . pp.

13– 15.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-63607-2.00003-4 .

ISBN 978-0-444-63607-2 .

^ Nesaratnam ST, ed. (2014).

Water Pollution Control .

doi : 10.1002/9781118863831 .

ISBN 978-1-118-86383-1 .

^ "Governments unite to step-up reduction on global DDT reliance and add nine new chemicals under international treaty" . Geneva: Stockholm Convention Secretariat. May 8, 2009. Press release.

^ Tchobanoglous G, Burton FL, Stensel HD (2003). "Chapter 3: Analysis and Selection of Wastewater Flowrates and Constituent Loadings".

Wastewater engineering: treatment and reuse (4th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

OCLC 48053912 .

^ Arvaniti OS, Stasinakis AS (August 2015). "Review on the occurrence, fate and removal of perfluorinated compounds during wastewater treatment".

The Science of the Total Environment .

524– 525: 81– 92.

Bibcode : 2015ScTEn.524...81A .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.023 .

PMID 25889547 .

^ Bletsou AA, Asimakopoulos AG, Stasinakis AS, Thomaidis NS, Kannan K (February 2013). "Mass loading and fate of linear and cyclic siloxanes in a wastewater treatment plant in Greece".

Environmental Science & Technology .

47 (4): 1824– 32.

Bibcode : 2013EnST...47.1824B .

doi : 10.1021/es304369b .

PMID 23320453 .

S2CID 39997737 .

^ Gatidou G, Kinyua J, van Nuijs AL, Gracia-Lor E, Castiglioni S, Covaci A, Stasinakis AS (September 2016). "Drugs of abuse and alcohol consumption among different groups of population on the Greek Island of Lesvos through sewage-based epidemiology".

The Science of the Total Environment .

563– 564: 633– 40.

Bibcode : 2016ScTEn.563..633G .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.04.130 .

hdl : 10067/1345920151162165141 .

PMID 27236142 .

S2CID 4073701 .

^ Gatidou G, Arvaniti OS, Stasinakis AS (April 2019). "Review on the occurrence and fate of microplastics in Sewage Treatment Plants".

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

367 : 504– 512.

Bibcode : 2019JHzM..367..504G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.081 .

PMID 30620926 .

S2CID 58567561 .

^ "Basic Information about Nonpoint Source Pollution" . Washington, DC: US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). October 7, 2020.

^ Walters A, ed. (2016).

Nutrient Pollution From Agricultural Production: Overview, Management and a Study of Chesapeake Bay . Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-63485-188-6 .

OCLC 960163923 .

^ Frequently Asked Questions About Air Deposition (Report).

EPA . September 2001. pp.

3– 7. EPA 453/R-01-009.

^ "What is Acid Rain?" .

EPA . June 24, 2022.

^ Sisterson DL, Liaw YP (January 1, 1990). "An evaluation of lightning and corona discharge on thunderstorm air and precipitation chemistry".

Journal of Atmospheric Chemistry .

10 (1): 83– 96.

Bibcode : 1990JAtC...10...83S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01980039 .

ISSN 1573-0662 .

S2CID 97714446 .

^ "Effects of Acid Rain" . EPA. April 24, 2022.

^ Kjellstrom T, Lodh M, McMichael T, Ranmuthugala G, Shrestha R, Kingsland S (2006).

"Air and Water Pollution: Burden and Strategies for Control" . In Jamison DT, Breman JG, Measham AR, Alleyne G, Claeson M, Evans DB, Jha P, Mills A, Musgrove P (eds.).

Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries (2nd ed.). World Bank.

ISBN 978-0-8213-6179-5 .

PMID 21250344 .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020.

^ a b Caldeira K, Wickett ME (September 2003).

"Oceanography: anthropogenic carbon and ocean pH" .

Nature .

425 (6956): 365.

Bibcode : 2001AGUFMOS11C0385C .

doi : 10.1038/425365a .

PMID 14508477 .

S2CID 4417880 .

^ Doney SC, Fabry VJ, Feely RA, Kleypas JA (January 1, 2009). "Ocean acidification: the other CO2 problem".

Annual Review of Marine Science .

1 (1): 169– 192.

Bibcode : 2009ARMS....1..169D .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.marine.010908.163834 .

PMID 21141034 .

S2CID 402398 .

^ For example, see Eaton, Andrew D.; Greenberg, Arnold E.; Rice, Eugene W.; Clesceri, Lenore S.; Franson, Mary Ann H., eds. (2005).

Standard Methods For the Examination of Water and Wastewater (21 ed.). American Public Health Association.

ISBN 978-0-87553-047-5 . Also available on CD-ROM and online by subscription.

^ a b Newton D (2008).

Chemistry of the Environment . Checkmark Books.

ISBN 978-0-8160-7747-2 .

^ National Rivers and Streams Assessment 2008–2009: A Collaborative Study (PDF) (Report). EPA. March 2016. EPA 841/R-16/007.

^ Karr JR (1981). "Assessment of biotic integrity using fish communities".

Fisheries .

6 (6): 21– 27.

Bibcode : 1981Fish....6f..21K .

doi : 10.1577/1548-8446(1981)006<0021:AOBIUF>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 1548-8446 .

^ Donat-P. Häder; E. Walter Helbling; Virginia E. Villafañe (September 30, 2021).

Anthropogenic Pollution of Aquatic Ecosystems . Springer Nature. p. 1.

ISBN 978-3-030-75602-4 . Retrieved August 9, 2022 .

Pollution is a major stress factor affecting all aquatic ecosystems including fresh, coastal and open ocean waters.

^ Davies-Colley, R. J.; Smith, D. G. (October 2001).

"Turbidity, Suspended Sediment and Water Clarity: A Review" .

Journal of the American Water Resources Association .

37 (5): 1085– 1101.

Bibcode : 2001JAWRA..37.1085D .

doi : 10.1111/j.1752-1688.2001.tb03624.x .

eISSN 1752-1688 .

ISSN 1093-474X .

S2CID 129093839 . Retrieved August 9, 2022 .

^ Kelland K (October 19, 2017).

"Study links pollution to millions of deaths worldwide" . Reuters.

^ Dovjak, Mateja; Kukec, Andreja (2019), "Health Outcomes Related to Built Environments", Creating Healthy and Sustainable Buildings , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 43–82, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-19412-3_2 , ISBN 978-3-030-19411-6 , S2CID 190160283 ^ "Nutrients and Eutrophication | U.S. Geological Survey" . USGS. March 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 9, 2024 .

^ Aczel, Miriam R. (2019).

"What Is the Nitrogen Cycle and Why Is It Key to Life?" .

Frontiers for Young Minds .

7 .

doi : 10.3389/frym.2019.00041 .

hdl : 10044/1/71039 .

^ "Cultural eutrophication | ecology | Britannica" .

Britannica . Retrieved February 9, 2024 .

^ Carpenter, S. R. (2008).

"Phosphorus control is critical to mitigating eutrophication" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

105 (32): 11039– 11040.

Bibcode : 2008PNAS..10511039C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0806112105 .

PMC 2516213 .

PMID 18685114 .

^ "Goal 14 targets" . UNDP. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ "China says water pollution so severe that cities could lack safe supplies" .

China Daily . June 7, 2005.

^ a b Jones OA, Gomes RL (2013). "Chapter 1: Chemical Pollution of the Aquatic Environment by Priority Pollutants and its Control". In Harrison RM (ed.).

Pollution: Causes, Effects and Control (5th ed.). Royal Society of Chemistry.

doi : 10.1039/9781782626527 .

ISBN 978-1-84973-648-0 .

^ UN-Water (2018) World Water Development Report 2018: Nature-based Solutions for Water , Geneva, Switzerland ^ Wang Y, Fan L, Jones OA, Roddick F (April 2021). "Quantification of seasonal photo-induced formation of reactive intermediates in a municipal sewage lagoon upon sunlight exposure".

The Science of the Total Environment .

765 142733.

Bibcode : 2021ScTEn.76542733W .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142733 .

PMID 33572041 .

S2CID 225156609 .

^ Primer for Municipal Wastewater Treatment Systems (Report).

EPA . 2004. p. 11. EPA 832-R-04-001.

^ Jones OA, Green PG, Voulvoulis N, Lester JN (July 2007). "Questioning the excessive use of advanced treatment to remove organic micropollutants from wastewater".

Environmental Science & Technology .

41 (14): 5085– 5089.

Bibcode : 2007EnST...41.5085J .

doi : 10.1021/es0628248 .

PMID 17711227 .

^ Renn AM (February 25, 2016).

"Wasted: How to Fix America's Sewers" (PDF) . New York, NY: Manhattan Institute. p. 7.

^ Greening CSO Plans: Planning and Modeling Green Infrastructure for Combined Sewer Overflow Control (PDF) (Report).

EPA . March 2014. 832-R-14-001.

^ "Clean Rivers Project" . Washington, DC: District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority . Retrieved April 13, 2024 .

^ "United States and Ohio Reach Clean Water Act Settlement with City of Toledo, Ohio" . EPA. August 28, 2002. Press release. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016.

^ Tchobanoglous G, Burton FL, Stensel HD (2003).

Metcalf & Eddy Wastewater Engineering: treatment and reuse (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill Book Company.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

^ George Tchobanoglous; Franklin L. Burton; H. David Stensel (2003). "Chapter 3: Analysis and Selection of Wastewater Flowrates and Constituent Loadings".

Metcalf & Eddy Wastewater engineering: treatment and reuse (4th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

OCLC 48053912 .

^ Von Sperling, M. (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 .

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISSN 1476-1777 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ Reed, Sherwood C. (1988).

Natural systems for waste management and treatment . E. Joe Middlebrooks, Ronald W. Crites. New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-051521-2 .

OCLC 16087827 .

^ Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation. Nashville, TN (2012).

"Tennessee Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook." Archived July 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ^ Concrete Washout (Report). Stormwater Best Management Practice.

EPA . February 2012. BMP fact sheet. EPA 833-F-11-006.

^ Mapulanga AM, Naito H (April 2019).

"Effect of deforestation on access to clean drinking water" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (17): 8249– 8254.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.8249M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1814970116 .

PMC 6486726 .

PMID 30910966 .

^ University of Basel (August 24, 2020).

"Climate change and land use are accelerating soil erosion by water" .

Science Daily .

^ "Ch. 5: Description and Performance of Storm Water Best Management Practices" . Preliminary Data Summary of Urban Storm Water Best Management Practices (Report). Washington, DC: United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). August 1999. EPA-821-R-99-012.

^ Protecting Water Quality from Urban Runoff (Report). EPA. February 2003. EPA 841-F-03-003. Archived from the original on January 17, 2016.

^ "Low Impact Development and Other Green Design Strategies" .

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System . EPA. 2014. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015.

^ California Stormwater Quality Association. Menlo Park, CA.

"Stormwater Best Management Practice (BMP) Handbooks." 2003.

^ New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Trenton, NJ.

"New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual." April 2004.

^ a b "An Act Providing for a Comprehensive Water Quality Management And For Other Purposes" .

The LawPhil Project .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2016 . Retrieved 30 September 2016 .

^ "Testing the waters Priorities for mitigating health risks from wastewater pollution" (PDF) . Royal Academy of Engineering. May 2024.

^ "Reducing sewage in rivers and seas is public health priority, says Chris Whitty" .

The Guardian .

^ Blakely, Rhys.

"Paddling in rivers this summer could make children ill, warns Whitty" .

The Times .

^ Speare-Cole, Rebecca.

"Minimising sewage in UK waters is a 'public health priority' – Chris Whitty" .

The Independent .

^ "Dozens of triathletes left severely ill after swimming in River Thames" .

The Independent .

^ "What's the problem with swimming in the Seine?" .

BBC .

^ United States. Clean Water Act.

33 U.S.C.

§ 1251 et seq.

Pub. L.

92–500 . Approved October 18, 1972.

^ "Summary of the Clean Water Act" .

Laws & Regulations . EPA. June 12, 2024.

^ "History of the Clean Water Act" .

Laws & Regulations . EPA. June 12, 2024.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Water pollution .

Library resources about Water pollution Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Tackling global water pollution – UN Environment Programme v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Marine pollution Algal bloom Anoxic event Anoxic waters Aquatic toxicology Cultural eutrophication Cyanotoxin Dead zone Environmental impact of shipping Eutrophication Fish diseases and parasites Fish kill Friendly Floatees Garbage patch Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific GASB Hypoxia Invasive species Marine debris Mercury in fish Microbead Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Ocean deoxygenation Oil spill Particle Plastic bags Plastic pellet pollution Point source pollution Shutdown of thermohaline circulation Silver nanoparticles Stormwater Surface runoff Upwelling Urban runoff Water pollution v t e Water Overviews Outline Data Model Properties States Liquid Ice Vapor Steam superheated Forms Deuterium-depleted Semiheavy Heavy Tritiated Doubly labeled water Hydronium On Earth Cycle Distribution Hydrosphere Hydrology Hydrobiology Origin Pollution Resources management policy Supply Extraterrestrial Extraterrestrial liquid water Asteroidal water Planetary oceanography Ocean world Hycean planet List of Candidates Specific Europa Mars Moon Enceladus Physical parameters Stratification Ocean stratification Lake stratification Ocean temperature Portal Category Commons Wiktionary v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐jht8w
Cached time: 20250818104850
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.963 seconds
Real time usage: 2.410 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13895/1000000
Revision size: 62214/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 504028/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4714/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 232/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 506373/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.349/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9572130/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2002.498      1 -total
 33.61%  672.996      1 Template:Reflist
 28.98%  580.411     13 Template:Excerpt
 13.07%  261.639     36 Template:Cite_journal
  9.58%  191.917      1 Template:World_topic
  7.93%  158.773     36 Template:Cite_web
  5.33%  106.720     20 Template:Rp
  5.06%  101.361     21 Template:Cite_book
  5.00%  100.133     20 Template:R/superscript
  4.80%   96.086      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:312266:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818104850 and revision id 1304638919. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_pollution&oldid=1304638919 " Categories : Water pollution Aquatic ecology Aquifers Environmental science Water and the environment Water supply Sanitation Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from January 2012 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 07:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water pollution 72 languages Add topic

