Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical sketch 2 Structure 3 Prizes 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala 12 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 59°51′31″N 17°37′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.8587°N 17.6321°E ﻿ / 59.8587; 17.6321 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Detail of the building of the Royal Swedish Society of Sciences in Uppsala.

The Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala ( Swedish : Kungliga Vetenskaps-Societeten i Uppsala ), is the oldest of the royal academies in Sweden, having been founded in 1710. The society has, by royal decree of 1906, 50 Swedish fellows and 100 foreign.

Early members included Emanuel Swedenborg and Anders Celsius .

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences was founded in Stockholm 1739. Its founders, some of whom were members of the Uppsala academy , specifically wanted a different academy.

Historical sketch [ edit ] The academy was founded 1710 in Uppsala on the initiative of the university librarian Erik Benzelius (jr) (later archbishop ) under the name of Collegium curiosorum .

[ 1 ] The name was changed to Societas Literaria Sueciae in 1719, when it received a royal charter in 1728 to Societas regia literaria et scientarium , and it was known from the mid 18th century as the Societas regia scientarum upsaliensis . All the academy's publications were in the Latin language until 1863.

[ 2 ] Structure [ edit ] The academy has 130 national members and 100 foreign members, belonging to one of the four " classes ": [ 3 ] the " Mathematical - Physical " class, the " Natural history -Medical " class, the " Historical- Archeological " class and the " Technical -Economical " class.

[ 4 ] All the sections are ruled by a single Presidium , which is formed by a president, a vice-president, a secretary, a vice-secretary and a treasurer: the king of Sweden is the Honorary President of the academy.

[ 4 ] Prizes [ edit ] The prizes awarded by the academy are as follows: [ 5 ] Linnaeus prize: the oldest prize awarded by the academy, named after Carl Linnaeus : the prize was instituted upon a donation by Linnaeus widow, Sara E. Linnaeus, on 8 September 1803.

Celsius Gold Medal is the most prestigious prize awarded by the academy, named after Anders Celsius . It was first awarded in 1961, and it is reserved to scientists working in mathematical and physical sciences , and as such, it is awarded upon decision by the " Mathematical - Physical class" of the academy.

[ 6 ] Bergstedt prize is the second oldest prize awarded by the academy, instituted on 12 May 1827, upon a donation by the Secretary of State Erik Bergstedt .

Thalen prize was instituted in 1902 and is named after the physics professor Robert Thalén .

(Lilly and Sven) Thureus prize was instituted upon a donation from Lilly and Sven Thureus in 1971: originally it was a single prize, but at present it is awarded yearly upon decision by each one of the four classes of the academy.

[ 6 ] Benzeliusbelöningarna (Benzelius grants) is awarded yearly, named after Erik Benzelius the younger , [ 7 ] instituted in 1980 and entirely founded by the academy: it is meant as a grant to young researchers.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Literally, this Latin name means " College of the Inquisitive Ones ".

^ Further information on the history of the academy can be found in references Rosén & Westrin 1893 , pp. 770–773 and Westrin 1921 , pp. 118–121.

^ This term is used as a synonym of division. This use is quite common: also the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei names his two divisions " Classi (classes) ".

^ a b "Organisation | Kungl. Vetenskaps-Societeten" (in Swedish). The Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ "Priser" (in Swedish). Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala.

^ a b See the " Structure " section of the entry.

^ The founder of the academy: see the " Historical sketch " section of the entry.

References [ edit ] Rosén, John; Westrin, Th., eds. (1893), "Vetenskapssocieteten i Uppsala" , V – Väring , Nordisk familjebok (in Swedish), vol. 17 (1st ed.), Stockholm : Gernandt, pp.

770– 773 .

Westrin, Th., ed. (1921), "Vetenskapssocieteten i Uppsala" , Werth – Väderkvarn , Nordisk familjebok (in Swedish), vol. 32 (2nd ed.), Stockholm , pp.

118– 121 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

External links [ edit ] The Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala (2010), Sundelöf, Erik (ed.), Society Web Site (in Swedish) , retrieved 16 May 2011 .

v t e Royal Academies of Sweden National Swedish Academy Academy of Sciences Academy of Letters, History and Antiquities Academy of Fine Arts Academy of Music Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Academy of War Sciences Academy of Engineering Sciences Academy of Naval Sciences Gustavus Adolphus Academy Society for Publication of Manuscripts on Scandinavian History Local Society of Sciences (Uppsala) Physiographic Society (Lund) Society of Arts and Sciences (Gothenburg) Society of the Humanities (Uppsala) Society of the Humanities (Lund) Society of Arts and Sciences (Uppsala) Skyttean Society (Umeå) v t e Uppsala University Institutions University Hospital University Library Linnaean Garden Botanical Garden Observatory Gustavianum University Hall Carolina Rediviva Ångström Laboratory People Uppsala University People Chancellors University Nations Student Union Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala Royal Academic Orchestra Nations Stockholm Upland Gästrike-Hälsinge Östgöta Västgöta Södermanlands-Nerike Västmanlands-Dala Småland Göteborg Kalmar Värmland Norrland Gotland Categories Uppsala University UU Alumni UU Faculty UU Rectors Other Partner Institutions Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States 2 France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX 59°51′31″N 17°37′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.8587°N 17.6321°E ﻿ / 59.8587; 17.6321 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Royal_Society_of_Sciences_in_Uppsala&oldid=1293068400 " Categories : Swedish Royal Academies Uppsala University 18th-century establishments in Uppsala County Hidden categories: CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles containing Swedish-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 13:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala 12 languages Add topic

