Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of discrimination in the United States 2 Intersectional analysis of discrimination 3 Discriminatory legislation and criminalization Toggle Discriminatory legislation and criminalization subsection 3.1 Anti-camping legislation 3.1.1 Lack of access to public restrooms 3.1.1.1 Anti-homeless architecture 4 Hate crimes and violence 5 Health Toggle Health subsection 5.1 Mental health amongst minority youth 5.2 Healthcare disparities 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against homeless people 4 languages العربية Deutsch Հայերեն Македонски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Homeless tents in the snow in Woodland Park, Seattle Discrimination against homeless people is categorized as the act of treating people who lack housing in a prejudiced or negative manner because they are homeless. Other factors can compound discrimination against homeless people including discrimination on the basis of race, gender, sexuality, age, mental illness, and other considerations.

Discrimination in the forms of social ostracization, institutional prejudice, and punitive legislation impacts homeless individuals, leaving well documented negative affects such as reducing reported rates of well-being, fracturing perceived social support, decreasing access to goods and services, increasing substance abuse, and prolonging the duration of homelessness.

[ 1 ] History of discrimination in the United States [ edit ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e "Homelessness" as a term was first used in the United States after the emergence of the Industrial Revolution . During this period of time the demand for agricultural work and trade work shifted instead to a demand for factory workers who would find themselves dependent on wages from a wealthier employer. The term "homelessness" was first coined in the 1870s as a response to the negative perception Americans had of the many young men travelling the country who were viewed as troublemakers and nontraditional tramps due to their unwillingness to participate in factory work.

[ 2 ] The modern conception of homelessness can be marked as emerging in the 1980s when homelessness was drastically exacerbated by an economic recession, low wages, high housing costs, gentrification of the inner cities, insufficient social services, the HIV/AIDS crisis, the crack epidemic , and the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill.

[ 2 ] As of 2023 the rate of homelessness was at an all-time high in large part due to the persistent issue of stagnant wages, high housing costs, cuts to social services, and continually emerging drug crises.

[ 3 ] In addition, incarceration rates have disproportionately increased while jailhouse programs tasked with providing ex-offenders with job training and tangible employment opportunities have been cut, leaving a sizeable segment of the population with decreased resources to avoid poverty and potential homelessness.

[ 4 ] Intersectional analysis of discrimination [ edit ] Social discrimination against homeless people is well documented and can differ depending on gender, race, age, sexuality, and other factors. For instance, research focusing on adults who self identified as part of a sexual or gender minority revealed that this cohort reported higher rates of discrimination and subsequent mental health deterioration as a result, oftentimes leading to increased substance abuse.

[ 5 ] This study also revealed that despite differences among sexual and gender minority adults, the most commonly reported reason for experiencing discrimination was perceived to be a reaction to their status of homelessness instead of other characteristics such gender or sexuality.

Intersectional studies of discrimination revealed that mothers face higher rates of eviction than men due to gendered stigma, with African American and Latina women being disproportionately affected.

[ 6 ] Accessing shelter and preventative assistance was found to be deterred by fear of attracting the attention of Child Protective Services , as well as the stigma associated with substance abuse and the perceived correlation to poor parenting. Stereotyping involved with substance abuse is complicated by mothers reporting higher rates of forced or coerced dependence on substances by a second party, and institutions often lack the knowledge or resources to adequately address these disparities, which leads mothers to feeling shamed and discouraged from seeking assistance.

[ 6 ] Studies of young people experiencing homelessness have provided a cross analysis including minoritized groups and subsequently revealed that gender minorities reported lower levels of hope caused by comparatively decreased access to social support.

[ 7 ] This was due to perceived rejection from family members and peers, and led to increases in substance abuse and lower levels of mental health. Despite differences in identity or minoritized status, all respondents reported the same levels of stress and discrimination, which suggests that social support is the primary resource most useful in increasing levels of hopefulness. This is relevant due to the correlation found between higher levels of hope and a quicker rehabilitation from homelessness.

[ 7 ] An integral consideration when discussing homelessness through an anthropological lens are the stigmas and cultural bias surrounding homeless people, and the snowball effect it has on affected people. Homelessness is frequently and widely associated with many types of illness both physical and mental; this is due in large part to political ideals and media depictions. Levels of homelessness are intrinsically linked to economic stability and prospects of a given country or area [ 8 ] , however the view perpetrated by the media is that the issue lies with the individual who is homeless, due to mental incapability or laziness rather than a wider societal issue [ 9 ] . This stigma surrounding homeless people also dictates their perception as medical hazards. Their perceived lifestyle and the way they are portrayed in popular media, conveys the belief that homeless people should be avoided, for the sake of personal safety or wellbeing [ 10 ] . These stigmas and perceptions can also disproportionately affect subsections of the homeless population, for example homeless men are more likely to be seen as failures and dangerous to the public , whereas homeless women are more likely to be pitied and seen as undesirable, stigmas that are themselves rooted in bigoted beliefs [ 11 ] .

Discriminatory legislation and criminalization [ edit ] Main article: Criminalization of homelessness Discriminatory legislation targets the activities and actions that many homeless people engage in, but due to the nature of these actions there have been questions of constitutional legitimacy in enforcing criminalization measures on the grounds that they are a violation of civil rights . Examples of discriminatory criminalization includes restricting permitted areas used for sitting or sleeping, restrictions on panhandling, [ 12 ] forced removals from an area, destruction of property, overly vague loitering and vagrancy laws, limiting bathroom access, prohibiting dumpster diving, punishing asocial or antisocial behavior, [ 13 ] and unequal enforcement of the law.

[ 14 ] The criminalization of panhandling, destruction of property, and forced removal from public and private areas has been argued by opponents to be violations of the First Amendment's protection of free speech and unlawful search and seizure.

[ 15 ] An American Civil Liberties Union report cited the issues that arise from forced relocation in a report focusing on the city of Los Angeles , which pushed homeless individuals to remote locations near the desert, far away from available food, water, and crucial services.

[ 16 ] The criminalization of sleeping or camping in public and private areas was ruled as unconstitutional by the Ninth Circuit US Court of Appeals on the grounds that it is a violation of the Eighth Amendment's protection from cruel and unusual punishment. The reasoning behind this argument was that homeless people should not be punished as long as homeless people lack the facilities to conduct these acts privately.

[ 17 ] In addition, despite Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibiting employment discrimination, arguments have arisen over address requirements in job applications that can result in discrimination against homeless people. Since homeless individuals have no residence, they often list the address of homeless shelters in job applications and have subsequently reported being denied positions regardless of sufficient qualification and positive interview sessions before address disclosure.

[ 6 ] Ban the Address, a campaign that proposes that employers delay asking about an applicant's address until after the applicant is given a job offer, has been backed by advocates as a possible solution to the employment discrimination that homeless individuals encounter.

[ 18 ] Anti-camping legislation [ edit ] Anti-camping legislation prohibits a number of actions that target homeless people. The rules and regulations typically vary between municipalities, but some of the prohibited behaviors include sleeping on public or private property, setting up a tent or tent-like structure, or keeping property stored in unauthorized areas.

[ 19 ] The spaces where this behavior is prohibited can include parks, beaches, sidewalks, roads, under bridges, and other public and private areas.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Anti-camping legislation in municipalities has increased because of the 2024 Supreme Court ruling in Grants Pass v. Johnson, which states that the criminalization of homeless people sleeping in public areas or setting up encampments does not constitute as a violation of the Eighth Amendment.

[ 22 ] The repercussions of this ruling may include increased fining, arrests, and sudden relocations of individuals outside of city limits. Some of the concerns regarding this ruling include the threat of property loss during forced relocation, including personal phones, medication, and items of identification that can hinder prospects of future employment, housing, and safety if lost.

[ 23 ] People experiencing homelessness have also relayed their fear of increased inaccessibility of food, water, and other necessary goods and services due to restrictions of public and private land, and how this subsequently makes them feel socially outcasted while simultaneously making job application and resource building more difficult due to the frequency of forced relocation.

[ 23 ] Lack of access to public restrooms [ edit ] According to the National Alliance to End Homelessness , there was a total of 553,742 homeless people accounted for across the United States as of January 2017.

[ 24 ] Of those accounted for, 192,875 of them were unsheltered and lived in inhumane and unsafe conditions. Many unsheltered homeless camps are located in industrial districts and along highways, far away from public parks facilities where traditional public bathrooms are located. If local municipalities do not provide bathroom access, homeless people are left to urinate and defecate in the streets and waterways near their camps.

The University of Colorado Denver released a report highlighting the criminalization of homelessness across the state of Colorado .

[ 25 ] The report found that 83% of the people interviewed said they were denied bathroom access because they were homeless. Without access to bathrooms, many unsheltered homeless people across the country are left to live in unsanitary conditions which, in turn, leads to public health concerns such as the hepatitis A outbreak in California during 2016–2018. A report in The New England Journal of Medicine found that 649 people in California were infected with hepatitis A in 2017, and that most of those affected were homeless.

[ 26 ] Anti-homeless architecture [ edit ] "Anti-homeless spikes" in front of a window Some cities and towns have incorporated hostile architecture , also known as defensive architecture, to deter homeless people through the use of uncomfortable designs that prevent sitting or sleeping.

[ 27 ] These designs include spikes, segregated benches, and gated doorways.

[ 28 ] Research conducted by Crisis recorded that 35% of homeless people surveyed were unable to find a place to sleep as a result of the designs. In addition, a fifth of respondents reported experiencing other measures, such as intentionally disruptive sounds being played, to drive them out of area.

As of 2024, 256,610 people experiencing homelessness are unsheltered, largely due to the predicament that there are only enough beds to accommodate 53% of the homeless individuals who need them.

[ 29 ] This leaves many homeless people with no other option than to sleep outside, which is made more difficult and degrading by hostile architecture and noise pollution.

Hate crimes and violence [ edit ] See also: Homelessness in the United States § Crimes against homeless people Homeless individuals are not covered under hate crime statues federally, and there are very few studies that focus on the victimization of homeless individuals as a group.

[ 30 ] The majority of the existing literature and documentation of emotional or physical harm inflicted upon a homeless person due to their housing status has been compiled by the National Coalition for the Homeless, whose work in the area has inspired different state legislatures to incorporate homelessness as a protected category of their state's hate crime laws.

[ 31 ] The NCH's repository lists roughly 2000 reported incidents of violence against homeless people and 588 murders over the past 23 years, however the true number of crimes committed against homeless people is hard to surmise due to the issue of underreporting.

[ 32 ] These crimes have allegedly been committed due to the victim's homelessness, or because some aggressors may view homeless people as vulnerable and easy to target.

[ 33 ] Evidence supporting this claim comes from neural imaging studies which revealed that participants responded to images of homeless individuals with contempt, disgust, and dehumanization; which indicates a partial explanation for the discrimination and hate crimes that homeless people are subjected to.

[ 34 ] [ 1 ] A signification amount of resistance to homeless is based on their overwhelmingly disproportionate propensity to commit violent crime, particularly against strangers.

[ 35 ] Frequent cases of sexual assault, hate crimes, and littering also inspire resistance to the homeless.

Health [ edit ] Homeless youth, especially those from minority groups, have to deal with considerable mental health challenges, including depression, anxiety, and PTSD , which are further aggravated by experiences of discrimination, trauma, and lack of consistent housing.

[ 36 ] Many of these sociocultural barriers include limited access to insurance, discrimination in health care, and transportation issues, which have invariably barred many from accessing much-needed medical attention.

[ 37 ] Adopting the Housing First Initiative and trauma-informed care models as part of systems to reduce discrimination and increase access to services for homeless populations can be crucial to ensuring health improvement.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Homeless individuals with a mental health issue or a substance use disorder are much more likely to find themselves with life-threatening conditions of the body and immediate conditions of the body and often live in dangerous situations. More than one out of ten populations seeking care for substance abuse or mental health in the public health system identify themselves as homeless.

[ 40 ] Mental health amongst minority youth [ edit ] Mental health issues are rampant among homeless people, especially among minority youths, because they suffer compounded effects from harmful living conditions, trauma, and discrimination from systems.

[ 37 ] According to Covenant House , approximately 50% of homeless youth suffer from depression, anxiety, or PTSD as a result of stressful and traumatic conditions.

[ 41 ] A study conducted on homeless minority youths in Los Angeles found that the experience of racial and ethnic discrimination is very closely related to emotional distress like depression and anxiety.

[ 36 ] A study conducted in Canada regarding indigenous homeless youth also revealed that their major challenges in mental health are anxiety and depression with suicidal thoughts. It's important to underscore social interventions and community care in exposure to violence, food insecurity, and unstable family environments. This often becomes a vicious cycle that increasingly deteriorates mental health. Stress from homelessness can worsen existing conditions and initiate other problems.

[ 39 ] Homeless persons may lack identification or access to transportation, making it difficult to provide them with mental health services.

[ 37 ] Almost all homeless persons do not seek mental health services because of discrimination and stigma found in healthcare in contrast to using those services, leaving untreated and, therefore, worsening conditions.

[ clarification needed ] [ 36 ] Trauma-informed care is essential because it understands the ongoing effects of trauma while creating a safe, healing environment to counter these stresses. In addition, peer support in terms of social and racial factors promotes resilience through belonging and reduction of the destructive effects of discrimination. Programs designed with input from people who have lived experience prove effective in their successes of achieving better mental health outcomes and filling service gaps.

[ 39 ] Healthcare disparities [ edit ] Access to healthcare often acts as an obstacle to homeless people's efforts to achieve good health. Absences of insurance, transportation, or money leads to poor health condition outcomes. Most end up using emergency services and going through many hospital admissions for preventable conditions.

[ 37 ] To address such cases, California's Senate Bill 1152 was passed in 2018, which ended patient dumping , requiring hospitals to provide temporary housing support for homeless patients post-discharge, even though housing is still an issue at its core. One of its most hopeful solutions is the Housing First initiative, which rests on permanent and unconditional housing as a necessary foundation for improving health and stability. Studies show that Housing First decreases the costs of emergency services, hospitalizations, and Medicaid expenses while improving mental health and reducing substance use. However, its expansion has encountered political and financial roadblocks. Thus, it does not require just affordable housing but also policies that will ensure access to comprehensive healthcare without reservation.

[ 38 ] Discrimination is one of the most prominent issues underlying the health inequalities experienced by homeless people while attempting to access healthcare services. It significantly hampers their capacity to obtain the medical assistance they deserve. The stigma that the homeless people often face and stereotyping can be a dehumanizing experience for them and can deter them from seeking medical attention altogether.

[ 36 ] Such an experience is pretty standard as many report being treated as if they have no worth by doctors or dispensaries, and this not only worsens their mental issues but also prevents them from seeking help in the future.

[ 42 ] Other than the absence of identification and transportation, which can be seen more as structural barriers, the barriers also include lack of insurance, which limits their ability to access viable health care options. Such impediments, combined with administrative barriers such as limited clinic operating hours and complicated intake procedures, frequently result in missed appointments or avoidance of care entirely.

[ 37 ] Furthermore, racial discrimination and ethnic bias also permeate many of these disparities; minority homeless people face even further disadvantages when trying to access adequate and appropriate healthcare. Consequently, any policies developed to address these concerns should not only be aimed at increasing housing availability but should also include measures to prevent discrimination in healthcare settings, such as anti-bias education for healthcare providers and improving access to healthcare.

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-homelessness legislation Aporophobia Black triangle (badge) Camden bench Class discrimination Consolidated Laws of New York Economic discrimination Economic inequality Homeless dumping Homelessness Hostile architecture Housing First Internally displaced person List of homelessness organizations Poverty Public housing Right to housing Skid row Social cleansing Vagrancy laws References [ edit ] ^ a b Johnstone M, Jetten J, Dingle GA, Parsell C, Walter ZC (2015).

"Discrimination and well-being amongst the homeless: the role of multiple group membership" .

Front Psychol .

6 : 739.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00739 .

PMC 4450171 .

PMID 26082741 .

^ a b National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018).

"Appendix B, The History of Homelessness in the United States" .

Permanent Supportive Housing: Evaluating the Evidence for Improving Health Outcomes Among People Experiencing Chronic Homelessness . National Academies Press.

doi : 10.17226/25133 .

ISBN 978-0-309-47707-9 .

PMID 30148580 . NBK519584.

^ "State of Homelessness: 2024 Edition" .

^ "What Led to the Rise of Homelessness" . 23 February 2017.

^ Ehlke SJ, Cohn AM, Boozary LK, Alexander AC, Waring JJ, Businelle MS, Kendzor DE (2022).

"Discrimination, Substance Use, and Mental Health among Sexual and Gender Minority Adults Accessing Day Shelter Services" .

Subst Use Misuse .

57 (8): 1237– 47.

doi : 10.1080/10826084.2022.2076874 .

PMC 10428822 .

PMID 35603487 .

^ a b c Bullock, H.E.; Reppond, H.A.; Truong, S.V.; Singh, M.R. (2020). "An intersectional analysis of the feminization of homelessness and mothers' housing precarity".

Journal of Social Issues .

76 (4): 835– 858.

doi : 10.1111/josi.12406 .

hdl : 2027.42/163821 .

^ a b Budescu, Mia; Valera, Dania; Cruz, Harvey (2024).

"The Association Between Stress, Discrimination, and Hope Among Youth Experiencing Homelessness: Social Support as a Buffer" .

International Journal on Homelessness .

4 (2): 62– 79.

doi : 10.5206/ijoh.2023.3.17381 .

^ https://smitfc.org/economic-causes-of-homelessness ^ https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1525/maq.1993.7.2.02a00030 ^ https://books.google.com.au/books?hl=en&lr=&id=2R0sAwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR5&dq=anthropology+of+health+and+homelessness&ots=JPBIPfT9P7&sig=d84mGDYtQndSJiXHEE9AsJIpdWY#v=onepage&q&f=false ^ https://www.jstor.org/stable/682823 ^ Criminalizing Crisis: The Criminalization of Homelessness in U.S. Cities (Report). National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty. November 2011. Archived from the original on 2017-09-14 . Retrieved 2014-04-30 .

^ "Britain: Where have all the homeless gone?" .

The Economist . Vol. 372, no. 8388. pp.

21– 49.

^ Cunningham, Kelly (1999). "Table III: Prohibited Conduct".

Out of Sight — Out of Mind?: A Report on Anti-Homeless Laws, Litigation and Alternatives in 50 United States Cities . National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-7881-8276-1 .

^ Criminalizing Crisis: The Criminalization of Homelessness in U.S. Cities (Report). National Law Center on Homelessness & Poverty. November 2011. Archived from the original on 2017-09-14 . Retrieved 2014-04-30 .

^ Ward, Ethan (2021-10-26).

"The ACLU Says There's A War Against Unhoused People In Los Angeles" . LAist.

^ Oppenheimer, Peer Marie (2024).

"The Illusion of Public Space: Enforcement of Anti-Camping Ordinances Against Individuals Experiencing Homelessness" .

University of Chicago Legal Forum .

2023 . 18.

^ Golabek-Goldman, Sarah (2017).

"Ban the Address: Combating Employment Discrimination Against the Homeless" .

The Yale Law Journal .

126 (6): 1788– 1868.

ISSN 0044-0094 .

JSTOR 44867953 .

^ "Anti-Camping Ordinances – Important Case Law and Frequently Asked Questions" . ACLU Washington. April 17, 2017.

^ Headlee, Peyton (2023-01-03).

"New law makes it illegal for homeless people to sleep on state owned land in Missouri" .

KMBC . Retrieved 2024-10-22 .

^ D'Oench, Peter (2024-09-30).

"New Florida law bans those struggling with homelessness from sleeping outdoors" .

www.cbsnews.com . CBS Miami . Retrieved 2024-10-22 .

^ Chung, Andrew (June 29, 2024).

"US Supreme Court backs anti-camping laws used against homeless people" .

Reuters .

^ a b Diamond, Brie (2024-06-18).

" "They don't want us anywhere": The impact of anti-homelessness laws on unsheltered residents of Fort Worth, Texas" .

Journal of Qualitative Criminal Justice & Criminology .

doi : 10.21428/88de04a1.2c00962c .

^ "State of homelessness" . National Alliance to End Homelessness. 2018.

^ Robinson; Sickels (2015).

"No right to rest criminalizing homelessness in Colorado" (PDF) . University of Colorado Denver and Denver Homeless Outloud.

, retrieved from ^ Kushel M (January 2018).

"Hepatitis A Outbreak in California — Addressing the Root Cause" .

N Engl J Med .

378 (3): 211– 3.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMp1714134 .

PMID 29211622 .

^ McFadden, Christopher (2020-11-22).

"15 Examples of 'Anti-Homeless' Hostile Architecture That You Probably Never Noticed Before" .

Interesting Engineering .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-22 . Retrieved 2021-10-04 .

^ "New research from Crisis uncovers dehumanising effects of defensive architecture" .

Crisis .

^ "State of Homelessness: 2024 Edition" .

^ Wachholz, Sandra (2005). "Hate Crimes Against the Homeless: Warning-Out New England Style".

Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare .

32 (4). 10.

doi : 10.15453/0191-5096.3119 .

^ Raegan, Joern (2009).

"Mean Streets: Violence against the Homeless and the Makings of a Hate Crime" .

Hastings Race & Poverty L.J .

6 (4): 305.

^ Al-Hakim M (June 2015). "Making a home for the homeless in hate crime legislation".

J Interpers Violence .

30 (10): 1755– 81.

doi : 10.1177/0886260514549197 .

PMID 25228595 .

^ "Hate Crimes — National Coalition for the Homeless" .

National Coalition for the Homeless — Building a movement to End Homelessness . Retrieved 2024-10-25 .

^ Harris LT, Fiske ST (October 2006). "Dehumanizing the lowest of the low: neuroimaging responses to extreme out-groups".

Psychol Sci .

17 (10): 847– 53.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01793.x .

PMID 17100784 .

^ Martell, D. A.; Rosner, R.; Harmon, R. B. (1995). "Base-rate estimates of criminal behavior by homeless mentally ill persons in New York City".

Psychiatric Services .

46 (6): 596– 601.

doi : 10.1176/ps.46.6.596 .

PMID 7641002 .

^ a b c d e Milburn, Norweeta G.; Batterham, Philip; Ayala, George; Rice, Eric; Solorio, Rosa; Desmond, Kate; Lord, Lynwood; Iribarren, Javier; Rotheram-Borus, Mary Jane (2010).

"Discrimination and Mental Health Problems among Homeless Minority Young People" .

Public Health Reports .

125 (1): 61– 67.

doi : 10.1177/003335491012500109 .

ISSN 0033-3549 .

PMC 2789817 .

PMID 20402197 .

^ a b c d e Omerov, Pernilla; Craftman, Åsa G.; Mattsson, Elisabet; Klarare, Anna (2020).

"Homeless persons' experiences of health- and social care: A systematic integrative review" .

Health & Social Care in the Community .

28 (1): 1– 11.

doi : 10.1111/hsc.12857 .

ISSN 0966-0410 .

PMID 31524327 .

^ a b Lee, Alexandria (22 January 2021).

"Disparities in Health Care for the Homeless" . LLU Institute for Health Policy Leadership, Loma Linda University Health.

^ a b c Mirza, Sabina (2023-09-08).

"Mental Health & Educational Attainment: Learning From Indigenous Youth Who Are Homeless" .

International Journal of Indigenous Health .

18 (2).

doi : 10.32799/ijih.v18i2.39571 .

ISSN 2291-9376 .

^ "Health" . National Alliance to End Homelessness. December 2023.

^ "Mental Health Challenges of Homeless Youth" . Covenant House International.

^ Koehler, Kurt (May 2021).

Medical Mistrust Among Individuals Experiencing Homelessness (Thesis). Temple University.

doi : 10.34944/dspace/6474 .

hdl : 20.500.12613/6492 .

v t e Homelessness People Aged people Beggar Cyber-homeless Families Gutter punk McRefugee Mole people Street people Street children Social orphan Vagrants Bergie Tramps Hobos Youth Issues Anti-homelessness legislation Bill of Rights Bumvertising Discrimination Mental health Patient dumping Popular culture Spirituality Vulnerability Index Pets Survival sex Social cleansing Slum clearance Responses Soup kitchen Hygiene program Homeless ministry Homelessness services List Street newspaper List Shelters Homeless shelter Cooling center Drop-in center Four penny coffin Two-penny hangover Penny sit-up Warming center Women's shelter Homeless Friendly Precincts Housing Foyers Housing First Rapid Re-Housing Right to housing Single-room occupancy (SRO) Squatting Tent city Transitional housing Awareness Homelessness Action Week Homeless Persons' Week Homeless World Cup International Year of Shelter for the Homeless Street Child World Cup Youth Homelessness Matters Day By country Africa Algeria Egypt Ghanaian children South Africa Americas Canada Vancouver Latin American children United States LGBTQ youth Veterans Women California San Francisco Colorado Columbus Florida Minneapolis New Mexico Oregon Seattle Elsewhere Asia Bangladeshi children China India children Indonesia Iraq Israel Japan North Korea Filipino children Thai children Europe East Eastern European children Hungary Russia North Denmark Finland Ireland Sweden United Kingdom England Scotland South Greece Portugal Spain Vatican City West France Germany Netherlands Switzerland Oceania Australia Papua New Guinea New Zealand Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐67l6p
Cached time: 20250817042702
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.900 seconds
Real time usage: 1.031 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3332/1000000
Revision size: 34267/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 266083/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1322/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 221870/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.582/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7158054/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  815.436      1 -total
 40.24%  328.160      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
 39.97%  325.922      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 36.29%  295.894      1 Template:Reflist
 29.38%  239.552      9 Template:Excerpt
 19.79%  161.380     16 Template:Cite_journal
  7.88%   64.267     15 Template:Cite_web
  6.03%   49.187      1 Template:Short_description
  5.33%   43.481      4 Template:Navbox
  4.82%   39.344      1 Template:Homelessness Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19823600:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817042702 and revision id 1306322971. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrimination_against_homeless_people&oldid=1306322971 " Categories : Discrimination against the homeless Class discrimination Homelessness Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2024 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 04:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discrimination against homeless people 4 languages Add topic

