Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 Organizational structure 4 Achievements 5 List of presidents 6 Notable scientists and affiliated people 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Riken 20 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Polski Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 35°46′49″N 139°36′45″E ﻿ / ﻿ 35.78028°N 139.61250°E ﻿ / 35.78028; 139.61250 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Japanese research organization Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (Riken) 理化学研究所 (理研) Formation 1917 ; 108 years ago ( 1917 ) Type Designated National Research and Development Institute Headquarters Wakō , Saitama Prefecture , Japan Location 7 campuses Coordinates 35°46′49″N 139°36′45″E ﻿ / ﻿ 35.78028°N 139.61250°E ﻿ / 35.78028; 139.61250 Affiliations Asian Research Network Website www .riken .jp Riken ( Japanese : 理研 ; English: / ˈ r ɪ k ɛ n / ; [ 1 ] stylized in all caps as RIKEN ) is a national scientific research institute in Japan. Founded in 1917, it now has about 3,000 scientists on seven campuses across Japan, including the main site at Wakō , Saitama Prefecture , on the outskirts of Tokyo . Riken is a Designated National Research and Development Institute , [ 2 ] and was formerly an Independent Administrative Institution .

Riken conducts research in various fields of science, including physics , chemistry , biology , genomics , medical science , engineering , high-performance computing and computational science , and ranging from basic research to practical applications with 485 partners worldwide.

[ 3 ] It is almost entirely funded by the Japanese government , with an annual budget of ¥100 billion (US$750 million) in FY2023.

[ 4 ] Name [ edit ] "Riken" is an acronym of the formal name Rikagaku Kenkyūsho ( 理化学研究所 ) , and its full name in Japanese is Kokuritsu Kenkyū Kaihatsu Hōjin Rikagaku Kenkyūsho ( 国立研究開発法人理化学研究所 ) and in English is the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research .

History [ edit ] Riken in the Taishō period A 1938 ad for Riken Vitamin A This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In 1913, the well-known scientist Jokichi Takamine first proposed the establishment of a national science research institute in Japan. This task was taken on by Viscount Shibusawa Eiichi , a prominent businessman, and following a resolution by the Diet in 1915, Riken came into existence in March 1917. In its first incarnation, Riken was a private foundation (財団法人, zaidan ), funded by a combination of industry, the government, and the Imperial Household . It was located in the Komagome district of Tokyo , and its first director was the mathematician Baron Dairoku Kikuchi .

In 1927, Viscount Masatoshi Ōkōchi , the third director, established the Riken Concern (a zaibatsu ). This was a group of spin-off companies that used Riken's scientific achievements for commercial ends and returned the profits to Riken. At its peak in 1939 the zaibatsu comprised about 121 factories and 63 companies, including Riken Kankōshi, which is now Ricoh .

During World War II , the Japanese army's atomic bomb program was conducted at Riken. In April 1945 the US bombed Riken's laboratories in Komagome, and in November, after the end of the war, Allied soldiers destroyed its two cyclotrons .

After the war, the Allies dissolved Riken as a private foundation, and it was brought back to life as a company called Kagaku Kenkyūsho ( 科学研究所 ) , or Kaken ( 科研 ) . In 1958 the Diet passed the Riken Law, whereby the institute returned to its original name and entered its third incarnation, as a public corporation ( 特殊法人 , tokushu hōjin ) , funded by the government. In 1963 it relocated to a large site in modern day Wakō then until 1970 in Saitama Prefecture , just outside Tokyo .

Since the 1980s Riken has expanded dramatically. New labs, centers, and institutes have been established in Japan and overseas, including: in 1984, the Life Science Center in Tsukuba in 1995, the Muon Research Facility at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in the UK in 1997, the Harima Institute, the Brain Science Institute in Wako, and the center at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in the United States of America in 1998, the Genomic Sciences Center in 2000, the Yokohama Institute, which now contains four centers for research in the life sciences in 2002, the Kobe Institute, which contains the Center for Developmental Biology In October 2003, Riken's status changed again, to Independent Administrative Institution . As such, Riken is still publicly funded, and it is periodically evaluated by the government, but it has a higher degree of autonomy than before. Riken is regarded as the flagship research institute in Japan and conducts basic and applied experimental research in a wide range of science and technology fields including physics, chemistry, medical science, biology and engineering.

Riken was the subject of international attention in 2014 after the Stimulus-triggered acquisition of pluripotency cell (also known as STAP ) publication, investigation, retraction, and suicide of Yoshiki Sasai , the principal investigator.

Organizational structure [ edit ] Main Research Building in Wako Advanced Institute for Computational Science in Kobe The main divisions of Riken are listed here. Purely administrative divisions are omitted.

Headquarters (mostly in Wako) Wako Branch Center for Emergent Matter Science (research on new materials for reduced power consumption) Center for Sustainable Resource Science (research toward a sustainable society) Nishina Center for Accelerator-Based Science (site of the Radioactive Isotope Beam Factory , a heavy-ion accelerator complex) Center for Brain Science Center for Advanced Photonics (research on photonics including terahertz radiation) Research Cluster for Innovation Cluster for Pioneering Research (chief scientists) Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences Program Tokyo Branch Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (research on artificial intelligence ) Tsukuba Branch BioResource Research Center Harima Institute Riken SPring-8 Center (site of the SPring-8 synchrotron and the SACLA x-ray free electron laser ) Yokohama Branch (site of the Yokohama Nuclear magnetic resonance facility) Center for Sustainable Resource Science Center for Integrative Medical Sciences (research toward personalized medicine) Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research (also based in Kobe and Osaka) [ 5 ] Program for Drug Discovery and Medical Technology Platform Structural Biology Laboratory Sugiyama Laboratory Kobe Branch Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research ( developmental biology and nuclear medicine medical imaging techniques) Center for Computational Science (R-CCS, home of the Fugaku super computer and now decommissioned K computer ) Achievements [ edit ] Two Riken scientists have won the Nobel prize for physics : Hideki Yukawa in 1949 and Shin'ichirō Tomonaga in 1965.

The SPring-8 (Super Photon Ring 8GeV) facility in Harima is one of the largest and most powerful third-generation synchrotron radiation facility.

[ 6 ] In July 2004 a team at Riken created element 113 (now named nihonium , after Nihon = Japan). On April 2, 2005 the same team successfully created it for the second time, and a third event was seen in 2012. The discovery was officially recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) and the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics (IUPAP) in December 2015.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Riken Super Combined Cluster is one of the world's fastest supercomputers . In January 2006, Riken set up the Next-Generation Supercomputer R&D Center, with the purpose of designing and building the fastest supercomputer in the world, and in June 2006, it announced the completion of a one- petaFLOPS computer system designed specially for molecular dynamics simulation.

Currently a new system, the K computer is being installed at Riken [ needs update ] and despite it being still not finished, it topped the LINPACK benchmark with the performance of 8.162 petaFLOPS, or 8.162 quadrillion calculations per second, with a computing efficiency ratio of 93.0%, making it the fastest supercomputer in the world at the time.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The complete project entered service in November 2012.

[ 13 ] List of presidents [ edit ] Dairoku Kikuchi (1917) Kōi Furuichi (1917–1921) Masatoshi Ōkōchi (1921–1946) Yoshio Nishina (1946–1951) Kiichi Sakatani (1951–1952) Takeshi Murayama (1952–1956) Masanori Satō (1956–1958) Haruo Nagaoka (1958–1966) Shirō Akahori (1966–1970) Toshio Hoshino (1970–1975) Shinji Fukui (1975–1980) Tatsuoki Miyajima (1980–1988) Minoru Oda (1988–1993) Akito Arima (1993–1998) Shunichi Kobayashi (1998–2003) Ryōji Noyori (2003 – 31 March 2015) Hiroshi Matsumoto (1 April 2015 – 31 March 2022) [ 14 ] Makoto Gonokami (1 April 2022–present) [ 15 ] Notable scientists and affiliated people [ edit ] Kotaro Honda , inventor of KS steel Kikunae Ikeda , discoverer of monosodium glutamate and the umami flavor Dairoku Kikuchi , mathematician and the first Director of Riken Seishi Kikuchi , physicist, known for his explanation of the Kikuchi lines Hiroaki Kitano systems biologist involved in RoboCup , AIBO etc.

[ 16 ] Chika Kuroda , chemist, known for research on natural dyes , and one of the first three women to receive a bachelor's degree in Japan Daniel Loss , physicist, known for proposing the Loss–DiVincenzo quantum computer Kōsuke Morita , physicist, leader of team that discovered element 113 , now named nihonium after Japan Hantaro Nagaoka , postulator of the Saturnian model of the atom Ukichiro Nakaya , physicist and essayist Yoshio Nishina , leading atomic physicist who worked with Bohr , Einstein , Heisenberg and Dirac Ryōji Noyori , past President, and winner of the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2001 Masatoshi Ōkōchi , physicist and the third Director of Riken Yoshiki Sasai , developmental biologist who grew an optic cup from stem cells Umetaro Suzuki , discoverer of vitamin B1 Toshio Takamine, specialist in spectroscopy , author of The "Near Infra-Red Spectra of Helium and Mercury" and "Absorption of Ha Line" and "The structure of mercury lines examined by an echelon grating and a Lummer-Gehrcke plate" Masayo Takahashi , pioneer in the clinical application of iPS Cell ( induced Pluripotent Stem Cell ) technology on macular degeneration Masatoshi Takeichi , discoverer of the cadherin family of cell-cell adhesion molecules and head of the Riken Center for Developmental Biology Ume Tange ( jp ), researcher on vitamins, and one of first three women to receive a bachelor's degree in Japan Torahiko Terada , physicist and essayist Yoshinori Tokura , pioneer of strongly-correlated electron systems in Japan Shin'ichirō Tomonaga , winner of the 1965 Nobel physics prize for his work on quantum electrodynamics Susumu Tonegawa , head of the Brain Science Institute and winner of the 1987 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of the mechanism of antibody diversity Michiyo Tsujimura , biochemist, known for isolating components of green tea Tadashi Watanabe , head of Riken's Next-Generation Supercomputer R&D Center Toshiko Yuasa , Japan's first female physicist, who specialized in nuclear physics Hideki Yukawa , physicist who won the 1949 Nobel prize for his prediction of the pion Hidetoshi Katori , physicist who invented the magic wavelength technique enabling the realization of ultra high precision optical lattice atomic clocks See also [ edit ] Riken integrated database of mammals References [ edit ] ^ "Introduction to RIKEN (2019)" . Riken. Archived from the original on 2021-06-06 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 .

^ "MEXT" (PDF) .

^ "Partnerships | RIKEN" .

www.riken.jp . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "人員・予算 | 理化学研究所" .

www.riken.jp . Retrieved 2024-02-17 .

^ Organisational changes are underway in 2018 with some laboratories joining the Center for Integrative Medical Sciences ^ Futura-Sciences.

"Record : un laser X avec une longueur d'onde de 1,2 angström" .

Futura-Sciences . Retrieved 2016-04-05 .

^ "Search for element 113 concluded at last" .

www.sciencecodex.com . 26 September 2012 . Retrieved 2016-04-05 .

^ "Discovery Of Element 113 By RIKEN Scientists Completes 7th Row Of Periodic Table" .

Tech Times . 2016-01-05 . Retrieved 2016-04-05 .

^ "Japanese 'K' Computer Is Ranked Most Powerful" .

The New York Times . 20 June 2011 . Retrieved 20 June 2011 .

^ "Japan Reclaims Top Ranking on Latest TOP500 List of World's Supercomputers" , top500.org , archived from the original on June 23, 2011 , retrieved June 20, 2011 ^ "K computer, SPARC64 VIIIfx 2.0GHz, Tofu interconnect" , top500.org , archived from the original on June 23, 2011 , retrieved June 20, 2011 ^ "Supercomputer "K computer" Takes First Place in World" . RIKEN. Archived from the original on 11 March 2012 . Retrieved 20 June 2011 .

^ "With 16 petaflops and 1.6M cores, DOE supercomputer is world's fastest" .

Ars Technica . 18 June 2012 . Retrieved 2016-04-05 .

^ Hiroshi Matsumoto takes helm at Riken , retrieved 7 April 2015 ^ "Makoto Gonokami takes office as President of RIKEN" (Press release). RIKEN. 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 2022-08-18 .

^ Kitano, H.; Asada, M.; Kuniyoshi, Y.; Noda, I.; Osawa, E. (1997). "Robo Cup ".

Proceedings of the first international conference on Autonomous agents - AGENTS '97 . p. 340.

doi : 10.1145/267658.267738 .

ISBN 0897918770 .

S2CID 2557966 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to RIKEN .

Official website (in English and Japanese) Riken Research (in English and Japanese) – A resource for up-to-date information on key achievements of Riken researchers.

v t e Incorporated Administrative Agencies in Japan There are 102 institutions as of April 1, 2012.

Bold institutions employ national public servants.

Cabinet Office National Archives of Japan ja:Northern Territories Issue Association ja:National Consumer Affairs Center of Japan Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) ja:National Statistics Center ja:Public Foundation for Peace and Consolation ja:Management Organization for Postal Savings and Postal Life Insurance Ministry of Foreign Affairs Japan International Cooperation Agency Japan Foundation Ministry of Finance ja:National Research Institute of Brewing Japan Mint National Printing Bureau Commemorative Organization for the Japan World Exposition '70 Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology ja:National Institute of Special Education National Center for University Entrance Examinations ja:National Institution For Youth Education ja:National Women's Education Center National Museum of Nature and Science National Institute for Materials Science ja:National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention ja:National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology National Institutes for Cultural Heritage ja:National Institute of Radiological Sciences ja:National Center for Teachers' Development Japan Science and Technology Agency Japan Society for the Promotion of Science RIKEN Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency ja:National Agency for the Advancement of Sports and Health Japan Arts Council ja:Japan Student Services Organization Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology ja:Institute of National Colleges of Technology National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation Japan Atomic Energy Agency Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare ja:National Institute of Health and Nutrition ja:National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health ja:Organization for Workers Retirement Allowance Mutual Aid ja:Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly, Persons with Disabilities and Job Seekers ja:Welfare And Medical Service Agency ja:National Center for Persons with Severe Intellectual Disabilities, Nozominosono Japan Institute for Labour Policy and Training ja:Japan Labour Health and Welfare Organization ja:National Hospital Organization ja:Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Agency ja:National Institute of Biomedical Innovation ja:Readjustment of Facilities for Insured Persons and Beneficiaries Organization Government Pension Investment Fund ja:National Cancer Center ja:National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Hospital ja:National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry ja:National Center for Global Health and Medicine ja:National Center for Child Health and Development ja:National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontrogy Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries ja:Food and Agricultural Materials Inspection Center ja:National Center for Seeds and Seedlings ja:National Livestock Breeding Center ja:National Fisheries University ja:National Agriculture and Food Research Organization ja:National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences ja:National Institute for Agro-Environmental Sciences ja:Japan International Research Center for Agricultural Sciences ja:Forestry and Forest Products Research Institute ja:Fisheries Research Agency ja:Agriculture & Livestock Industries Corporation ja:Farmer's Pension Fund ja:Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Credit Foundations Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry ja:Information-Technology Promotion Agency ja:Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry ja:National Center for Industrial Property Information and Training Nippon Export and Investment Insurance National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology National Institute of Technology and Evaluation New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization Japan External Trade Organization ja:Japan Nuclear Energy Safety Organization ja:Information-technology Promotion Agency Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation ja:Organization for Small & Medium Enterprises and Regional Innovation Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism ja:Public Works Research Institute ja:Building Research Institute ja:National Traffic Safety and Environment Laboratory ja:National Maritime Research Institute ja:Port and Airport Research Institute ja:Electronic Navigation Research Institute ja:National Institute for Sea Training ja:Marine Technical Education Agency ja:Civil Aviation College ja:National Agency of Vehicle Inspection: Japan Railway Construction, Transport and Technology Agency Japan National Tourism Organization ja:Japan Water Agency ja:National Agency for Automotive Safety & Victims' Aid ja:Organization for Environment Improvement around International Airports ja:Maritime Disaster Prevention Center ja:Urban Renaissance Agency ja:Fund for the Promotion and Development of the Amami Islands ja:Japan Expressway Holding and Debt Repayment Agency ja:Japan Housing Finance Agency Ministry of the Environment ja:National Institute for Environmental Studies ja:Environmental Restoration and Conservation Agency Ministry of Defense ja:Labor Management Organization for USFJ Employees Related topics ja:Act on General Rules for Independent Administrative Agency List of Independent Administrative Institutes in Japan ja:Japanese administrative reforms ja:Government Revitalization Unit ja:Japanese government program review ja:Japanese extra-governmental organizations Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Riken&oldid=1298938710 " Categories : Riken 1917 establishments in Japan Biosafety level 4 laboratories Independent Administrative Institutions of Japan Multidisciplinary research institutes Nuclear research institutes Research institutes in Japan Science and technology in Japan Zaibatsu Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates not on Wikidata Infoboxes without native name language parameter Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from September 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Japanese-language sources (ja) Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Riken 20 languages Add topic

