Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theories on altruism and spitefulness 2 Doubts about the adaptive nature of spiteful behavior 3 Spiteful behavior in animals Toggle Spiteful behavior in animals subsection 3.1 Infanticide 3.2 Aggression by means of pathogens 4 Spiteful behavior in humans Toggle Spiteful behavior in humans subsection 4.1 Wartime infanticide 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Hamiltonian spite 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spiteful behaviour in animals Female wattled jacanas often carry out infanticide.

Within the field of social evolution , Hamiltonian spite is a term introduced by W. D. Hamilton for spiteful behaviors occurring among conspecifics that have a cost for the actor and a negative impact upon the recipient.

Theories on altruism and spitefulness [ edit ] W. D. Hamilton published an influential paper on altruism in 1964 to explain why genetic kin tend to help each other.

[ 1 ] He argued that genetically related individuals are likely to carry the copies of the same alleles ; thus, helping kin may ensure that copies of the actors' alleles pass on to next generations of both the recipient and the actor.

While this became a widely accepted idea, it was less noted that Hamilton published a later paper that modified this view.

[ 2 ] This paper argues that by measuring the genetic relatedness between any two (randomly chosen) individuals of a population several times, we can identify an average level of relatedness. Theoretical models predict that (1) it is adaptive for an individual to be altruistic to any other individuals that are more closely related to it than this average level, and also that (2) it is adaptive for an individual to be spiteful against any other individuals that are less closely related to it than this average level. The indirect adaptive benefits of such acts can surpass certain costs of the act (either helpful or harmful) itself. Hamilton mentioned birds and fishes exhibiting infanticide (more specifically: ovicide) as examples for such behaviors.

Briefly, an individual can increase the chance of its genetic alleles to be passed to the next generations either by helping those that are more closely related, or by harming those that are less closely related than relationship by chance.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Doubts about the adaptive nature of spiteful behavior [ edit ] Though altruism and spitefulness appear to be two sides of the same coin, the latter is less accepted among evolutionary biologists.

First, unlike the case with the beneficiary of an altruistic act, targets of aggression are likely to act in revenge: bites will provoke bites. Thus harming non-kin may be more costly than helping kin.

Second, presuming a panmictic population , the vast majority of pairs of individuals exhibit a roughly average level of relatedness. For a given individual, the majority of others are not worth helping or harming. While it is easy to identify the few most closely related ones (see: kin recognition ), it is hard to identify the most genetically distant ones.

Most terrestrial vertebrates exhibit a certain degree of site fidelity, so levels of kinship tend to correlate negatively with spatial distance. While this may provide some cues to identify the least related individuals, it may also ensure that non-kin rarely if ever meet each other.

Spiteful behavior in animals [ edit ] Infanticide [ edit ] Many animal species exhibit infanticide, i.e. adults tend to kill the eggs or the offspring of conspecifics, even if they do not feed on them (in the absence of cannibalism ).

[ 5 ] This form of spitefulness is relatively free from the threat of revenge – provided that the parents and relatives of the target are either weak or far away. Infanticide may not be a form of spite as in many cases the loss of offspring to the female brings it back into estrous providing a mating advantage to an infanticidal male. This is seen in lions.

[ 6 ] When infected by tuberculosis, badgers emigrate from their natal group.

Aggression by means of pathogens [ edit ] An individual carrying a long-lasting infection of virulent pathogens may benefit from (1) channelling the flow of pathogens from its own body away from its kin and (2) directing them toward non-kin conspecifics. The adaptive nature of this behavior has been supported by the analysis of theoretical models [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and also by the analyses of the behavioral repertoire of different animal species.

[ 9 ] Thus, tuberculosis -infected European badgers and rabies -infected dogs equally tend to emigrate from their natal ranges before starting to distribute the pathogens. Similarly, wild herds of Asian elephants tend to defecate into drinkwater holes apparently to keep rival herds away.

[ 10 ] Depiction of Herod's alleged infanticide from a church in Lüen.

Spiteful behavior in humans [ edit ] Wartime infanticide [ edit ] Throughout human history, war has often emerged as a costly form of aggression, typically targeting the non-kin enemy. Naturally, most wars appear to be motivated by potential benefits other than the genetic. Nevertheless, widespread infanticide during periods of war indicates Hamiltonian elements as well. Infanticide is a biologically spiteful action in that it costs the killer time and energy, and opens the killer to the threat of revenge, without any direct compensating benefits.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Kin selection References [ edit ] ^ Hamilton WD 1964. The genetical evolution of social behaviour. Part  I and II. Journal of Theoretical Biology 7: 1–16 and 17–52.

^ Hamilton WD 1970. Selfish and spiteful behaviour in an evolutionary model. Nature 228: 1218–20.

^ Vickery WL, Brown JS, FitzGerald GJ 2003. Spite: altruism’s evil twin. Oikos, 102, 413–16.

^ Foster KR, Wenseleers T, Ratnieks FLW 2001. Spite: Hamilton’s unproven theory. Annales Zoologici Fennici 38: 229–38.

^ van Schaik CP, Janson CH (eds.) 2000. Infanticide by males and its implications. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ Press.

^ Van Schaik, C. P., & Janson, C. H. (Eds.). (2000). Infanticide by males and its implications. Cambridge University Press.

^ Rózsa L 1999. Influencing random transmission is a neutral character in hosts. Journal of Parasitology, 85, 1032–35.

^ Dionisio F 2007. Selfish and spiteful behaviour through parasites and pathogens. Evolutionary Ecology Research, 9: 1199-1210 ^ Rózsa L 2000. Spite, xenophobia, and collaboration between hosts and parasites. Oikos 91: 396–400.

^ Jog M, Watve M 2005. Role of parasites and commensals in shaping host behaviour. Current Science 89: 1184–91 v t e Sociobiology Topics Behavioural genetics Challenge hypothesis Dual inheritance theory Ethology Evolutionary psychology Evolution of morality Evolutionary models of food sharing Group selection Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Male warrior hypothesis Reciprocal altruism Sexual selection in humans Sex and psychology Sociality eusociality evolution presociality Dunbar's number Polyethism Supporters Anne Campbell Noam Chomsky Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Sarah Blaffer Hrdy Steven Pinker Frans de Waal E. O. Wilson Sociobiology: The New Synthesis Robert Wright Opponents Stephen Jay Gould Leon Kamin Richard Lewontin Steven Rose Not in Our Genes Category Commons Evolutionary biology portal v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hamiltonian_spite&oldid=1297748423 " Categories : Evolutionary psychology Sociobiology Altruism Biological warfare Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2013 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 07:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hamiltonian spite 2 languages Add topic

