Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The geography of women 2 Socialist feminist geography 3 Feminist geographies of difference 4 Critical human geography 5 Challenges of feminist geography 6 Controversies surrounding feminist geography 7 Notable feminist geographers 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Scientific journals Toggle the table of contents Feminist geography 14 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Approach in human geography which applies the theories, methods and critiques of feminism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist geography is a sub-discipline of human geography that applies the theories, methods, and critiques of feminism to the study of the human environment, society, and geographical space.

[ 1 ] Feminist geography emerged in the 1970s, when members of the women's movement called on academia to include women as both producers and subjects of academic work.

[ 2 ] Feminist geographers aim to incorporate positions of race, class, ability, and sexuality into the study of geography. The discipline was a target for the hoaxes of the grievance studies affair .

The geography of women [ edit ] The geography of women examines the effects geography has on gender inequality and is theoretically influenced by welfare geography and liberal feminism . Feminist geographers emphasize the various gendered constraints put in place by distance and spatial separation (for instance, spatial considerations can play a role in confining women to certain locations or social spheres). In their book Companion to Feminist Geography , Seager and Johnson argue that gender is only a narrow-minded approach to understanding the oppression of women throughout the decades of colonial history.

[ 2 ] As such, understanding the geography of women requires a critical approach to questions of the dimensions of age, class, ethnicity, orientation and other socio-economic factors.

[ 2 ] An early objection to the concept of geography of women, however, claimed that gender roles were mainly explained through gender inequality. However, Foord and Gregson argue that the idea of gender roles emerges from a static social theory that narrows the focus to women and portrays women as victims, which gives a narrow reading of distance. Instead, they claim that the concept of the geography of women is able to display how spatial constraint and separation enter into the construction of women's positions.

[ 3 ] In 2004, theorist Edward Said critiqued the idea of geographical spaces in such a context where actions on gendered practices of representation are fabricated through dominant ideological beliefs.

[ 4 ] In response, feminist geographers argue that misrepresentations of gender roles and taken-for-granted feminist movements reveal that the challenges of the colonial present lie within the confinement of women to limited spatial opportunities. Therefore, feminist geographies are built on the principle that gender should be applied and developed in terms of space.

[ 5 ] Socialist feminist geography [ edit ] Socialist feminist geography, theoretically influenced by Marxism and Socialist feminism , seeks to explain inequality, the relationship between capitalism and patriarchy , and the interdependence of geography, gender relations, and economic development under capitalism. Socialist feminist geography revolves around questions of how to reduce the gender inequality caused by patriarchy and capitalism, and focuses predominantly on spatial separation, gender place, and locality. Uncertainty regarding appropriate articulation of gender and class analysis fuels a key theoretical debate within the field of socialist feminist geography. For example, when analyzing married mainland Chinese immigrant women living in New York City, women remain the primary object of analysis, and gender remains the primary social relation. However, socialist feminist geographers also recognize that many other factors, such as class, affect women's post-migration experiences and circumstances.

[ 6 ] Socialist feminist geographers first worked primarily at the urban scale: Anglo-American feminist geographers focused on the social and spatial separation of suburban homes from paid employment. This was seen as vital to the day-to-day and generational development and maintenance of traditional gender relations in capitalist societies.

[ 7 ] Socialist feminist geographers also analyze the ways in which the effects of geographical differences on gender relations not only reflect, but also partly determine local economic changes.

Judith Butler 's concept of "citationality" [ 8 ] explores the lack of agency surrounding the facilitation of the presence of women within the discipline of geography. Subsequently, feminist geographers conclude that whenever performative measures are taken to diminish women's rights in geographical space, surrounding conventions adapt to make it seem as the norm.

[ 8 ] For instance, Susan Hanson and Geraldine Pratt's book "Gender, Work, and Space" [ 9 ] reveals how geographical elements, such as the configuration of workplaces, the distribution of resources, and the design of urban and rural environments, contribute to shaping and reinforcing gender disparities within the realm of work.

Feminist geographies of difference [ edit ] Feminist geographies of difference is an approach to feminist geography that concentrates on the construction of gendered identities and differences among women. It examines gender and constructions of nature through cultural, post-structural, postcolonial and psychoanalytic theories, as well as writings by women of color , lesbian women, gay men, and women from third world countries. In this approach, feminist geographers emphasize the study of micro-geographies of body, mobile identities, distance, separation and place, imagined geographies , colonialism and post-colonialism, and environment or nature .

Since the late 1980s, many feminist geographers have moved on to three new research areas: categories of gender between men and women, the formation of gender relations and identities, and the differences between relativism and situational knowledge.

Firstly, feminist geographers have contested and expanded the categories of genders between men and women. Through this, they have also begun to investigate differences in the constructions of gender relations across race, ethnicity, age, religion, sexuality and nationality, paying particular attention to women who are positioned along multiple axes of difference.

Secondly, to gain a better understanding of how gender relations and identities are formed and assumed, feminist geographers have drawn upon a broader extent of social theory and culture. Building upon this theoretical platform, feminist geographers are more able to discuss and debate the influence that post-structuralist and psychoanalytic theories have on multiple identifications.

[ 10 ] Lastly, the difference between relativism and situated knowledge is a key area of discussion. Through these discussions, feminist geographers have discovered ways to reconcile partial perspectives with a commitment to political action and social change.

Critical human geography [ edit ] Critical human geography is defined as "a diverse and rapidly changing set of ideas and practices within human geography linked by a shared commitment to emancipatory politics within and beyond the discipline, to the promotion of progressive social change and to the development of a broad range of critical theories and their application in geographical research and political practice." [ 6 ] Critical human geography emerged from the field of Anglophonic geography in the mid-1990s, and it presents a broad alliance of progressive approaches to the discipline. Critical human geographers focus on key publications that mark different eras of critical human geography, drawing upon anarchism , anti-colonialism , critical race theory , environmentalism , feminism , Marxism , nonrepresentational theory, post-Marxism , post-colonialism, post-structuralism, psychoanalysis , queer theory , situationism , and socialism .

Critical human geography is understood as being multiple, dynamic, and contested.

[ 11 ] Rather than a specific sub-discipline of geography , feminist geography is often considered part of a broader, postmodern , critical theory approach, that draws upon the theories of Michel Foucault , Jacques Derrida , and Judith Butler, and many post-colonial theorists. Feminist geographers often focus on the lived experiences of individuals and groups in the geographies of their own localities, rather than theoretical development without empirical work.

[ 1 ] Many feminist geographers study the same subjects as other geographers, but focus specifically on gender divisions.

[ 12 ] This has developed into concerns with wider issues of gender, family, sexuality, race, and class. Examples of areas of focus include: Geographic differences in gender relations and gender equality The geography of women (e.g. spatial constraints and welfare geography) The construction of gender identity through the use and nature of spaces and places Geographies of sexuality ( queer theory ) Geographies of disability Children's geographies Feminist geographers are also deeply impacted by and respondent to contemporary globalization and neoliberal discourses that are manifested transnationally and translocally.

[ 2 ] Feminist geography also critiques human geography and other academic disciplines, arguing that academic structures have been traditionally characterized by a patriarchal perspective and that contemporary studies which do not confront the nature of previous work reinforce the masculine bias of academic study.

[ 13 ] British geographer Gillian Rose's Feminism and Geography [ 1 ] is one such sustained criticism that claims that the approach to human geography in Britain is historically masculinist. This geographic masculinization includes traditions of writing landscapes as feminine spaces—and thus as subordinate to male geographers—and subsequent assumptions of a separation between mind and body. Johnston & Sidaway describe such separation as "Cartesian dualism" and further explain its influence on geography: [ 14 ] "' Cartesian dualism underlines our thinking in a myriad of ways, not least in the divergence of the social sciences from the natural sciences, and in a geography which is based on the separation of people from their environments.  Thus while geography is unusual in its spanning of the natural and social sciences and in focusing on the interrelations between people and their environments, it is still assumed that the two are distinct and one acts on the other. Geography, like all of the social sciences, has been built upon a particular conception of mind and body which sees them as separate, apart and acting on each other (Johnston, 1989, cited in Longhurst, 1997, p. 492)' 
Thus, too, feminist work has sought to transform approaches to the study of landscape by relating it to the way that it is represented ('appreciated' so to speak), in ways that are analogous to the heterosexual male gaze directed towards the female body (Nash 1996). Both of these concerns (and others)- about the body as a contested site and for the Cartesian distinction between mind and body - have been challenged in postmodern and poststructuralist feminist geographies." Other feminist geographers have interrogated how the discipline of geography itself represents and reproduces the heterosexual male gaze. Feminist geographers such as Katherine McKittrick have asserted that how we see and understand space are fundamentally bound up in how we understand the hegemonic presence of the white male subject in history, geography and in the materiality of everyday space.

[ 15 ] Building off of Sylvia Wynter 's theories of the racialized production of public and private space, McKittrick challenges "social landscapes that presume subaltern populations have no relationship to the production of space" [ 15 ] and writes to document black female geographies in order to "allow us to engage with a narrative that locates and draws on black histories and black subjects in order to make visible social lives which are often displaced, rendered ungeographic." [ 16 ] McKittrick stakes claim in the co-articulation of race and gender as they articulate space, writing: "I am emphasizing here that racism and sexism are not simply bodily or identity-based; racism and sexism are also spatial acts and illustrate black women's geographic experiences and knowledges as they are made possible through domination." [ 17 ] Moreover, many feminist geographers have critiqued human geography for centering masculine knowledge emphasizing "objective" knowledge, arguing instead for the use of situated knowledge which understands both observation and analysis as being rooted in partial objectivity.

[ 18 ] Challenges of feminist geography [ edit ] Linda McDowell and Joanne P. Sharp, both foundational feminist geographers and scholars, describe the struggle of gaining recognition in academia, saying that "[it has been] a long struggle to gain recognition within geography as a discipline that gender relations are a central organizing feature both of the material and symbolic worlds and of the theoretical basis of the discipline." [ 19 ] Feminist geographers struggle in academia in a variety of ways. Firstly, ideas that originate from feminist discourse are often seen as commonsense once the wider field accepts them, thereby rendering geography that is explicitly feminist invisible. Furthermore, feminist geography is understood to be the only subfield of geography where gender is explicitly addressed, permitting the wider discipline to disengage from feminist challenges. Finally, within the field, some geographers believe that feminist practice has been fully integrated into the academy, making feminist geography obsolete.

Challenges of feminist geography are also embedded in the subfield itself. The epistemology of feminist geography argues that the positionalities and lived experiences of the geographers are as central to scholarship as what is being researched. In this way, feminist geographers must maintain diverse identities to fully engage with the discipline. Linda Peake and Gill Valentine point out that, while feminist geography has addressed gender issues in more than twenty-five countries across the world, scholarship in the field of feminist geography is primarily conducted by white female scholars from institutions in the Global North.

[ 20 ] In this way, feminist geography faces not only barriers rooted in the academy but a lack of diversity in its own field.

[ 21 ] Feminist geographers draw upon a broad range of social and cultural theory, including psychoanalysis and post-structuralism , to develop a fuller understanding of how gender relations and identities are shaped and assumed. This has led to the fundamental rethinking of gender and the contradictions and possibilities presented by the seeming instability and insistent repetitions of gender norms in practice. The focus on multiple identifications and the influence of post-structuralist and psychoanalytic theories has allowed feminist geographers to enter into dialogue with other strands of critical geography. This open dialogue, however, has also allowed tensions to build between geographers in the United States and geographers in Great Britain. Theoretical differences among feminist geographers are more obvious than in the past, but since 1994, the national differences between America and British geographers have begun to diminish as both parties pursue new directions.

[ 10 ] Controversies surrounding feminist geography [ edit ] In 2018, a leading journal in feminist geography entitled Gender, Place and Culture was subject to a scholarly publishing hoax known as the Grievance studies affair . James A. Lindsay, Peter Boghossian and Helen Pluckrose disingenuously submitted a paper titled "Human Reactions to Rape Culture and Queer Performativity in Urban Dog Parks in Portland, Oregon." [ 22 ] The paper proposed that dog parks are "rape-condoning spaces", and a place of rampant canine rape culture and systemic oppression against "the oppressed dog" through which human attitudes to both problems can be measured and analyzed by applying black feminist criminology . The paper suggested that this could provide insight into training men out of sexual violence and bigotry. The paper has since been retracted.

[ 23 ] The hoax has been criticized as unethical and mean-spirited, as well as race-baiting and misogynist and critics of the hoax have suggested that the hoaxers misrepresented the process of peer review.

[ 24 ] Notable feminist geographers [ edit ] Mona Domosh Rosalyn Deutsche Samantha Fletcher Susan Hanson Dolores Hayden Sarah Holloway Cindi Katz Doreen Massey Linda McDowell Gillian Rose Evelyn Stokes Gill Valentine Rachel Pain See also [ edit ] History of geography Category:Women geographers Critical geography Cultural geography References [ edit ] ^ a b c Rose, Gillian (1993).

Feminism & Geography: The Limits of Geographical Knowledge . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 9780816624188 .

^ a b c d Seager, J., & Nelson, L. (Eds.). (2004). Companion to Feminist Geography. Williston, VT, USA: Blackwell Publishing.

^ Foord, Jo; Gregson, Nicky (1986). "Patriarchy: Towards a Reconceptualisation*".

Antipode .

18 (2): 186– 211.

Bibcode : 1986Antip..18..186F .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8330.1986.tb00362.x .

ISSN 1467-8330 .

^ Gregory, D. (2004). The colonial present. (pp. 18-19). Victoria: Blackwell Publishing.

^ Massey, Doreen (1990).

Space, Place, and Gender . University of Minnesota Press Minneapolis.

^ a b Longhurt, Robyn (2002). "Geography and gender: a 'critical' time?".

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ MaccKenzie, S.; Rose, D. (1983).

Industrial change, the domestic economy and home life .

^ a b McKenzie, J. (2001). Perform or Else : From Discipline to Performance. London, GBR: Routledge.

^ Hanson, Susan; Pratt, Geraldine; Pratt, Geraldine J. (1995).

Gender, work and space . International studies of women and place (1. publ ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-09941-7 .

^ a b Monk, J. (1982).

On not excluding the other half from human geography .

^ Warf, Barney (2010).

Encyclopedia of Geography Critical Human Geography . University British Columbia-Vancouver.

^ McDowell, Linda (1993) "Space, place and gender relations" in Progress in Human Geography 17(2) ^ Moss, Pamela, 2007 Feminisms in Geography: Rethinking Space, Place, and Knowledges Rowman & Littlefield Publishers ISBN 978-0-7425-3829-0 ^ Johnston, R.J. & J. D. Sidaway.  (2004).

Geography and Geographers.

London: Arnold, p. 312.

^ a b McKittrick, Katherine.

Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the Cartographies of Struggle . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2006. p. 92 ^ McKittrick, x.

^ McKittrick, xviii ^ Coddington, Kate (2015).

"Feminist Geographies "Beyond" Gender: de-Coupling Feminist Research and the Gendered Subject" (PDF) .

Geography Compass .

9 (4): 214– 224.

Bibcode : 2015GComp...9..214C .

doi : 10.1111/gec3.12207 .

S2CID 145686614 .

^ McDowell, Linda; Sharp, Joanne (1997).

Space, gender, knowledge: Feminist readings .

^ Peake, Linda; Valentine, Gill (2003). "Editorial".

Gender, Place and Culture .

10 (2): 107– 09.

doi : 10.1080/0966369032000079505 .

S2CID 216641065 .

^ Dias, Karen; Blecha, Jennifer (2007). "Feminism and Social Theory in Geography: An Introduction*".

Professional Geographer .

59 (1): 1– 9.

Bibcode : 2007ProfG..59....1D .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9272.2007.00586.x .

S2CID 144778791 .

^ "Academic Grievance Studies and the Corruption of Scholarship - Areo" .

Areo . 2018-10-03 . Retrieved 2018-10-13 .

^ Wilson, Helen (2018-10-05). "Retracted article: Human reactions to rape culture and queer performativity at urban dog parks in Portland, Oregon".

Gender, Place & Culture : 1– 20.

doi : 10.1080/0966369x.2018.1475346 .

ISSN 0966-369X .

(Retracted, see doi : 10.1080/0966369x.2018.1513216 ) ^ "What the 'Grievance Studies' Hoax Means" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . 2018-10-09 . Retrieved 2018-10-13 .

Further reading [ edit ] Vera Chouinard and Ali Grant. (1995) 'On being not even anywhere near 'the project': ways of putting ourselves in the picture.' Antipode 27(2): 137-166.

Domosh, Mona and Seager, Joni. (eds) (2001) Putting Women in Place: Feminist Geographers Make Sense of the World.

New York: Guilford Publications.

McKittrick, Katherine. Demonic Grounds: Black Women and the Cartographies of Struggle. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2006.

McDowell, Linda (1992) Doing gender: feminisms, feminists and research methods in human geography . Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 17, 399-416.

McDowell, Linda; and Sharp, Joanne P. (eds). (1999).

A Feminist Glossary of Human Geography.

London: Arnold.

McDowell, Linda. (1999) Gender, Identity and Place: understanding feminist geographies.

Cambridge : Polity Press, 1999 Pratt, Geraldine. (2004) "Working Feminism." Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

Gillian Rose (1993) Feminism and Geography: The Limits of Geographical Knowledge Univ. of Minnesota Press Seager, Joni and Nelson, Lise. (eds) (2004) Companion to Feminist Geography (Blackwell Companions to Geography).

Blackwell Publishers, ISBN 1-4051-0186-5 Valentine, Gill. (2004) Public Space and the Culture of Childhood.

London:Ashgate Johnston, R.J. & J.D. Sidaway.  (2004).

Geography and Geographers.

London: Arnold.  Chapter 8: Feminist geographies.

Simonsen, Kirsten. (2007). "Practice, spatiality and embodied emotions: an outline of a geography of practice". Human Affairs, 17(2), 168-181.

Kern, Leslie. (2019). "Feminist City: A Field Guide". Verso Books.

Bridging Worlds – Building Feminist Geographies: Essays in Honour of Janice Monk Edited by Anindita Datta, Janet Momsen and Ann M Oberhauser, Routledge International Studies of Women and Place, Routledge, Oxon, New York ISBN 9781032275628 Routledge Handbook of Gender and Feminist Geographies (2020) Edited by Anindita Datta, Peter Hopkins, Lynda Johnston, Elizabeth Olson and Joseli Maria Silva, Routledge, London and New York, ISBN 978-1-138-05768-5 Scientific journals [ edit ] Gender, Place and Culture - A Journal of Feminist Geography Routledge ISSN 0966-369X Online ISSN 1360-0524 v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_geography&oldid=1299910356 " Categories : Feminism and education Feminism and society Human geography Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles intentionally citing retracted publications Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 03:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist geography 14 languages Add topic

