Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Inscribed figure 9 languages বাংলা Español Galego हिन्दी 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometric figure which is "snugly enclosed" by another figure Inscribed circles of various polygons An inscribed triangle of a circle A tetrahedron (red) inscribed in a cube (yellow) which is, in turn, inscribed in a rhombic triacontahedron (grey).

(Click here for rotating model) In geometry , an inscribed planar shape or solid is one that is enclosed by and "fits snugly" inside another geometric shape or solid.

[ 1 ] To say that "figure F is inscribed in figure G" means precisely the same thing as "figure G is circumscribed about figure F". A circle or ellipse inscribed in a convex polygon (or a sphere or ellipsoid inscribed in a convex polyhedron ) is tangent to every side or face of the outer figure (but see Inscribed sphere for semantic variants). A polygon inscribed in a circle, ellipse, or polygon (or a polyhedron inscribed in a sphere, ellipsoid, or polyhedron) has each vertex on the outer figure; if the outer figure is a polygon or polyhedron, there must be a vertex of the inscribed polygon or polyhedron on each side of the outer figure. An inscribed figure is not necessarily unique in orientation; this can easily be seen, for example, when the given outer figure is a circle, in which case a rotation of an inscribed figure gives another inscribed figure that is congruent to the original one.

Familiar examples of inscribed figures include circles inscribed in triangles or regular polygons , and triangles or regular polygons inscribed in circles. A circle inscribed in any polygon is called its incircle , in which case the polygon is said to be a tangential polygon . A polygon inscribed in a circle is said to be a cyclic polygon , and the circle is said to be its circumscribed circle or circumcircle .

The inradius or filling radius of a given outer figure is the radius of the inscribed circle or sphere, if it exists.

The definition given above assumes that the objects concerned are embedded in two- or three- dimensional Euclidean space , but can easily be generalized to higher dimensions and other metric spaces .

For an alternative usage of the term "inscribed", see the inscribed square problem , in which a square is considered to be inscribed in another figure (even a non-convex one) if all four of its vertices are on that figure.

Properties [ edit ] Every circle has an inscribed triangle with any three given angle measures (summing of course to 180°), and every triangle can be inscribed in some circle (which is called its circumscribed circle or circumcircle).

Every triangle has an inscribed circle, called the incircle .

Every circle has an inscribed regular polygon of n sides, for any n ≥ 3, and every regular polygon can be inscribed in some circle (called its circumcircle).

Every regular polygon has an inscribed circle (called its incircle), and every circle can be inscribed in some regular polygon of n sides, for any n ≥ 3.

Not every polygon with more than three sides has an inscribed circle; those polygons that do are called tangential polygons . Not every polygon with more than three sides is an inscribed polygon of a circle; those polygons that are so inscribed are called cyclic polygons .

Every triangle can be inscribed in an ellipse, called its Steiner circumellipse or simply its Steiner ellipse, whose center is the triangle's centroid .

Every triangle has an infinitude of inscribed ellipses . One of them is a circle, and one of them is the Steiner inellipse which is tangent to the triangle at the midpoints of the sides.

Every acute triangle has three inscribed squares . In a right triangle two of them are merged and coincide with each other, so there are only two distinct inscribed squares. An obtuse triangle has a single inscribed square, with one side coinciding with part of the triangle's longest side.

A Reuleaux triangle , or more generally any curve of constant width , can be inscribed with any orientation inside a square of the appropriate size.

See also [ edit ] Circumconic and inconic Cyclic quadrilateral References [ edit ] ^ Sanders, J. Edward; Zerr, G. B. M. (1908).

"193" .

The American Mathematical Monthly .

15 (10): 189– 190.

doi : 10.2307/2969584 .

JSTOR 2969584 .

External links [ edit ] Inscribed and circumscribed figures. A.B. Ivanov (originator), Encyclopedia of Mathematics .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inscribed_figure&oldid=1298046539 " Category : Elementary geometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inscribed figure 9 languages Add topic

