Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principle 2 System approach 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Electric Turbo Compound (ETC) 3.2 STES 4 Environmental impact 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Energy recovery 4 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Energy recovery" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Berner Tricoil Energy Recovery System atop the Center for Sustainable Landscapes in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Energy recovery includes any technique or method of minimizing the input of energy to an overall system by the exchange of energy from one sub-system of the overall system with another. The energy can be in any form in either subsystem, but most energy recovery systems exchange thermal energy in either sensible or latent form.

In some circumstances the use of an enabling technology, either daily thermal energy storage or seasonal thermal energy storage (STES, which allows heat or cold storage between opposing seasons), is necessary to make energy recovery practicable. One example is waste heat from air conditioning machinery stored in a buffer tank to aid in night time heating .

Principle [ edit ] A common application of this principle is in systems which have an exhaust stream or waste stream which is transferred from the system to its surroundings. Some of the energy in that flow of material (often gaseous or liquid ) may be transferred to the make-up or input material flow. This input mass flow often comes from the system's surroundings, which, being at ambient conditions, are at a lower temperature than the waste stream . This temperature differential allows heat transfer and thus energy transfer, or in this case, recovery. Thermal energy is often recovered from liquid or gaseous waste streams to fresh make-up air and water intakes in buildings , such as for the HVAC systems, or process systems.

System approach [ edit ] Energy consumption is a key part of most human activities. This consumption involves converting one energy system to another , for example: The conversion of mechanical energy to electrical energy, which can then power computers, light, motors etc. The input energy propels the work and is mostly converted to heat or follows the product in the process as output energy. Energy recovery systems harvest the output power and provide this as input power to the same or another process.

An energy recovery system will close this energy cycle to prevent the input power from being released back to nature and rather be used in other forms of desired work.

Examples [ edit ] Heat recovery is implemented in heat sources like e.g. a steel mill . Heated cooling water from the process is sold for heating of homes, shops and offices in the surrounding area.

Regenerative braking is used in electric cars, trains, heavy cranes etc. where the energy consumed when elevating the potential is returned to the electric supplier when released.

Active pressure reduction systems where the differential pressure in a pressurized fluid flow is recovered rather than converted to heat in a pressure reduction valve and released.

Energy recovery ventilation Energy recycling Water heat recycling Heat recovery ventilation Heat recovery steam generator Cyclone Waste Heat Engine [ 1 ] Hydrogen turboexpander-generator Thermal diode Thermal oxidizer Thermoelectric Modules Waste heat recovery units Electric Turbo Compound (ETC) [ edit ] Electric Turbo Compound (ETC) cross section Main article: Electric turbo compound Electric Turbo Compounding (ETC) is a technology solution to the challenge of improving the fuel efficiency of gas and diesel engines by recovering waste energy from the exhaust gases.

STES [ edit ] At a foundry in Sweden waste heat is recovered and stored in a large mass of native bedrock which is penetrated by a cluster of 140 heat exchanger equipped boreholes (155mm diameter) that are 150m deep. This store is used for heating an adjacent factory as needed, even months later.

[ 2 ] The Drake Landing Solar Community in Alberta , Canada uses STES to recover and utilize natural heat that otherwise would be wasted. The community uses a cluster of boreholes in bedrock for interseasonal heat storage, and this enables obtaining 97 percent of the year-round space heating from solar thermal collectors on the garage roofs.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Cold winter temperatures can be recovered by circulating water through a dry cooling tower and using that to chill a deep aquifer or borehole cluster. The chill is later recovered from the storage for summer air conditioning.

[ 5 ] With a coefficient of performance (COP) of 20 to 40, this method of cooling can be ten times more efficient than conventional air conditioning.

[ 6 ] Environmental impact [ edit ] There is a large potential for energy recovery in compact systems like large industries and utilities. Together with energy conservation , it should be possible to dramatically reduce world energy consumption . The effect of this will then be: Reduced number of coal-fired power plants Reduced airborne particles, NO x and CO 2 – improved air quality Slowing or reducing climate change Lower fuel bills on transport Longer availability of crude oil Change of industries and economies not fully researched In 2008 Tom Casten , chairman of Recycled Energy Development , said that " We think we could make about 19 to 20 percent of U.S. electricity with heat that is currently thrown away by industry.

" [ 7 ] A 2007 Department of Energy study found the potential for 135,000 megawatts of combined heat and power (which uses energy recovery) in the U.S., [ 8 ] and a Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory study identified about 64,000 megawatts that could be obtained from industrial waste energy, not counting CHP.

[ 9 ] These studies suggest that about 200,000 megawatts, or 20%, of total power capacity could come from energy recycling in the U.S. Widespread use of energy recycling could therefore reduce global warming emissions by an estimated 20 percent.

[ 10 ] Indeed, as of 2005, about 42% of U.S. greenhouse gas pollution came from the production of electricity and 27% from the production of heat.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] It is difficult to quantify the environmental impact of a global energy recovery implementation in some sectors. The main impediments are: [ citation needed ] Lack of efficient technologies for private homes. Heat recovery systems in private homes can have an efficiency as low as 30% or less. It may be more realistic to use energy conservation like thermal insulation or improved buildings. Many areas are more dependent on forced cooling and a system for extracting heat from dwellings to be used for other uses are not widely available.

Ineffective infrastructure. Heat recovery in particular need a short distance from producer to consumer to be viable. A solution may be to move a large consumer to the vicinity of the producer. This may have other complications.

Transport sector is not ready. With the transport sector using about 20% of the energy supply, most of the energy is spent on overcoming gravity and friction.

Electric cars with regenerative braking seem to be the best candidate for energy recovery. Wind systems on ships are under development. Very little work on the airline industry is known in this field.

See also [ edit ] Efficient energy use Energy conservation Energy recycling DWEER List of energy storage projects Mechanical vapor recompression Pinch analysis Waste-to-energy References [ edit ] ^ Cyclone Power Technologies Website ^ Andersson, O.; Hägg, M. (2008), "Deliverable 10 – Sweden – Preliminary design of a seasonal heat storage for ITT Flygt, Emmaboda, Sweden" , IGEIA – Integration of geothermal energy into industrial applications, pp. 38–56 and 72–76, retrieved 21 April 2013 ^ Wong, Bill (June 28, 2011), "Drake Landing Solar Community" Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine , IDEA/CDEA District Energy/CHP 2011 Conference, Toronto, pp. 1–30, retrieved 21 April 2013 ^ Wong B., Thornton J. (2013).

Integrating Solar & Heat Pumps.

Archived 2013-10-15 at the Wayback Machine Renewable Heat Workshop.

^ Paksoy, H.; Stiles, L. (2009), "Aquifer Thermal Energy Cold Storage System at Richard Stockton College" Archived 2014-01-12 at the Wayback Machine , Effstock 2009 (11th International) – Thermal Energy Storage for Efficiency and Sustainability, Stockholm.

^ Willemsen, G. 1998.

Open-loop geothermal heat pump systems in the USA and aquifer cold storage in the netherlands – similarities and differences.

The Second Stockton International Geothermal Conference. March 16 and 17, 1998 ^ 'Recycling' Energy Seen Saving Companies Money . By David Schaper. May 22, 2008.

Morning Edition .

National Public Radio .

^ Bruce Hedman, Energy and Environmental Analysis/USCHPA, "Combined Heat and Power and Heat Recovery as Energy Efficiency Options", Briefing to Senate Renewable Energy Caucus, September 10, 2007, Washington DC.

^ Bailey, Owen; Worrell, Ernst (2005).

"Clean Energy Technologies: a Preliminary Inventory of the Potential for Electricity Generation, Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory, 4/05" (PDF) .

doi : 10.2172/843010 .

^ "The Energy Information Administration, Existing Capacity by Energy Source, 2006" .

^ "Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . Archived from the original on 2011-12-18.

^ "Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2005" .

U.S. Energy Information Administration .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Energy recovery .

Energy Recovery from the Combustion of Municipal Solid Waste -EPA 26 Projects Funded: Energy Recovery Methods Studied with ASHRAE Undergraduate Grants Heat Recovery in Industry v t e Environmental technology General Appropriate technology Clean technology Climate smart agriculture Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Eco-innovation Ecotechnology Electric vehicle Energy recycling Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Environmental impact design Green building Green vehicle Environmentally healthy community design Public interest design Sustainability Sustainability science Sustainable ( agriculture architecture design development food systems industries procurement refurbishment technology transport ) Pollution Air pollution ( control dispersion modeling ) Industrial ecology Solid waste treatment Waste management Water ( agricultural wastewater treatment industrial wastewater treatment sewage treatment waste-water treatment technologies water purification ) Sustainable energy Efficient energy use Electrification Energy development Energy recovery Fuel ( alternative fuel biofuel carbon-neutral fuel hydrogen technologies ) List of energy storage projects Renewable energy commercialization transition Sustainable lighting Transportation ( electric vehicle hybrid vehicle ) Conservation Building ( green insulation natural sustainable architecture New Urbanism New Classical ) Conservation biology Ecoforestry Efficient energy use Energy conservation Energy recovery Energy recycling Environmental movement Environmental remediation Glass in green buildings Green computing Heat recovery ventilation High-performance buildings Land rehabilitation Nature conservation Permaculture Recycling Water heat recycling Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Energy_recovery&oldid=1303168871 " Categories : Energy recovery Energy policy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 12:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Energy recovery 4 languages Add topic

