Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient Greek philosophers 2 Roman Era 3 Middle Ages 4 Renaissance, Reformation and Enlightenment 5 Modern era Toggle Modern era subsection 5.1 United States 5.2 European Union 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mixed government 13 languages Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Română Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government combining elements of monarchy, aristocracy and democracy "Balance of powers" redirects here. For other uses, see Balance of power .

Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Mixed government (or a mixed constitution ) is a form of government that combines elements of democracy , aristocracy and monarchy , ostensibly making impossible their respective degenerations which are conceived in Aristotle's Politics as anarchy , oligarchy and tyranny . The idea was popularized during classical antiquity in order to describe the stability, the innovation and the success of the republic as a form of government developed under the Roman constitution .

Unlike classical democracy, aristocracy or monarchy, under a mixed government rulers are elected by citizens rather than acquiring their positions by inheritance or sortition (at the Greco-Roman time, sortition was conventionally regarded as the principal characteristic of classical democracy ).

[ 1 ] The concept of a mixed government was studied during the Renaissance and the Age of Reason by Tomás Fernández de Medrano , Niccolò Machiavelli , Giambattista Vico , Immanuel Kant , Thomas Hobbes and others. It was and still is a very important theory among supporters of republicanism . Various schools have described modern polities, such as the European Union and the United States , as possessing mixed constitutions.

Ancient Greek philosophers [ edit ] Plato in his book The Republic divided governments into five basic types (four being existing forms and one being Plato's ideal form, which exists "only in speech"): democracy : government by the many oligarchy : government by the few timocracy : government by the honored or valued tyranny : government by one for himself aristocracy : government by the best (Plato's ideal form of government) Plato found flaws with all existing forms of government and thus concluded that aristocracy, which emphasizes virtue and wisdom, is the purest form of government.

Aristotle largely embraced Plato's ideas and in his Politics three types (excluding timocracy) are discussed in detail. Aristotle considers constitutional government (a combination of oligarchy and democracy under law) the ideal form of government, but he observes that none of the three are healthy and that states will cycle between the three forms in an abrupt and chaotic process known as the kyklos or anacyclosis . In his Politics , he lists a number of theories of how to create a stable government. One of these options is creating a government that is a mix of all three forms of government.

Polybius argued that most states have a government system that is composed of "more than one" of these basic principles, which then was called a mixed government system.

[ 2 ] Roman Era [ edit ] Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The ideal of a mixed government was popularized by Polybius , who saw the Roman Republic as a manifestation of Aristotle's theory (Millar, 2002). Monarchy was embodied by the consuls , the aristocracy by the Senate and democracy by the elections and great public gatherings of the assemblies . Each institution complements and also checks the others, presumably guaranteeing stability and prosperity.  Polybius was very influential and his ideas were embraced by Cicero (Millar, 2002).

Middle Ages [ edit ] St. Thomas Aquinas argued in his letter On Kingship that a monarchy, with some limitations set by an aristocracy and democratic elements, was the best and most just form of government. He also emphasized the monarch's duty to uphold the divine and natural law and abide by limitations imposed on the monarch by custom and existing law.

Renaissance, Reformation and Enlightenment [ edit ] Cicero became extremely well regarded during the Renaissance and many of his ideas were embraced. Polybius was also rediscovered and the positive view of mixed governments became a central aspect of Renaissance political science integrated into the developing notion of republicanism . In order to minimise the misuse of political power, John Calvin advocated a mixture of aristocracy and democracy as the best form of government. He praised the advantages of democracy: "It is an invaluable gift if God allows a people to elect its overlords and magistrates". To further safeguard the rights and liberties of those who are ordinary, Calvin also favored the distribution of power to several political institutions ( separation of powers ).

[ 3 ] Mixed government theories became extremely popular in the Enlightenment and were discussed in detail by Thomas Hobbes , John Locke , Giambattista Vico , Montesquieu , Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Immanuel Kant . Apart from his contemporaries, only Montesquieu became widely acknowledged as the author of a concept of separation of powers (although he wrote rather on their "distribution").

[ 4 ] According to some scholars, for example, Heinrich August Winkler , the notion also influenced the writers of the United States Constitution who based the idea of checks and balances , in part, upon the ancient theory.

[ 5 ] The constitution of Britain during the Victorian Era with a Parliament composed of the Sovereign (monarchy), a House of Lords (aristocracy) and House of Commons (democracy) is a prime example of a mixed constitution in the 19th century.

[ 6 ] This political system had its roots in two closely related developments in seventeenth-century England. First, a series of political upheavals—the Civil War (Puritan Revolution), the exclusion crisis of 1679–1681, and the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Second, an intense public debate about the best, most liberal and most stable form of government. Its main participants were John Milton , John Locke , Algernon Sidney and James Harrington . Their thinking became the basis of the radical Whig ideology. It "described two sorts of threats to political freedom: a general decay of the people which would invite the intrusion of evil and despotic rulers, and the encroachment of executive authority upon the legislature, the attempt that power always made to subdue the liberty protected by mixed government. The American Revolution revealed that this radical Whig understanding of politics had embedded itself deeply in American minds. [...] Radical Whig perceptions of politics attracted widespread support in America because they revived the traditional concerns of a Protestant culture that had always verged on Puritanism . That moral decay threatened free government could not come as a surprise to a people whose fathers had fled England to escape sin".

[ 7 ] 18th-century Whigs, or commonwealthmen , such as John Trenchard , Thomas Gordon and Benjamin Hoadly "praised the mixed constitution of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, and they attributed English liberty to it; and like Locke they postulated a state of nature from which rights arose which the civil polity, created by mutual consent, guaranteed; they argued that a contract formed government and sovereignty resided in the people". So mixed government is the core of both the British form of modern-era democracy, constitutional monarchy , and the American model: republicanism .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The "father" of the American constitution, James Madison , stated in Federalist Paper No. 40 that the Constitutional Convention of 1787 created a mixed constitution. Madison referred to Polybius in Federalist Paper No. 63 .

[ 11 ] However, much more important was that "most" ideas that the American Revolutionaries put into their political system "were a part of the great tradition of the eighteenth-century commonwealthmen, the radical Whig ideology".

[ 12 ] Modern era [ edit ] United States [ edit ] One school of scholarship based mainly in the United States considers mixed government to be the central characteristic of a republic and holds that the United States has rule by the one (the President ; monarchy), (the Senate elected since 1912 democracy ; democracy elected),  ( House of Representatives ; democracy elected).

[ 13 ] Another school of thought in the U.S. says the Supreme Court has taken on the role of "The Best" in recent decades, ensuring a continuing separation of authority by offsetting the direct election of senators and preserving the mixing of democracy,  and monarchy.

[ 14 ] European Union [ edit ] According to a view, in the European Union context the Commission President represents the rule by the one while the Commission represents the aristocratic dimension and the Parliament represents the democratic dimension.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Anacyclosis Constitutionalism Constitutional economics Crowned republic Fusion of powers Rule according to higher law Plato's Republic Aristotle's Politics Separation of powers References [ edit ] ^ Headlam, James Wycliffe (1891).

Election by Lot at Athens . Cambridge, Univ. Press. p.

12 .

^ Heinrich August Winkler (2012), Geschichte des Westens. Von den Anfängen in der Antike bis zum 20. Jahrhundert , Third Edition, Munich (Germany), ISBN 978-3-406-59235-5 , p. 179 ^ Jan Weerda, Calvin , in: Evangelisches Soziallexikon , Third Edition, Stuttgart (Germany), 1958, col. 210 ^ Winkler (2012), pp. 184ff ^ Winkler (2012), p. 301 ^ Heinrich August Winkler (2012), pp. 151ff ^ Robert Middlekauff (2005 ), The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763-1789 , Revised and Expanded Edition, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-531588-2 , pp. 51-52 ^ Winkler (2012), pp. 142ff ^ Middlekauff (2005), pp. 136ff ^ Cf. Thomas S. Kidd (2010), God of Liberty: A Religious History of the American Revolution , New York, N.Y., ISBN 978-0-465-00235-1 , pp. 7-8 ^ Cf. Heinrich August Winkler (2012), pp. 290ff ^ Middlekauff (2005), p. 51 ^ "Constitution Day 2021: Mixed Government, Bicameralism, and the Creation of the U.S. Senate" .

U.S. Senate . September 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 30, 2021 .

^ Rosen, Zivi S. (2006).

"The Irony of Populism: The Republican Shift and the Inevitability of American Aristocracy" (PDF) .

Regent University Law Review .

18 : 287– 89 . Retrieved December 30, 2021 .

^ Explaining the stability of the EU through the concept of a Mixed Constitution .

External links [ edit ] Polybius and the Founding Fathers: the separation of powers De Republica Anglorum , Sir Thomas Smyth's description of the English Constitution under Queen Elizabeth I Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mixed_government&oldid=1306279314 " Categories : Constitutional law Mixed government Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mixed government 13 languages Add topic

