Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Revelation 12:7–10 2 Interpretations Toggle Interpretations subsection 2.1 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 2.2 Seventh-day Adventists 3 Bible parallels 4 Depiction Toggle Depiction subsection 4.1 Literature 4.2 Art 4.3 Music 4.4 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents War in Heaven 15 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Malagasy 日本語 Português Română ไทย Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conflict between Lucifer and Michael in the New Testament This article uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyse them.

Please help improve this article .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Son casts the rebels out of Heaven . 1866 Illustration by Gustave Doré for John Milton 's Paradise Lost .

The Fall of the Rebel Angels; left hand panel of Hieronymus Bosch 's The Haywain Triptych , c. 1500 Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The War in Heaven is a mythical conflict between supernatural forces in traditional Christian cosmology , attested in the Book of Revelation alongside proposed parallels in the Hebrew Bible and the Dead Sea Scrolls . It is described as the result of Satan , who is often identified as the angel Lucifer , rebelling against God and leading to a war between his followers and those still loyal to God, led by the Archangel Michael .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Within the New Testament , the War in Heaven provides basis for the concept of the fallen angels and for Satan's banishment to Hell . The War is frequently featured in works of Christian art , such as John Milton 's epic poem Paradise Lost , which describes it as occurring over the course of three days as a result of God the Father announcing Jesus Christ as His Son .

Revelation 12:7–10 Further information: Revelation 12 and Serpents in the Bible § Ancient serpent Then war broke out in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back. But he was not strong enough, and they lost their place in heaven. The great dragon was hurled down—that ancient serpent called the devil, or Satan, who leads the whole world astray. He was hurled to the earth, and his angels with him.

— Revelation 12:7–10 (NIV) Interpretations The Christian tradition has stories about angelic beings cast down from heaven by God, often presenting the punishment as inflicted in particular on Satan . As a result of linking this motif with the cited passage of the Book of Revelation , the casting of Satan down from heaven, which other versions of the motif present as an action of God himself, has become attributed to the archangel Michael at the conclusion of a war between two groups of angels, of whom (because of the mention of the dragon's tail casting a third of the stars of heaven to the earth) one third are supposed to have been on the side of Satan, in spite of the fact that the casting down of the stars ( Revelation 12:4 ) [ non-scripture source needed ] is recounted as occurring before the start of the "war in heaven" ( Revelation 12:7 ) [ non-scripture source needed ] .

Commentators have attributed Satan's rebellion to a number of motives, all of which stem from his great pride. These motives include: a refusal to bow down to mankind on the occasion of the creation of man —as in the Armenian , Georgian , and Latin versions of the Life of Adam and Eve .

[ 3 ] Islamic tradition holds a similar view: Iblis refuses to bow down to Adam .

[ 4 ] the culmination of a gradual distancing from God through rebellion (an idea of Origen of Alexandria ).

[ 5 ] a declaration by God that all were to be subject to his Son, the Messiah (as in Milton's Paradise Lost ).

[ 6 ] Jonathan Edwards states in his sermon Wisdom Displayed in Salvation : Satan and his angels rebelled against God in heaven, and proudly presumed to try their strength with his. And when God, by his almighty power, overcame the strength of Satan, and sent him like lightning from heaven to hell with all his army; Satan still hoped to get the victory by subtlety[.] [ 7 ] In the Catholic Encyclopedia (1911) article "St. Michael the Archangel", Frederick Holweck wrote: "St. John speaks of the great conflict at the end of time , which reflects also the battle in heaven at the beginning of time." He added that Michael's name "was the war-cry of the good angels in the battle fought in heaven against the enemy and his followers".

[ 8 ] Several modern Bible-commentators view the "war in heaven" in Revelation 12:7–13 as an eschatological vision of the end of time or as a reference to spiritual warfare within the church , rather than (as in Milton 's Paradise Lost ) "the story of the origin of Satan/Lucifer as an angel who rebelled against God in primeval times." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Some commentators have seen the war in heaven as "not literal" but symbolic of events on earth.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) teaches that Revelation 12 concerns an actual event in the pre-mortal existence of man . The Book of Moses , included in the LDS standard works canon, references the war in heaven and Satan's origin as a fallen angel of light.

[ 15 ] The concept of a war in heaven at the end of time became an addendum to the story of Satan's fall at the genesis of time—a narrative which included Satan and a third of all of heaven's angels. Evidence for this interpretation comes from the phrase "the devil and his angels"; [ 16 ] this specific phrasing became paramount to the reinforcement of the notion that people associated angels with the devil preceding the writing of Revelation.

The LDS Church believes that the war in heaven started in the premortal existence when Heavenly Father ( Elohim ) created the Plan of salvation to enable humanity to become like him. Jesus Christ as per the plan was the Savior and those who followed the plan would come to Earth to experience mortality and progress toward eternal life. Lucifer, another spirit son of God, rebelled against the plan's reliance on agency and proposed an altered plan that negated agency. Thus he became Satan, and he and his followers were cast out of heaven. This denied them participating in God's plan, the privileges of receiving a physical body, and experiencing mortality.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Seventh-day Adventists In Seventh-day Adventist theology , the Great Controversy theme refers to the cosmic battle between Jesus Christ and Satan , also played out on earth.  One of the 28 fundamental beliefs of Seventh-day Adventists states: 8.

Great Controversy : "All humanity is now involved in a great controversy between Christ and Satan regarding the character of God, His law, and His sovereignty over the universe. This conflict originated in heaven when a created being, endowed with freedom of choice, in self-exaltation became Satan, God's adversary. He led into rebellion a portion of the angels. He introduced the spirit of rebellion into this world when he led Adam and Eve into sin. This human sin resulted in the distortion of the image of God in humanity, the disordering of the created world, and its eventual devastation at the time of the worldwide flood. Observed by the whole creation, this world became the arena of the universal conflict, out of which the God of love will ultimately be vindicated. To assist His people in this controversy, Christ sends the Holy Spirit and the loyal angels to guide, protect, and sustain them in the way of salvation. (Rev. 12:4-9; Isa. 14:12-14; Eze. 28:12-18; Gen. 3; Rom. 1:19-32; 5:12-21; 8:19-22; Gen. 6-8; 2 Peter 3:6; 1 Cor. 4:9; Heb. 1:14.)" [ 19 ] The chief proponent of the "war in heaven" among SDAs was Ellen G. White, who expanded the concept in her book, Great Controversy between Christ and Satan (1884), where she reinterprets and extends Milton's portrayal in Paradise Lost as a metaphor for religious conflict throughout the Christian age.

Bible parallels See also: Ezekiel's cherub in Eden Parallels are drawn to the passage in Isaiah 14:4–17 that mentions the "son of the morning" who had "fallen from heaven" and was "cast down to the earth". In verse 12 of this passage, the Hebrew word that referred to the morning star was translated into Latin as lucifer . With the application to the Devil of the morning-star story, "Lucifer" was then popularly applied to him as a proper name. The term lucifer , the Latin name (literally "Light-Bearer" or "Light-Bringer") for the morning star (the planet Venus in its morning appearances), is often given to the Devil in popular stories. The brilliancy of the morning star—which appears brighter than all other stars, but is not seen during the night proper—may have given rise to myths such as the Babylonian story of Ethana and Zu, who was led by his pride to strive for the highest seat among the star-gods on the northern mountain of the gods (an image present also in Ezekiel 28:14 ), but was hurled down by the supreme ruler of the Babylonian Olympus.

[ 20 ] Stars were then regarded as living celestial beings.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The Jewish Encyclopedia states that the myth concerning the morning star was transferred to Satan by the first century before the Common Era , citing in support of this view the Life of Adam and Eve and the Slavonic Book of Enoch 29:4, 31:4, where Satan- Sataniel is described as having been one of the archangels. Because he contrived "to make his throne higher than the clouds over the earth and resemble 'My power' on high", Satan-Sataniel was hurled down, with his angels, and since then he has been flying in the air continually above the abyss . According to Jewish thought, the passage in Isaiah was used to prophesy the fate of the King of Babylon , who is described as aiming to rival God.

[ 22 ] Depiction The motif of the fall of Satan and his angels can be found in Christian angelology and Christian art , and the concept of fallen angels (who, for rebelling against God, were downgraded and condemned to being earthbound) is widespread.

[ 23 ] Literature Anatole France in the 1914 novel La Révolte des Anges adapted the Christian references to make a parable about revolts and revolutionary movements.

In Milton's Paradise Lost (1674), the angel Lucifer leads a rebellion against God before the Fall of Man . A third of the angels, including pagan gods such as Moloch and Belial , are hurled by God from Heaven.

[ 24 ] Art The subject of the War in Heaven has been depicted by many noted artists, both in paintings and in sculptures, including works by Pieter Paul Rubens , Guido Reni and Jacob Epstein .

War in Heaven War in Heaven by Pieter Paul Rubens , 1619 Michael and Satan, by Guido Reni , c. 1636 St Michael's Victory over the Devil , by Jacob Epstein at Coventry Cathedral The fall of the rebel angels , by Charles Le Brun , after 1680 Michael battles the rebel angels, by Sebastiano Ricci , c. 1720 Michael battles the rebel angels, by Johann Georg Unruhe 1793 Detail, Georg Unruhe Michael and the Dragon.

Die Bibel in Bildern (Revelation) engraving by Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld , 1860.

1866 Gustave Doré illustration for Paradise Lost , depicting a melee between the angels.

Music A choral antiphon for the feast of Michaelmas , Factum est Silentium , paraphrases the events described in Revelation 8:1 and Revelation 12:7–12 : Factum est silentium in caelo, Dum committeret bellum draco cum Michaele Archangelo.

Audita est vox millia millium dicentium: Salus, honor et virtus omnipotenti Deo.

Millia millium minestrabant ei et decies centena millia assistebant ei.

Alleluia.

Variant 1: Dum draco committeret bellum et Michael pugnavit cum eo et fecit victoriam.

There was silence in heaven When the dragon fought with the Archangel Michael.

The voice of a thousand thousand was heard saying: Salvation, honour and power be to almighty God.

A thousand thousand ministered to him and ten hundreds of thousands stood before him.

Alleluia.

Variant 1: For a serpent was waging war; and Michael fought with him and emerged victorious.

The antiphon has been set as a choral motet by a number of composers including Felice Anerio , Richard Dering , Melchior Franck , Alessandro Grandi and Costanzo Porta .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] A hymn written by the German poet and hymnodist Friedrich Spee in 1621, " Unüberwindlich starker Held " ("Invincible strong hero"), also makes reference to the Archangel Michael overcoming the dragon.

[ 27 ] Bach's cantata Es erhub sich ein Streit, BWV 19 is on this subject.

Other Other pieces of media to have referenced the War in Heaven, either as direct depictions or textual allusions, include Warhammer 40K , Babylon 5 and the Doom series.

The War in Heaven is a 1999 Christian-themed Doom clone developed by Eternal Warriors and published by ValuSoft.

[ 28 ] See also Wikimedia Commons has media related to War in Heaven .

Æsir–Vanir War Asura Devas Gigantomachy War between angels and jinn Theomachy Titanomachy References ^ Revelation 12:7–9 ^ Joan Young Gregg (1997).

Devils, Women, and Jews: Reflections of the Other in Medieval Sermon Stories .

State University of New York . p. 28.

ISBN 0-7914-3417-6 .

^ Sections 14–15 of the Armenian Archived 2 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Georgian , and Latin versions of the Life of Adam and Eve ^ Quran 7:11–12 Archived 22 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (Oxford University Press 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 ), article Origen ^ Book 5, lines 654–668 "Paradise Lost: Book V (1667)" . Archived from the original on 16 May 2008 . Retrieved 29 June 2008 .

[...] but not so wak'd / Satan, so call him now, his former name / Is heard no more [in] Heav'n; he of the first, / If not the first Arch-Angel, great in Power, / In favour and præeminence, yet fraught / With envie against the Son of God, that day / Honourd by his great Father, and proclaimd / Messiah King anointed, could not beare / Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaird. / Deep malice thence conceiving & disdain, / Soon as midnight brought on the duskie houre / Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolv'd / With all his Legions to dislodge, and leave / Unworshipt, unobey'd the Throne supream / Contemptuous [...].

^ Jonathan Edwards; Sereno Edwards Dwight; David Brainerd (1830).

The Works of President Edwards: With a Memoir of His Life ...

G. & C. & H. Carvill. p. 87.

^ Holweck, Frederick (1911).

"St. Michael the Archangel" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York . Retrieved 28 January 2010 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ M. Eugene Boring; Fred B. Craddock (2004).

The People's New Testament Commentary . Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press. pp.

799– 800.

ISBN 0-664-22754-6 .

The ejection of the Accuser from heaven is not (as in Milton's Paradise Lost ) the story of the origin of Satan as an angel who rebelled against God in primeval times. Neither here nor elsewhere do biblical authors give speculative 'explanations' about the origin of Satan or evil. Such a myth had developed in pre-Christian Judaism (1–2 En.), and there are fragmentary echoes of it in the New Testament (Jude 6; 2 Pet. 2:4). That is not the picture in this story, which does not take place in primeval times but at the eschatological time of the establishment of God's kingdom by the life, death, and exaltation of Jesus [...].

^ Compare: "Revelation 12 Matthew Henry's Commentary on the Whole Bible" . Archived from the original on 21 May 2008 . Retrieved 28 July 2008 .

It is generally agreed by the most learned expositors that the narrative we have in this and the two following chapters, from the sounding of the seventh trumpet to the opening of the vials, is not a prediction of things to come, but rather a recapitulation and representation of things past [...].

^ Compare: "Revelation 12 Jamieson-Fausset-Brown Bible Commentary" . Archived from the original on 21 May 2008 . Retrieved 19 June 2008 .

It is generally agreed by the most learned expositors that the narrative we have in this and the two following chapters, from the sounding of the seventh trumpet to the opening of the vials, is not a prediction of things to come, but rather a recapitulation and representation of things past, which, as God would have the apostle to foresee while future, he would have him to review now that they were passed, that he might have a more perfect idea of them in his mind, and might observe the agreement between the prophecy and that Providence that is always fulfilling the scriptures.

^ "Revelation 12 Matthew Henry's Commentary" .

Mhc.biblecommenter.com . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

12:7–11 The attempts of the dragon proved unsuccessful against the church, and fatal to his own interests. The seat of this war was in heaven; in the church of Christ, the kingdom of heaven on earth. The parties were Christ, the great Angel of the covenant, and his faithful followers; and Satan and his instruments. The strength of the church is in having the Lord Jesus for the Captain of their salvation. Pagan idolatry, which was the worship of devils, was cast out of the empire by the spreading of Christianity. [...] The servants of God overcame Satan by the blood of the Lamb, as the cause. By the word of their testimony: the powerful preaching of the gospel is mighty, through God, to pull down strongholds. By their courage and patience in suffering: they loved not their lives so well but they could lay them down in Christ's cause. These were the warriors and the weapons by which Christianity overthrew the power of pagan idolatry; and if Christians had continued to fight with these weapons, and such as these, their victories would have been more numerous and glorious, and the effects more lasting. The redeemed overcame by a simple reliance on the blood of Christ, as the only ground of their hopes.

^ One hundred and seventy-three sermons on several subjects : Volume 1, p. 137 Samuel Clarke , John Clarke, J. Leathley ((Dublin)), 1751 "7. that X. there was War in Heaven; Michael and his Angels *- fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels ... But the Meaning of this Passage is not literal, as if the Devil had the power to fight against the Angels or Ministers of God's government" ^ Smith, Charles Edward (1890). "The Church and the Dragon".

The World Lighted: A Study of the Apocalypse . New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp.

128– 129.

What, now, is the war in heaven? Of course not literal war, nor literally in heaven; not the actual clash of arms between Michael and his angels, and Satan and his wicked cohorts. But something on earth worthy to be represented by such a Titanic contest. What can that be, if not the contest in the visible church concerning true and false doctrine?

^ Top, Brent L.

(1992).

"War in Heaven" . In Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mormonism . New York: Macmillan Publishing. pp.

1546– 1547.

ISBN 0-02-879602-0 .

OCLC 24502140 .

^ Matthew 25:41 ^ "War in Heaven" . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . Retrieved 31 May 2020 .

^ "Plan of Salvation" .

^ "Fundamental Beliefs" .

Seventh-day Adventist Church . Archived from the original on 10 March 2006 . Retrieved 15 September 2006 .

^ a b "Lucifer" .

JewishEncyclopedia.com . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

The brilliancy of the morning star, which eclipses all other stars, but is not seen during the night, may easily have given rise to a myth such as was told of Ethana and Zu: he was led by his pride to strive for the highest seat among the star-gods on the northern mountain of the gods (comp. Ezek. xxviii. 14; Ps. xlviii. 3 [A.V. 2]), but was hurled down by the supreme ruler of the Babylonian Olympus. Stars were regarded throughout antiquity as living celestial beings (Job xxxviii. 7).

^ Job 38:7 ^ "Lucifer" .

JewishEncyclopedia.com . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ "Fall of Angels" .

JewishEncyclopedia.com . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ "Paradise Lost: Book 1" . Archived from the original on 15 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 July 2017 .

^ Shrock, Dennis (2009).

"2. the Renaissance Era: Richard Dering (Deering) ca. 1580-1630" .

Choral Repertoire . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199716623 .

^ Gant, Andrew (2017).

O Sing Unto the Lord: A History of English Church Music . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226469621 .

^ Keller, Karl.

"Das St. Michaelslied von Friedrich Spee und "Der deutsche Michel" " (PDF) .

historicum.net (in German). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2014 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

^ "The War in Heaven" .

www.gamevortex.com . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

Further reading Christoph Auffarth, Loren T. Stuckenbruck (Eds.): The Fall of the Angels . Brill, Leiden 2004 (Themes in Biblical Narrative, 6), ISBN 90-04-12668-6 .

Mareike Hartmann: Höllen-Szenarien. Eine Analyse des Höllenverständnisses verschiedener Epochen anhand von Höllendarstellungen . Lit, Münster 2005 (Ästhetik – Theologie – Liturgik, 32), ISBN 3-8258-7681-0 .

Neil Forsyth, The Old Enemy: Satan & the Combat Myth (Princeton University Press) 1987.

External links The Fall of Satan , beliefnet.com The Fall of Angels Archived 25 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine , cfdevotionals.org A Rebellion in Heaven Archived 14 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , christiancourier.com Lucifer , Jewish Encyclopedia Fall of Angels , Jewish Encyclopedia War in Heaven , warinheaven.com v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐gwlpb
Cached time: 20250814215607
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.780 seconds
Real time usage: 1.001 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2571/1000000
Revision size: 27774/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 111695/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2652/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 118971/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.513/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16761270/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  877.068      1 -total
 30.33%  265.987      1 Template:Reflist
 15.90%  139.476      6 Template:Cite_book
 11.56%  101.395      1 Template:Lang
  9.11%   79.871      1 Template:Christian_Eschatology
  8.75%   76.785      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.12%   71.188      1 Template:Religious_text_primary
  7.79%   68.346      1 Template:Ambox
  7.47%   65.546      1 Template:Short_description
  7.36%   64.556      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10254657:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215607 and revision id 1303530182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=War_in_Heaven&oldid=1303530182 " Categories : War in Heaven Biblical phrases Book of Revelation Christian cosmology Christian mythology Christian terminology Eschatology Michael (archangel) War in mythology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles lacking reliable references from January 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from January 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from February 2024 Articles containing French-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 14:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents War in Heaven 15 languages Add topic

