Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Core issues Toggle Core issues subsection 1.1 Intersectionality 1.2 Motherhood and the private sphere 1.3 Toxic masculinity 1.4 Gender pay gap 2 Sub-theories of socialist feminism Toggle Sub-theories of socialist feminism subsection 2.1 Anarcha-feminism 2.2 Marxist feminism 3 Later theoretical works Toggle Later theoretical works subsection 3.1 Zillah R. Eisenstein 3.2 Donna Haraway and "A Cyborg Manifesto" 3.3 Autonomist feminism 3.4 Material feminism 3.5 Ecological feminism or Ecofeminism 4 Praxis Toggle Praxis subsection 4.1 Women's liberation in real socialism 4.2 Chicago Women's Liberation Union 4.3 Women's International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell 4.4 Big Flame 5 Theorists 6 Socialist feminist groups 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Socialist feminism 37 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ideology that seeks liberation from economic and cultural sources of women's oppression This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( December 2021 ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article appears to be slanted towards recent events .

Please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events.

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Socialist feminism rose in the 1960s and 1970s as an offshoot of the feminist movement and New Left that focuses upon the interconnectivity of the patriarchy and capitalism .

[ 1 ] However, the ways in which women's private, domestic, and public roles in society has been conceptualized, or thought about, can be traced back to Mary Wollstonecraft 's A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) and William Thompson 's utopian socialist work in the 19th century.

[ 2 ] Ideas about overcoming the patriarchy by coming together in female groups to talk about personal problems stem from Carol Hanisch. This was done in an essay in 1969 which later coined the term 'the personal is political.' [ 3 ] This was also the time that second wave feminism started to surface which is really when socialist feminism kicked off. Socialist feminists argue that liberation can only be achieved by working to end both the economic and cultural sources of women's oppression .

[ 4 ] Socialist feminism is a two-pronged theory that broadens Marxist feminism 's argument for the role of capitalism in the oppression of women and radical feminism 's theory of the role of gender and the patriarchy. Socialist feminists reject radical feminism's main claim that patriarchy is the only, or primary, source of oppression of women.

[ 5 ] Rather, Socialist feminists assert that women are oppressed due to their financial dependence on males. Women are subjects to male domination within capitalism due to an uneven balance in wealth. They see economic dependence as the driving force of women's subjugation to men. Further, Socialist feminists see women's liberation as a necessary part of a larger quest for social, economic, and political justice. Socialist feminists attempted to integrate the fight for women's liberation with the struggle against other oppressive systems based on race, class, sexual orientation, or economic status.

[ 6 ] Socialist feminism draws upon many concepts found in Marxism , such as a historical materialist point of view, which means that they relate their ideas to the material and historical conditions of people's lives. Thus, Socialist feminists consider how the sexism and gendered division of labor of each historical era is determined by the economic system of the time. Those conditions are largely expressed through capitalist and patriarchal relations. Socialist feminists reject the Orthodox Marxist notion that class and class struggle are the only defining aspects of history and economic development.

[ 7 ] Although Marx may have prioritised class oppression as the subject of his study and did not talk about female emancipation often, he did treat it as an issue in its own right. One place that this is shown is in his third Parisian manuscript of 1844, where he states that "marriage is a form of exclusive private property", and condones treating women "as the prey and servant of social lust".

[ 8 ] Despite some claims, he has never been found to argue that the creation of a classless society would lead to gender oppression vanishing; instead evidence exists which suggest that he viewed female struggles as something independent.

[ 9 ] However due to his writing on women being scarce, the tradition and works of Marxist Feminism is one constructed through the works of the many feminist Marxists that came after; either through reinterpreting his original writings or providing their own theories to the foundation he provided. Much of this work has gone towards specifying how gender and class work together to create distinct forms of oppression and privilege for women and men of each class. For example, they observe that women's class status is generally derivative of her husband's class or occupational status, e.g. a secretary that marries her boss assumes his class status.

In 1972, " Socialist Feminism: A Strategy for the Women's Movement ", which is believed to be the first publication to use the term socialist feminism, was published by the Hyde Park Chapter of the Chicago Women's Liberation Union ( Heather Booth , Day Creamer, Susan Davis, Deb Dobbin, Robin Kaufman, and Tobey Klass).

[ 10 ] Other socialist feminists, notably two long-lived American organizations Radical Women and the Freedom Socialist Party , point to the classic Marxist writings of Frederick Engels ( The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State ) and August Bebel ( Woman and Socialism ) as a powerful explanation of the link between gender oppression and class exploitation. In the decades following the Cold War , feminist writer and scholar Sarah Evans says that the socialist feminist movement has lost traction in the West due to a common narrative that associates socialism with totalitarianism and dogma.

[ 11 ] Post-1970, the socialist feminist movement continued to grow. In "Socialist Women: European Socialist Feminism in the Nineteenth & early Twentieth Centuries," [ 12 ] by Elizabeth Lapovsky Kennedy , social feminism is defined as "women who saw the root of sexual oppression in the existence of private property and who envisioned a radically transformed society in which man would exploit neither man nor women [ 1 ] " The equality described has to do with a transformed society in which both sexes are equal and given the same opportunities despite any physiological differences. Going forward it is described to need a total change in both the economic and social system to create the lasting improvement that the socialist feminism movement is looking for.

Kristen Ghodsee argues in her book Why Women Have Better Sex Under Socialism that free markets discriminate against women as big bosses consider women to be less reliable, weaker and more emotional which leads to the gender pay gap as they need financial incentives to employ them.

[ 13 ] George Bernard Shaw quotes "Capitalism acts on women as a continual bribe to enter into sex relations for money".

[ 14 ] He also claims many women take part in work within the household but this is invisible as far as the market is concerned.

Core issues [ edit ] Intersectionality [ edit ] Ueno Chizuko , giving a talk at the University of Tokyo, in 2014 He Zhen , socialist feminist, born in 1884 Socialist feminist Claudia Jones worked to incorporate Black women, other working women of color, and their needs into The Communist Party in the 1930s. This is because The Communist Party tended to default to issues of the white, male proletariat. Jones theoretical background rests at the intersection of Marxism , Black Nationalism , and Feminism and she is credited with theorizing triple oppression , the concept that Black and Brown women experience oppression based on race, class, and gender. Jones further argues that white women, much less Black and Brown working women, would never be liberated if the structures of colonialism were not abolished and Black Nationalism were not adopted.

[ 15 ] Feminist historian Linda Gordon asserts that socialist feminism is inherently intersectional, at least to a certain degree, because it takes into account both gender and class. Gordon says that because the foundation of socialist feminism rests on multiple axes, socialist feminism has a history of intersectionality that can be traced back to a period decades before Dr.

Kimberlé Crenshaw first articulated the concept of intersectionality in 1989.

[ 16 ] According to Gordon, socialist feminism of the 1980s presaged the concept of intersectionality by examining the overlapping structures that produce an individual's experience of oppression.

[ 17 ] Feminist scholar and women's studies professor Elizabeth Lapovsky Kennedy says that this broader analysis of societal structures began with socialist feminism and served as a catalyst for feminist scholarship. Kennedy says that many of the first women's studies programs were established by socialist feminist theorists.

[ 1 ] Despite the claims of being a homogenizing philosophy that erases difference of identity, [ 18 ] socialist feminism's inherent approach to difference of identities, through an analysis of economic exploitation of all, is both recognized and enhanced by Crenshaw's intersectionality.

Despite the alleged presence of intersectionality in socialist feminism, many feminists, particularly women of color, critique the movement for perceived deficiencies in regards to racial equity. In Kennedy's account of socialist feminism's impact on women's studies, she says that a lack of Black voices in feminist academia contributed to whitewashing of women's studies programs and courses.

[ 1 ] Kum-Kum Bhavani , a professor at University of California Santa Barbara, and Margaret Coulson, a socialist feminist scholar, assert that racism in the socialist feminist movement stems from the failure of many white feminists to recognize the institutional nature of racism. According to Bhavani and Coulson, race, class, and gender are inextricably linked, and the exclusion of any one of these factors from one's worldview would result in an incomplete understanding of the systems of privilege and oppression they say constitute our society.

[ 19 ] Kathryn Harriss, a feminist scholar from the United Kingdom, describes what she sees as the shortcomings of the socialist feminist movement of the 1980s in the United Kingdom. Harriss describes marginalized women's grievances with the Women's Liberation Movement . She says many lesbian women criticized the movement for its domination by heterosexual feminists who perpetuated heterosexism in the movement. Similarly, Black women asserted that they were deprived a voice due to the overwhelming majority of white women in the WLM advocating widely held views regarding violence against women, the family, and reproductive rights that failed to account for the distinct struggles faced by women of color.

[ 20 ] Motherhood and the private sphere [ edit ] Theorists Anna Wheeler and William Thompson , in The Appeal of One Half the Human Race, Women, Against the Pretensions of the Other Half, Men, to Retain Them in Political, and thence in Civil and Domestic Slavery , published in 1825, describe how women's work contributes to capitalism's continuance. They assert that cooking, cleaning, doing laundry, and all other activities that are deemed domestic work do constitute as actual work. Wheeler and Thompson assert that people, or labor, are needed for capitalism to function and that without women producing children as well as fulfilling these domestic activities, capitalism would fail.

[ 2 ] Flora Tristian , French socialist activist, in her piece "Why I mention Women" published in 1843, argued that women and girls do not receive education because they are tasked with domestic duties. Girls and women, according to Tristan, thus cannot obtain gainful employment outside of the domestic sphere due to their neglect in their education and forced preoccupation with cleaning, cooking, and tending to children.

[ 2 ] Socialist feminists highlight how motherhood and the gendered division of labor grows "naturally" from women's role as mothers, is the source of women's exclusion from the public sphere, and creates women's economic dependence on men. They assert that there is nothing natural about the gendered division of labor and show that the expectation that women perform all or most reproductive labor , i.e. labor associated with birthing and raising children but also the cleaning, cooking, and other tasks necessary to support human life, deny women the capacity to participate fully in economic activity outside the home. In order to free themselves from the conditions of work as a mother and housekeeper, socialist feminists such as Charlotte Perkins Gilman saw the professionalization of housework as key. This would be done by hiring professional nannies and housekeepers to take the load of domestic work away from the woman in the house.

[ 21 ] Perkins Gilman also recommended the redesign of homes in ways that would maximize their potential for creativity and leisure for women as well as men, i.e. emphasizing the need for rooms like studios and studies and eliminating kitchens and dining rooms. These changes would necessitate the communalization of meal preparation and consumption outside the home and free women from their burden of providing meals on a house-by-house scale.

Toxic masculinity [ edit ] Main article: Toxic masculinity This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Socialist feminism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Socialist feminists claim that toxic masculinity is not only damaging to men but also women and non-binary people. Toxic masculinity is the idea that men should behave in a specific way, most commonly these behaviors are strong and with hold emotion (Salam, Maya). For example, in Latinx culture toxic masculinity is referred to as "Machismo" (FEM Magazine). Machismo keeps men in their designated masculine roles while women are given the submissive role. Machismo enforces the idea that men are the superior gender and women are second class citizens. The pressure on men to adhere to gender roles and in particular a gender binary feeds to the crisis of male suicide, rape culture and the normalization of violence. Socialist feminist politics aims to say this normalized behavior is just another part of gender construction the patriarchy has just created to harm women.

Toxic masculinity can be observed in everyday life such as wikt:" locker room talk " (FEM Magazine). Locker room talk is an excuse for men to spew comments about women that are most commonly sexual. Because these men are in a certain environment, this behavior is normalized. However, locker room talk is extremely harmful especially because it enforces the gender hierarchy that socialist feminism aims to diminish. Another example in which exemplifies toxic masculinity is the phrase "boys will be boys". This term is usually used to justify an action of a male that is rude or inappropriate which in turn harms women because it makes exceptions for men to behavior however they please. These examples enforce the behaviors that are sexist and give a false idea to men that they are allowed to treat women however they want.

Toxic masculinity has become a more popular issue to discuss among feminists due to the increase of popular male influencers that promote the behaviors and mindsets of toxic masculinity. Males will go on social media platforms such as TikTok, and share their harmful ideas about how women should be behaving. This has become a major issue among feminists today, and trends on TikTok have been curated to combat toxic masculinity. For example, the #97% trend was created for women to share their stores about sexual harassment. It states that 97% of women will experience some form of sexual harassment in their lifetime; therefore, this trend shows that women suffer immensely at the hands of men.

Gender pay gap [ edit ] Socialist feminist theories have been used to highlight the economic disparities amongst women on a global scale. Contemporary socialist feminists have shifted their concerns from uncompensated house labor to the insufficient pay women receive for work done outside the home. Although some women have secured high-paying male-dominated jobs, most find work in service, clerical, agriculture, and light industrial work.

[ 22 ] Feminist philosopher Rosemarie Tong presents three common reasons for the gender wage gap: "the concentration of women in low-paying, female-dominated jobs; the high percentage of women who work part-time rather than full-time; and outright wage discrimination against women." [ 22 ] The gender pay gap has been produced and sustained through patriarchal and capitalist conditions. The feminization and devaluation of service-based jobs have subjected women to low wages. The lack of access women have to alternative employment which may harbor higher pay, has increased the wage gap. Households that cannot hire additional aid for domestic duties limit the hours women are able to work outside their homes—having to do both outside and inside labor results in the uncompensated "second shift", expanding the gap. Women's work is considered "secondary wages" under patriarchy.

[ 22 ] Even women who can work full-time and do the same jobs as men are not paid equally. Tong claims that "women are paid less simply because they are women, a very disturbing thought to say the least." [ 22 ] The gender pay gap is an issue that is especially prevalent in the United States. In Feminist Policy and Human Nature , [ 23 ] Allison Jagger describes the biological differences between women and men that would affect job performance namely "Most evidently, women's reproductive functions may mean that women have needs for pregnancy leave, maternity services and arrangements for easy access to their nursing babies." [ 23 ] This fact insists that it is not only important but it is necessary for the workplace to incorporate this fairly into contracts. Forcing women to take unpaid maternity leave goes into the issue of the gender wage gap since women have reproductive needs that go far beyond men but are not compensated for that.

In looking at the amount of unpaid labor that women have worked over centuries is a major issue regarding unpaid labor in the house and in childcare. Women in capitalism are not compensated for their role in the household including housework, cooking, cleaning, childcare and the cost of carrying and delivering a child. "Contracts for husbands to pay their wives for domestic services have been found invalid by the courts. If housewives do not like the conditions of their work they are hardly free to move to another household; instead, they are tied by an elaborate legal contract which can only be broken on special grounds. Marriage is, in fact, a relation that is remarkably similar to the feudal relation of vassalage; it provides a means for exchanging support and protection from the husband in return for services and devotion from the wife." The idea of a contract for husbands to pay their wives is an exaggerated circumstance yet for decades it was the expectation that the woman would be considered a housewife and the man would be the breadwinner and make decisions for the family. This idea of women's unpaid labor is more than simply the housework and childcare services; it's the fact that the labor housewives did was considered compulsory instead of labor. This is the type of thinking and mentality that the socialist feminism and women who want more of these In 2017, there was an international women's strike protesting the unfair treatment of women in today's society.

[ 24 ] The strike included over 50 countries and occurred on international women's day. The strikes in each country were focused on an injustice in that specific country. In the United States women protested by not working or spending money to show how much influence women have.

[ 25 ] Sub-theories of socialist feminism [ edit ] Anarcha-feminism [ edit ] Anarcha-feminism , also called anarchist feminism and anarcho-feminism, combines anarchism with feminism . It generally views patriarchy as a manifestation of involuntary coercive hierarchy that should be replaced by decentralized free association . Anarcha-feminists believe that the struggle against patriarchy is an essential part of class struggle , and the anarchist struggle against the state . In essence, the philosophy sees anarchist struggle as a necessary component of feminist struggle and vice versa.

L. Susan Brown claims that "as anarchism is a political philosophy that opposes all relationships of power, it is inherently feminist".

[ 26 ] Bakunin opposed patriarchy and the way the law "subjects [women] to the absolute domination of the man". He argued that "[e]qual rights must belong to men and women" so that women can "become independent and be free to forge their own way of life". Bakunin foresaw the end of "the authoritarian juridical family " and "the full sexual freedom of women." [ 27 ] Anarcha-feminism began with late 19th and early 20th century authors and theorists such as anarchist feminists Emma Goldman , Voltairine de Cleyre and Lucy Parsons .

[ 28 ] In the Spanish Civil War , an anarcha-feminist group, Mujeres Libres (Free Women) linked to the Federación Anarquista Ibérica , organized to defend both anarchist and feminist ideas, [ 29 ] while the prominent Spanish anarchist and feminist leader Federica Montseny held that the "emancipation of women would lead to a quicker realization of the social revolution" and that "the revolution against sexism would have to come from intellectual and militant 'future-women.' According to this Nietzschean concept of Federica Montseny's, women could realize through art and literature the need to revise their own roles." [ 30 ] In Argentina, Virginia Bolten is responsible for the publication of a newspaper called La Voz de la Mujer ( The Woman's Voice ), which was published nine times in Rosario between 8 January 1896 and 1 January 1897, and was revived, briefly, in 1901. A similar paper with the same name was reportedly published later in Montevideo , which suggests that Bolten may also have founded and edited it after her deportation.

[ 31 ] "La Voz de la Mujer described itself as "dedicated to the advancement of Communist Anarchism". Its central theme was that of the multiple nature of women's oppression. An editorial asserted, "We believe that in present-day society nothing and nobody has a more wretched situation than unfortunate women." Women, they said, were doubly oppressed—by bourgeois society and by men. Its feminism can be seen from its attack on marriage and upon male power over women. Its contributors, like anarchist feminists elsewhere, developed a concept of oppression that focused on gender oppression. Marriage was a bourgeois institution which restricted women's freedom, including their sexual freedom. Marriages entered into without love, fidelity maintained through fear rather than desire, oppression of women by men they hated—all were seen as symptomatic of the coercion implied by the marriage contract. It was this alienation of the individual's will that the anarchist feminists deplored and sought to remedy, initially through free love and then, and more thoroughly, through social revolution." [ 32 ] Mujeres Libres was an anarchist women's organization in Spain that aimed to empower working class women. It was founded in 1936 by Lucía Sánchez Saornil , Mercedes Comaposada and Amparo Poch y Gascón and had approximately 30,000 members. The organization was based on the idea of a "double struggle" for women's liberation and social revolution and argued that the two objectives were equally important and should be pursued in parallel. In order to gain mutual support, they created networks of women anarchists. Flying day-care centres were set up in efforts to involve more women in union activities.

[ 33 ] Lucía Sánchez Saornil , was a Spanish poet, militant anarchist and feminist . She is best known as one of the founders of Mujeres Libres and served in the Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT) and Solidaridad Internacional Antifascista (SIA). By 1919, she had been published in a variety of journals, including Los Quijotes , Tableros , Plural , Manantial and La Gaceta Literaria . Working under a male pen name , she was able to explore lesbian themes [ 34 ] at a time when homosexuality was criminalized and subject to censorship and punishment. Writing in anarchist publications such as Earth and Freedom , the White Magazine and Workers' Solidarity , Lucía outlined her perspective as a feminist.

In the past decades, two films have been produced about anarcha-feminism.

Libertarias is a historical drama made in 1996 about the Spanish anarcha-feminist organization Mujeres Libres . In 2010, the Argentinian film Ni dios, ni patrón, ni marido was released which is centered on the story of anarcha-feminist Virginia Bolten and her publishing of La Voz de la Mujer .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Marxist feminism [ edit ] Socialist feminist Clara Zetkin and Rosa Luxemburg in 1910 Marxist feminism is a sub-type of feminist theory which focuses on the social institutions of private property and capitalism to explain and criticize gender inequality and oppression. According to Marxist feminists, private property gives rise to economic inequality, dependence, political and domestic struggle between the sexes, and is the root of women's oppression in the current social context.

Marxist feminism's foundation is laid by Friedrich Engels in his analysis of gender oppression in The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884). He argues that a woman's subordination is not a result of her biological disposition but of social relations, and that men's efforts to achieve their demands for control of women's labor and sexual faculties have gradually solidified and become institutionalized in the nuclear family . Through a Marxist historical perspective, Engels analyzes the widespread social phenomena associated with female sexual morality, such as fixation on virginity and sexual purity, incrimination and violent punishment of women who commit adultery , and demands that women be submissive to their husbands. Ultimately, Engels traces these phenomena to the recent development of exclusive control of private property by the patriarchs of the rising slaveowner class in the ancient mode of production, and the attendant desire to ensure that their inheritance is passed only to their own offspring: chastity and fidelity are rewarded, says Engels, because they guarantee exclusive access to the sexual and reproductive faculty of women possessed by men from the property-owning class.

In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, both Clara Zetkin and Eleanor Marx were against the demonization of men and supported a proletariat revolution that would overcome as many male–female inequalities as possible.

[ 37 ] In this way, a politic of solidarity was seen as the means to enact a socialist platform. As their movement already had the most radical demands in women's equality, most Marxist leaders, including Clara Zetkin [ 38 ] [ 39 ] and Alexandra Kollontai , [ 40 ] [ 41 ] counterposed Marxism against bourgeois feminism, rather than trying to combine them.

Orthodox Marxists argue that most Marxist forerunners claimed by feminists or Marxist feminists including Clara Zetkin [ 42 ] [ 43 ] and Alexandra Kollontai [ 44 ] [ 45 ] were against capitalist forms of feminism. They agreed with the main Marxist movement that feminism was a bourgeois ideology counterposed to Marxism and against the working class. Instead of feminism, the Marxists supported the more radical political program of liberating women through socialist revolution, with a special emphasis on work among women and in materially changing their conditions after the revolution. Orthodox Marxists view the later attempt to combine Marxism and feminism as a liberal creation of academics and reformist leftists who want to make alliances with bourgeois feminists. For instance, Alexandra Kollontai wrote in 1909: [ 44 ] For what reason, then, should the woman worker seek a union with the bourgeois feminists? Who, in actual fact, would stand to gain in the event of such an alliance? Certainly not the woman worker.

Kollontai was a prominent leader in the Bolshevik party in Russia, defending her stance on how capitalism had shaped a rather displeasing and oppressing position for females that are part of its system.

[ 46 ] She recognized and emphasized the difference between the proletariat and bourgeoise women in society, though it has been expressed by Kollontai's thought that all women under a capitalist economy were those of oppression.

[ 46 ] One of the reasons Kollontai had a strict opposition of the bourgeois women and proletariat or working-class women to have an alliance is because the bourgeois was still inherently using the women of the working class to their advantage, and therefore prolonging the injustice that women in a capitalist society are treated.

[ 46 ] She theorized that a well-balanced economic utopia was ingrained in the need for gender equality, but never identified as a feminist, though she greatly impacted the feminist movement within the ideology of feminism within and throughout socialism.

[ 47 ] Kollontai had a harsh stance on the feminist movement and believed feminist to be naïve in only addressing gender as the reason inequality was happening under a capitalist rule.

[ 48 ] She believed that the true issue of inequality was that of the division of classes that led to the immediate production of gender struggles, just how men in the structure of the classes shown a harsh divide as well.

[ 48 ] Kollontai analyzed the theories and historical implications of Marxism as a background for her ideologies, which she addressed the most profound obstacle for society to address be that of the gender inequality, which could never be eradicated under a capitalist society.

[ 49 ] As capitalism is inherently for private profit, Kollontai's argument toward the eradication of women suffrage within society under a capitalist rule also delved into how women cannot and will not be abolished under a capitalist society because of the ways in which women's "free labor" has been utilized. Kollontai criticized the feminist movement as also neglecting to emphasize how the working class, while trying to care and provide for a family and being paid less than that of men, was still expected to cater to and provide for the bourgeois or upper-class women who were still oppressing the working-class women by utilizing their stereotypical type of work.

[ 50 ] Kollontai also faced harsh scrutiny in being a woman leader in a time of a male dominated political stance during the Bolshevik movement.

[ 50 ] In keeping with her unusual position during her time, she also kept diaries of her plans and ideas on moving towards a more "modern" society where socialism would help uproot that of capitalism and the oppression that different groups of gender and class had been facing.

[ 50 ] Kollontai was a great example of a woman who was indeed still oppressed by the times and was removed from her own ideologies and progress for the mere fact she was a woman in times where being so in a powerful position was frowned upon and "great women" were only allowed to be placed alongside "great men" in history.

[ 51 ] Kollontai's most pertinent presence in feminist socialism was her stance on reproductive rights and her view on women being allowed the same luxuries that men have in finding love not only to be stable and supported, and to also be able to make their own money and be secure on their own two feet.

[ 51 ] She focused her attention on opening up society's allowance of women's liberation from a capitalist and bourgeois control and emphasizing women's suffrage in the working-class.

[ 49 ] A pioneering Marxist and feminist, Mary Inman of the Communist Party USA challenged the party's orthodox position by arguing that the home is a center of production and housewives carry out productive labor. Her writings include In Woman's Defense (1940) and Woman-Power (1942).

[ 52 ] Inman's work was at first warmly received by several top Communist women leaders, including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn and Ella Reeve Bloor , but the CPUSA leadership began an official attack on Inman's work for purported ideological deviation in 1941.

[ 53 ] A series of articles written against Inman's ideas appeared in the party's literary monthly, The New Masses , and the polemic was extended with the publication of a pamphlet by A. Landy, Marxism and the Woman Question.

[ 53 ] Radical Women , a major Marxist-feminist organization, bases its theory on Marx' and Engels' analysis that the enslavement of women was the first building block of an economic system based on private property. They contend that elimination of the capitalist profit-driven economy will remove the motivation for sexism, racism, homophobia, and other forms of oppression.

[ 54 ] Later theoretical works [ edit ] Zillah R. Eisenstein [ edit ] Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism was a collection of essays assembled and anthologized by Zillah R. Eisenstein in 1978.

Sociologist and academic Rhonda F. Levine cites Eisenstein's work as a "superb discussion of the socialist-feminist position" in her anthology Enriching the Sociological Imagination: How Radical Sociology Changed the Discipline .

[ 55 ] Levine goes on to describe the book as "one of the earliest statements of how a Marxist class analysis can combine with a feminist analysis of patriarchy to produce a theory of how gender and class intersect as systems of inequality".

[ 55 ] Eisenstein defines the term 'capitalist patriarchy' as "descriptive of the 'mutually reinforcing dialectical relationship between capitalist class structure and hierarchical sexual structuring." [ 56 ] She believes: "The recognition of women as a sexual class lays the subversive quality of feminism for liberalism because liberalism is premised upon women's exclusion from public life on this very class basis. The demand for real equality of women with men, if taken to its logical conclusion, would dislodge the patriarchal structure necessary to a liberal society." [ 57 ] Donna Haraway and "A Cyborg Manifesto" [ edit ] In 1985, Donna Haraway published the essay " A Cyborg Manifesto : Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century" in Socialist Review . Although most of Haraway's earlier work was focused on emphasizing the masculine bias in scientific culture, she has also contributed greatly to feminist narratives of the twentieth century. For Haraway, the Manifesto came at a critical juncture at which feminists, in order to have any real-world significance, had to acknowledge their situatedness within what she terms the "informatics of domination".

[ 58 ] Feminists must, she proclaims, unite behind "an ironic dream of a common language for women in the integrated circuit".

[ 58 ] Women were no longer on the outside along a hierarchy of privileged binaries but rather deeply imbued, exploited by and complicit within networked hegemony, and had to form their politics as such.

[ 59 ] According to Haraway's manifesto, "there is nothing about being female that naturally binds women together into a unified category. There is not even such a state as ' being ' female, itself a highly complex category constructed in contested sexual scientific discourses and other social practices" (p. 155). A cyborg does not require a stable, essentialist identity, argues Haraway, and feminists should consider creating coalitions based on "affinity" instead of identity. To ground her argument, Haraway analyzes the phrase "women of colour", suggesting it as one possible example of affinity politics. Using a term coined by theorist Chela Sandoval, Haraway writes that "oppositional consciousness" is comparable with a cyborg politics, because rather than identity it stresses how affinity comes as a result of "otherness, difference, and specificity" (p. 156).

Donna Haraway is the author of A Cyborg Manifesto and it describes a dystopian future in which cyborgs represent the ideal way society would treat people in fixing the way society separates people by gender, race and religion. In her extensive manifesto written in 1991, Haraway explains about a political myth as a "cyborg" [ 60 ] who represents the ideal way someone would be treated in society. Haraway's manifesto describes the cyborg as "A cybernetic organism, a hybrid of machine and organism, a creature of social reality as well as a creature of fiction. Social reality is lived social relations, our most important political construction, a world-changing fiction. The international women's movements have constructed 'women's experience', as well as uncovered or discovered this crucial collective object. This experience is a fiction and fact of the most crucial, political kind" Defined as a post-gender world, this cyborg represents the idea that there can by a dystopian future in which gender, religion and race are not dismissed but are not factors in how members of this society treat each other. This manifesto is consistently mentioning the idea of feminism and how feminists aren't looking for more or less than men but to make the playing field equal. This also goes to the socialist feminism point that without a massive change in society the feminist won't be able to get lasting change.

Autonomist feminism [ edit ] Leopoldina Fortunati is the author of The Arcane of Reproduction: Housework, Prostitution, Labor and Capital ( L'arcano della riproduzione: Casalinghe, prostitute, operai e capitale ), a feminist critique of Marx. Fortunati is the author of several books, including The Arcane of Reproduction (Autonomedia, 1995) and I mostri nell'immaginario (Angeli, 1995), and is the editor of Gli Italiani al telefono (Angeli, 1995) and Telecomunicando in Europa (1998), and with J. Katz and R. Riccini Mediating the Human Body. Technology, Communication and Fashion (2003). Her influences include Mariarosa Dalla Costa , Antonio Negri , and Karl Marx .

Silvia Federici is an Italian scholar, teacher, and activist from the radical autonomist feminist Marxist tradition.

[ 61 ] Federici's best known work, Caliban and the Witch: Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation , expands on the work of Leopoldina Fortunati. In it, she argues against Karl Marx's claim that primitive accumulation is a necessary precursor for capitalism . Instead, she posits that primitive accumulation is a fundamental characteristic of capitalism itself—that capitalism, in order to perpetuate itself, requires a constant infusion of expropriated capital.

Federici connects this expropriation to women's unpaid labour, both connected to reproduction and otherwise, which she frames as a historical precondition to the rise of a capitalist economy predicated upon wage labor. Related to this, she outlines the historical struggle for the commons and the struggle for communalism . Instead of seeing capitalism as a liberatory defeat of feudalism , Federici interprets the ascent of capitalism as a reactionary move to subvert the rising tide of communalism and to retain the basic social contract.

She situates the institutionalization of rape and prostitution , as well as the heretic and witch-hunt trials, burnings, and torture at the center of a methodical subjugation of women and appropriation of their labor. This is tied into colonial expropriation and provides a framework for understanding the work of the International Monetary Fund , World Bank , and other proxy institutions as engaging in a renewed cycle of primitive accumulation, by which everything held in common—from water, to seeds, to our genetic code—becomes privatized in what amounts to a new round of enclosures .

Material feminism [ edit ] Material feminism highlights capitalism and patriarchy as central in understanding women's oppression. The theory centers on social change rather than seeking transformation within the capitalist system.

[ 62 ] Jennifer Wicke, defines materialist feminism as "a feminism that insists on examining the material conditions under which social arrangements, including those of gender hierarchy, develop [...]. [M]aterialist feminism avoids seeing this gender hierarchy as the effect of a singular [...] patriarchy and instead gauges the web of social and psychic relations that make up a material, historical moment".

[ 63 ] She states that "materialist feminism argues that material conditions of all sorts play a vital role in the social production of gender and assays the different ways in which women collaborate and participate in these productions".

[ 63 ] Material feminism also considers how women and men of various races and ethnicities are kept in their lower economic status due to an imbalance of power that privileges those who already have privilege, thereby protecting the status quo.

The term material feminism was first used in 1975 by Christine Delphy .

[ 64 ] The current concept has its roots in socialist and Marxist feminism ; Rosemary Hennessy and Chrys Ingraham, editors of Materialist Feminism: A Reader in Class, Difference, and Women's Lives , describe material feminism as the "conjuncture of several discourses— historical materialism , Marxist and radical feminism , as well as postmodernist and psychoanalytic theories of meaning and subjectivity".

[ 64 ] The term materialist feminism emerged in the late 1970s and is associated with key thinkers, such as Rosemary Hennessy , Stevi Jackson and Christine Delphy.

[ 62 ] Rosemary Hennessy traces the history of Materialist Feminism in the work of British and French feminists who preferred the term materialist feminism to Marxist feminism .

[ 65 ] In their view, Marxism had to be altered to be able to explain the sexual division of labor. Marxism was inadequate to the task because of its class bias and focus on production.

Feminism was also problematic due to its essentialist and idealist concept of woman. Material feminism then emerged as a positive substitute to both Marxism and feminism.

[ 65 ] Material feminism partly originated from the work of French feminists, particularly Christine Delphy. She argued that materialism is the only theory of history that views oppression as a basic reality of women's lives. Delphy states that this is why women and all oppressed groups need materialism to investigate their situation. For Delphy, "to start from oppression defines a materialist approach, oppression is a materialist concept".

[ 66 ] She states that the domestic mode of production was the site of patriarchal exploitation and the material basis of the oppression of women. Delphy further argued that marriage is a labor contract that gives men the right to exploit women.

[ 66 ] The Grand Domestic Revolution by Dolores Hayden is a reference. Hayden describes Material feminism at that time as reconceptualizing the relationship between the private household space and public space by presenting collective options to take the "burden" off women in regard to housework , cooking , and other traditional female domestic jobs.

[ 67 ] Ecological feminism or Ecofeminism [ edit ] In the 1970s, the impacts of post-World War II technological development led many women to organise against issues from the toxic pollution of neighbourhoods to nuclear weapons testing on indigenous lands. This grassroots activism emerging across every continent was both intersectional and cross-cultural in its struggle to protect the conditions for reproduction of Life on Earth. Known as ecofeminism, the political relevance of this movement continues to expand. Classic statements in its literature include Carolyn Merchant, US, The Death of Nature ; [ 68 ] Maria Mies, Germany, Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale ; [ 69 ] Vandana Shiva, India, Staying Alive: Women Ecology and Development ; [ 70 ] Ariel Salleh, Australia, Ecofeminism as Politics: nature, Marx, and the postmodern .

[ 71 ] Ecofeminism involves a profound critique of Eurocentric epistemology, science, economics, and culture. It is increasingly prominent as a feminist response to the contemporary breakdown of the planetary ecosystem.

Praxis [ edit ] Socialist feminists believe that women's liberation must be sought in conjunction with the social and economic justice of all people. They see the fight to end male supremacy as key to social justice, but not the only issue, rather one of many forms of oppression that are mutually reinforcing.

[ 72 ] Women's liberation in real socialism [ edit ] In the forty years of socialism in East Germany , the German Democratic Republic (GDR), many feminist demands were implemented: While women in the West still fought for a liberal abortion law, abortion was allowed up to the 12th week since 1972 and contraception was available to anyone.

While women in the West still had no access to the better paid male dominated professions, women in the GDR were encouraged to do so and promoted to further studies.

Children were taken care of by kindergarten and pre-kindergarten , a service women in West Germany are still waiting for and the main obstacle to equal employment opportunities.

Nevertheless, feminists of West Berlin remained skeptical as they lived door to door with this real socialism.

Cäcilia Rentmeister , who had personal contacts to friends and relatives in East Berlin analyzed in 1974 women's situation in the GDR in an article.

[ 73 ] Chicago Women's Liberation Union [ edit ] The Chicago Women's Liberation Union (CWLU) was formed in 1969 after a founding conference in Palatine, Illinois.

Naomi Weisstein , Vivian Rothstein , Heather Booth , and Ruth Surgal were among the founders. The main goal of the organization was to end gender inequality and sexism, which the CWLU defined as "the systematic keeping down of women for the benefit of people in power".

[ 74 ] The purpose statement of the organization expressed that "Changing women's position in society isn't going to be easy. It's going to require changes in expectations, jobs, child care, and education. It's going to change the distribution of power over the rest of us to all people sharing power and sharing in the decisions that affect our lives." [ 74 ] The CWLU spent almost a decade organizing to challenge both sexism and class oppression. The group is best known for the 1972 pamphlet " Socialist Feminism: A Strategy for the Women's Movement ", by the Hyde Park Chapter of the Chicago Women's Liberation Union. Nationally circulated, the publication is believed to be the first to use the term socialist feminism.

The CWLU was organized as an umbrella organization to unite a wide range of work groups and discussion groups. A representative from each work group went to monthly meetings of the Steering Committee to reach consensus on organizational policy and strategy. They addressed a myriad of issues including women's health, reproductive rights, education, economic rights, visual arts and music, sports, lesbian liberation, and more.

Women's International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell [ edit ] Women's International Terrorist Conspiracy from Hell (W.I.T.C.H.) was the name of many related but independent feminist groups formed in the United States during 1968 and 1969 and who were important in the development of socialist feminism. The name W.I.T.C.H. was also sometimes expanded as "Women Inspired to Tell their Collective History", "Women Interested in Toppling Consumer Holidays", and many other variations.

[ 75 ] There was no centralized organization; each W.I.T.C.H. group was formed independently by women inspired by the ideas and example of previous actions. Their activism mainly took the form of "zaps", a form of guerrilla theater mixing street theatre and protest , where they used attention-catching and humorous public actions to highlight political and economic complaints against companies and government agencies, frequently involving the use of witch costumes and the chanting of hexes . Witches often appeared as stock characters in feminist Left theatre, representing the misogynist crone stereotype.

On Halloween 1968, women from W.I.T.C.H. staged a " hex " of Wall Street at a branch of Chase Manhattan Bank , wearing rags and fright makeup; Robin Morgan stated that the Dow Jones Industrial Average declined sharply the next day.

[ 75 ] The DJIA did not decline sharply, and experienced a rise over the next several days and weeks.

[ 76 ] In December 1968 W.I.T.C.H targeted both the House Un-American Activities Committee and the Chicago Eight , saying that they conspired to treat only men as "leaders" of the antiwar movement . In 1969, W.I.T.C.H. held a protest at a "Bridal Fair" at Madison Square Garden. Members wore black veils. They handed out pamphlets titled "Confront the Whoremakers", chanted "Here come the slaves/Off to their graves", and had a mock "unwedding" ceremony. The protests also involved turning loose several white mice at the event, which Fair attendees began scooping up off the ground. The event resulted in negative media coverage for W.I.T.C.H., and some dissention among members over goals and tactics.

[ 77 ] In February 1970, the Washington coven (W.I.T.C.H. chapters were called "covens") held a protest during a Senate hearing on population control. They interrupted Texas Senator Ralph Yarborough 's testimony by chanting and throwing pills at panel members and people in the audience galleries.

[ 77 ] Spin-off "covens" were founded in Chicago, Illinois , and Washington, D.C.

, [ 75 ] and W.I.T.C.H. zaps continued until roughly the beginning of 1970. The "zap" protests used by W.I.T.C.H. may have helped inspire the zap action protest tactics adopted shortly afterwards by LGBT activists, and still in use.

Big Flame [ edit ] Big Flame was "a revolutionary socialist feminist organisation with a working-class orientation" [ 78 ] [ 79 ] in the United Kingdom . Founded in Liverpool in 1970, the group initially grew rapidly, with branches appearing in some other cities. Its publications emphasised that "a revolutionary party is necessary but Big Flame is not that party, nor is it the embryo of that party". The group was influenced by the Italian Lotta Continua group.

[ 80 ] The group published a magazine, Big Flame ; and a journal, Revolutionary Socialism .

[ 81 ] Members were active at the Ford plants at Halewood and Dagenham [ citation needed ] and devoted a great deal of time to self-analysis and considering their relationship with the larger Trotskyist groups. In time, they came to describe their politics as libertarian Marxist . In 1978, they joined the Socialist Unity electoral coalition , led by the Trotskyist International Marxist Group . In 1980, the anarchists of the Libertarian Communist Group joined Big Flame. The Revolutionary Marxist Current also joined at about this time. However, as more members of the group defected to the Labour Party , the journal ceased to appear in 1982, [ 81 ] and the group was wound up in about 1984. Ex-members of the group were involved in the launch of the mass-market tabloid newspaper the News on Sunday in 1987, which folded the same year.

[ 82 ] The name of the group was taken from a television play, The Big Flame (1969), written by Jim Allen and directed by Ken Loach for the BBC 's Wednesday Play season. It dealt with a fictional strike and work-in at the Liverpool Docks.

[ 83 ] Theorists [ edit ] Johanna Brenner Barbara Ehrenreich Angela Davis Barbara Smith Audre Lorde Clara Fraser Charlotte Perkins Gilman Emma Goldman Silvia Federici Donna Haraway Leopoldina Fortunati Heidi I. Hartmann Selma James Carolyn Merchant Maria Mies Sheila Rowbotham Ariel Salleh Vandana Shiva Sylvia Walby Nellie Wong Nancy Fraser Ruth Neto Socialist feminist groups [ edit ] Pan y Rosas Bread and Roses of Boston Chicago Women's Liberation Union Radical Women Freedom Socialist Party ROSA International Socialist Feminists See also [ edit ] Anarcha-feminism Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism Ecofeminism Feminist theory History of feminism Jineology Marxist feminism Material feminism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Lapovsky Kennedy, Elizabeth (2008).

"Socialist Feminism: What Difference Did It Make to the History of Women's Studies?" .

Feminist Studies .

34 (3).

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c Ferguson, Susan (2020).

Women and work: Feminism, labour, and social reproduction . UK: Pluto Press. pp.

40– 52.

^ The Personal is Political , retrieved January 21st 2021.

^ What is Socialist Feminism?

, retrieved on May 28th 2007.

^ Buchanan, Ian. "Socialist Feminism." A Dictionary of Critical Theory.

Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. Web. 20 October 2011.

^ "Socialist Feminism vs. Other Types of Feminism" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 16 March 2017 .

^ Harriss, Kathryn (1989-01-01). "New Alliances: Socialist-Feminism in the Eighties".

Feminist Review (31): 34– 54.

doi : 10.2307/1395089 .

JSTOR 1395089 .

^ Chattopadhyay, Paresh (2001).

"Marx on Women's Question" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

36 (26): 2455– 2457.

ISSN 0012-9976 .

JSTOR 4410809 .

^ Socialism, International (2020-03-29).

"How Marx and Engels fought for women's liberation" .

International Socialism . Retrieved 2024-09-28 .

^ Margeret "Peg" Strobel; Sue Davenport (1999).

"The Chicago Women's Liberation Union: An Introduction" .

The CWLU Herstory Website . University of Illinois. Archived from the original on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 25 November 2011 .

^ Kennedy, Elizabeth Lapovsky (2008). "Socialist Feminism: What Difference Did It Make to the History of Women's Studies?".

Feminist Studies .

34 (3): 497– 525.

JSTOR 20459218 .

^ Kennedy, Elizabeth Lapovsky (2008).

"Socialist Feminism: What Difference Did It Make to the History of Women's Studies?" .

Feminist Studies .

34 (3): 497– 525.

ISSN 0046-3663 .

JSTOR 20459218 .

^ Kristen R. Ghodsee, Why Women Have Better Sex Under Socialism (US: Nation Books, 2018) ^ George Bernad Shaw, An Intelligent Women's Guide to Capitalism and Socialism (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2017) ^ Lynn, Denise (2014).

"Socialist Feminism and Triple Oppression: Claudia Jones and African American Women in American Communism" .

Journal for the Study of Radicalism .

8 (2): 1– 20.

doi : 10.14321/jstudradi.8.2.0001 .

JSTOR 10.14321/jstudradi.8.2.0001 .

S2CID 161970928 .

^ Gordon, Linda (2016-07-12).

" 'Intersectionality', Socialist Feminism and Contemporary Activism: Musings by a Second-Wave Socialist Feminist" .

Gender & History .

28 (2): 340– 357.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0424.12211 .

ISSN 0953-5233 .

S2CID 148297476 .

^ Gordon, Linda (2013). "Socialist Feminism: The Legacy of the "Second Wave" ".

New Labor Forum .

22 (3): 20– 28.

doi : 10.1177/1095796013499736 .

JSTOR 24718484 .

S2CID 155250603 .

^ Mambrol, Nasrullah (2018-01-15).

"Marxist Feminism" .

Literary Theory and Criticism . Retrieved 2020-04-16 .

^ Bhavnani, Kum-Kum; Coulson, Margaret (2005). "Transforming Socialist-Feminism: The Challenge of Racism".

Feminist Review .

80 (80): 87– 97.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.fr.9400219 .

JSTOR 3874366 .

S2CID 189906176 .

^ Harriss, Kathryn (1989). "New Alliances: Socialist-Feminism in the Eighties".

Feminist Review (31): 34– 54.

doi : 10.2307/1395089 .

JSTOR 1395089 .

^ Perkins Gilman, Charlotte (1898).

Women and Economics . Small, Maynard & Company.

^ a b c d Tong, Rosemarie (2009).

Feminist thought : a more comprehensive introduction (3rd ed.). Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-7867-2597-7 .

OCLC 301812183 .

^ a b Jaggar, Alison M. (1983).

Feminist politics and human nature / . Philosophy and society. Totowa, N.J.

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015062115343 .

ISBN 9780847672547 .

^ "womenstrikeus.org" .

womenstrikeus.org .

^ "International Women's Day 2020" .

UN Women . Retrieved 2020-12-04 .

^ Brown, L. Susan (1995). "Beyond Feminism: Anarchism and Human Freedom". Reinventing Anarchy, Again. San Francisco: AK Press. pp. 149–154.

ISBN 978-1-873176-88-7 . p. 208.

^ An Anarchist FAQ.

What is Anarcha-Feminism?

Archived October 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Dunbar-Ortiz, p.9.

^ Ackelsberg.

^ "Spencer Sunshine: "Nietzsche and the Anarchists" (2005)" .

Fifth Estate .

367 : 36– 37. Winter 2004–2005 . Retrieved 2012-09-29 .

^ Molyneux, Maxine (2001).

Women's movements in international perspective: Latin America and beyond . Palgrave MacMillan. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-333-78677-2 .

^ "No God, No Boss, No Husband: The world's first Anarcha-Feminist group" . Libcom.org. January 3, 2012 . Retrieved 2012-09-29 .

^ O'Carroll, Aileen (June 1998).

"Mujeres Libres: Women anarchists in the Spanish Revolution" (54). Workers Solidarity. Archived from the original on 2015-09-26 . Retrieved 2012-09-29 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "R. Fue una época transgresora, emergió el feminismo y la libertad sexual estuvo en el candelero. Hay rastreos de muchas lesbianas escritoras: Carmen Conde[primera académica de número], Victorina Durán, Margarita Xirgu, Ana María Sagi, la periodista Irene Polo, Lucía Sánchez Saornil, fundadora de Mujeres Libres[sección feminista de CNT]... Incluso existía un círculo sáfico en Madrid como lugar de encuentro y tertulia.P. ¿Se declaraban lesbianas?R. Había quien no se escondía mucho, como Polo o Durán, pero lesbiana era un insulto, algo innombrable. Excepto los poemas homosexuales de Sánchez Saornil, sus textos no eran explícitos para poder publicarlos, así que hay que reinterpretarlos." "Tener referentes serios de lesbianas elimina estereotipos" by Juan Fernandez at El Pais ^ " "Ni Dios, Ni Patrón, Ni Marido" (2009) by Laura Mañá" . Cinenacional.com . Retrieved 2012-09-29 .

^ "Ni Dios, Ni Patron, Ni Marido - Trailer" . Youtube.com. 13 July 2010.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-22 . Retrieved 2012-09-29 .

^ Stokes, John (2000).

Eleanor Marx (1855–1898): Life, Work, Contacts . Aldershot: Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-0113-5 .

^ Zetkin, Clara, On a Bourgeois Feminist Petition (1895).

^ Zetkin, Clara, Lenin On the Women's Question .

^ Kollontai, Alexandra, The Social Basis of the Woman Question (1909).

^ Kollontai, Alexandra, Women Workers Struggle For Their Rights (1919).

^ Zetkin, Clara On a Bourgeois Feminist Petition 1895 ^ Zetkin, Clara Lenin on the Women's Question ^ a b Kollontai, Alexandra The Social Basis of the Woman Question 1909 ^ Kollontai, Alexandra Women Workers Struggle For Their Rights 1919 ^ a b c Field, Karen L. (1982).

"Alexandra Kollontai: Precursor of Eurofeminism" .

Dialectical Anthropology .

6 (3): 229– 244.

doi : 10.1007/BF02070526 .

ISSN 0304-4092 .

JSTOR 29790038 .

S2CID 147334031 .

^ Clements, Barbara Evans (1973).

"Emancipation Through Communism: The Ideology of A. M. Kollontai" .

Slavic Review .

32 (2): 323– 338.

doi : 10.2307/2495966 .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 2495966 .

^ a b Farnsworth, Beatrice Brodsky (1976).

"Bolshevism, the Woman Question, and Aleksandra Kollontai" .

The American Historical Review .

81 (2): 292– 316.

doi : 10.2307/1851172 .

ISSN 0002-8762 .

JSTOR 1851172 .

^ a b BERBEROGLU, BERCH (1994).

"Class, Race and Gender: The Triangle of Oppression" .

Race, Sex & Class .

2 (1): 69– 77.

ISSN 1075-8925 .

JSTOR 41680097 .

^ a b c Farnsworth, Beatrice (2010).

"Conversing with Stalin, Surviving the Terror: The Diaries of Aleksandra Kollontai and the Internal Life of Politics" .

Slavic Review .

69 (4): 944– 970.

doi : 10.1017/S003767790000992X .

ISSN 0037-6779 .

JSTOR 27896144 .

S2CID 158044855 .

^ a b Lokaneeta, Jinee (2001).

"Alexandra Kollontai and Marxist Feminism" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

36 (17): 1405– 1412.

ISSN 0012-9976 .

JSTOR 4410544 .

^ Weigand, Kate (2001).

Red Feminism: American Communism and the Making of Women's Liberation . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 30.

ISBN 9780801871115 .

^ a b Gluck, Sherna Berger (1990). "Mary Inman (1894–1985)". In Buhle, Mari Jo ; Buhle, Paul ; Georgakas, Dan (eds.).

Encyclopedia of the American Left (1st ed.). New York: Garland Publishing Co. pp.

361– 362.

^ The Radical Women Manifesto: Socialist Feminist Theory, Program and Organizational Structure [1] , Red Letter Press, 2001, ISBN 0-932323-11-1 , pages 2–26.

^ a b Levine, Rhonda F.

Legacies of the insurgent sociologist in Enriching the Sociological Imagination: How Radical Sociology Changed the Discipline , Brill Press, 2004, 978-9004139923, p8 ^ Madsen, Deborah L.

Feminist Theory and Literary Practice , Pluto Press, 2000, ISBN 0-7453-1601-8 , p193 ^ Eisenstein, Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for Socialist Feminism , cited in Feminism and Philosophy: Essential Readings in Theory, Reinterpretation, and Application , eds: Nancy Tuana, Rosemarie Tong, Westview Press 1995, ISBN 0-8133-2213-8 , p5 ^ a b Haraway, Donna. "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century." Stanford University.

"Haraway_CyborgManifesto.HTML" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-14 . Retrieved 2012-02-14 .

.

^ Spurgeon, Sara L. " The cyborg coyote: generating theory in the borderlands [ permanent dead link ] ." Southwestern American Literature , vol. 34, no. 2, 2009, p. 9+.

Literature Resource Center . Accessed 16 Mar. 2017.

^ Donna J. Haraway, " A Cyborg Manifesto : Science, technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century," in Simians, Cyborgs , and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York: Routledge, 1991), 149-181 ^ Silvia Frederici biography at Interactivist Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Jackson, Stevi (May–August 2001). "Why a materialist feminism is (Still) Possible—and necessary".

Women's Studies International Forum .

24 ( 3– 4): 283– 293.

doi : 10.1016/S0277-5395(01)00187-X .

^ a b Ferguson, Margaret (1994).

Feminism and postmodernism . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0822314882 .

^ a b Hennessy, Rosemary (1997).

Materialist feminism : a reader in class, difference, and women's lives . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415916349 .

^ a b Hennessy, Rosemary (1993).

Materialist feminism and the politics of discourse . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415904803 .

^ a b Delphy, Christine; Leonard, Diana (March 1980). "A Materialist Feminism is Possible".

Feminist Review .

4 (1): 79– 105.

doi : 10.1057/fr.1980.8 .

S2CID 55598087 .

^ Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale (2000).

Routledge international encyclopedia of women : global women's issues and knowledge . New York: Routledge. p. 766.

ISBN 9780415920902 .

^ Merchant, Carolyn (1980).

The Death of Nature: Women and the Scientific Revolution . New York: Harper & Row. p. 348.

ISBN 0062505955 .

^ Mies, Maria (1986).

Patriarchy and Accumulation on a World Scale (1st ed.). London: Zed Books. p. 280.

ISBN 9780862323424 .

^ Shiva, Vandana (1989).

Staying Alive: Women, Ecology and Development . London: Zed Books. p. 256.

ISBN 9780862328238 .

^ Salleh, Ariel (1997).

Ecofeminism as Politics: Nature, Marx and the Postmodern (1st ed.). London: Zed Books. p. 400.

ISBN 9781856494007 .

^ Kennedy, Elizabeth Lapovsky (2008). "Socialist Feminism: What Difference Did It Make To The History Of Women's Studies?".

Feminist Studies .

^ "Ein Blick über die Berliner Mauer (1974)" in Cristina Perincioli, "Berlin wird feministisch"(2015) p.172-177 (article translated in English) [2] .

^ a b "Cwlu Herstory" .

^ a b c Brownmiller, Susan (1999).

In Our Time: Memoir of a Revolution . The Dial Press. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-385-31486-2 .

^ "Historical Dow Jones Closing Prices 1961-1970" .

Automation Information . Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 15 March 2013 .

^ a b Bradley, Patricia (2003).

Mass Media and the Shaping of American Feminism, 1963-1975 . University Press of Mississippi. pp.

63– 64.

ISBN 9781578066131 .

^ Archive Archie Big Flame 1970-1984: Who We Were at wordpress.com ^ "Sojourner Truth Organization - 1969-1983 - Workplace Papers - Review of "Reflections on Organizing" (1970)" .

www.sojournertruth.net .

^ David Widgery The Left In Britain, 1956-1968 Penguin,1976 (p. 479) ^ a b John Moorhouse, A Historical Glossary of British Marxism (Pauper's Press, 1987) ISBN 0-946650-06-3 ^ Peter Chippindale, Chris Horrie. Disaster: The Rise And Fall of News On Sunday - Anatomy of a Business Failure. 1988 ISBN 978-0747402305 ^ Big Flame, The (1969) at Screenonline External links [ edit ] The Radical Women Manifesto: Socialist Feminist Theory, Program and Organizational Structure The socialist feminist project by Nancy Holmstrom Socialist Feminism: The First Decade, 1966-76 by Gloria Martin What is Socialist Feminism?

by Barbara Ehrenreich at the CWLU Herstory Archive Entry for Socialist Feminism in the Reader's Companion to U.S. Women's History Socialist Feminism: A Strategy for the Women's Movement By Hyde Park Chapter, Chicago Women's Liberation Union London Project for a Participatory Society is a Canadian "anti-racist, pro-feminist, anti-capitalist organization" v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialist_feminism&oldid=1301477778 " Categories : Socialist feminism Socialism Feminist movements and ideologies Feminist theory Feminism and social class New Left Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with dead external links from May 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2023 Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2023 Articles slanted towards recent events from August 2023 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 02:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Socialist feminism 37 languages Add topic

