Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition and format 3 Significance 4 References Toggle the table of contents Lightning talk 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short presentation given at a conference A lightning talk in Wikimedia Conference 2016 A lightning talk is a very short presentation lasting only a few minutes, given at a conference or similar forum. Several lightning talks will usually be delivered by different speakers in a single session, sometimes called a data blitz .

Some formats of lightning talk, including PechaKucha and Ignite , involve a specific number of slides that are automatically advanced at fixed intervals.  Lightning talks are often referred to as ignite talks.

History [ edit ] The YAPC (Yet Another Perl Conference) 19100 Conference came up with the term "lightning talk" at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh. The term was first coined by Mark Jason Dominus in June 2000.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The practice of lightning talks was first known to be used at the Python Conference in 1997, but was not named until the YAPC 19100 Conference.

[ 3 ] Definition and format [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Lightning talks are designed to be short presentations between five and ten minutes long, but are usually capped at five minutes.

[ 4 ] Most conferences will allot a segment of roughly 30 to 90 minutes long to speakers. Talks are arranged one after the other during the sessions. The talks are usually given at conferences in order for the event to have many speakers discuss a multitude of topics. The conferences are held in order for individuals to be able to share their ideas and concepts with people who have experience in the specific field.

[ 5 ] Lightning talks are brief and require the speaker to make their point clearly and rid the presentation of non-critical information.  This causes the audience to be more attentive to the speaker and gain a broader array of knowledge from the presentations given.

[ 6 ] The format of lightning talks varies greatly from conference to conference.

[ 7 ] Slides may be discouraged, and a single computer running a presentation program is used by all speakers. In general lightning talks are given in a format that can include slides but if so, the speaker must be careful not to read the details which they include.

[ 4 ] The term data blitz is sometimes used to refer to a session of lightning talks, particularly at academic conferences in the sciences and social sciences such as the annual conference of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology .

[ 8 ] Significance [ edit ] The goal of lightning talks is to articulate a topic in a quick, insightful, and clear manner. These concise and efficient talks are intended to gain the attention of the audience, communicate key information, and allow for several presenters to share their ideas in a brief period of time.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Talks that were presented at YAPC 19100" . Retrieved 2007-01-27 .

^ Berkun, Scott (January 14, 2010).

"The End Of Boring Presentations" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 14, 2010 .

^ Dominus, Mark (7 July 2000).

"Reports From YAPC 19100" . Perl.com . Retrieved March 12, 2014 .

^ a b Fowler, Mark (7 July 2004).

"Giving Lightning Talks" . Perl.com . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ Corkey, Joe (30 July 2013).

"Why You Should Give a Lightning Talk" . Business of Software . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ "Lightning Talks" . perl.plover.com/ . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ "ESRI International User Conference" . Esri . Retrieved 13 March 2014 .

^ "SPSP 2012 Data Blitz" .

SPSP 2012 Conference . The Society for Personality and Social Psychology. Archived from the original on 16 September 2012 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

^ "Giving a good lightning talk" . Software Sustainability Institute . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

v t e Unconference topics History Open space technology Foo Camp BloggerCon BarCamp Elements Ignite Lightning talk Dot-voting Examples AdaCamp BarCampBank Crisis camp EdCamp IndieWebCamp InfoCamp RecentChangesCamp Science Foo Camp SkeptiCamp StixCamp Sweden Social Web Camp Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lightning_talk&oldid=1268125808 " Category : Public speaking Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 January 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lightning talk 12 languages Add topic

