Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and previous names 2 Competences 3 Northern Ireland 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents British Geological Survey 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 日本語 Norsk bokmål Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geological survey British Geological Survey Abbreviation BGS Formation 1835 Legal status Government organisation Purpose Geoscience Location Keyworth , Nottinghamshire , England Region served United Kingdom Director Karen Hanghøj Parent organisation UK Research and Innovation (via NERC ) [ 1 ] Budget £ 57m around 50% from the Science Budget Website www .bgs .ac .uk The British Geological Survey ( BGS ) is a partly publicly funded body which aims to advance geoscientific knowledge of the United Kingdom landmass and its continental shelf by means of systematic surveying, monitoring and research.

The BGS headquarters are in Keyworth, Nottinghamshire , England. Its other centres are located in Edinburgh , Wallingford , Cardiff and London. The current tagline of the BGS is: Understanding our Earth .

[ 2 ] History and previous names [ edit ] The Geological Survey was founded in 1835 by the Board of Ordnance as the Geological Survey of Great Britain, under directorship of Henry De la Beche . This was the world's first national geological survey . It remained a branch of the Ordnance Survey for many years. In 1965, it was merged with the Geological Museum and Overseas Geological Surveys, under the name of Institute of Geological Sciences .

[ 3 ] In 1969, Beris Cox was the first female palaeontologist employed by the IGS.

[ 4 ] On 1 January 1984, the institute was renamed the British Geological Survey (and often referred to as the BGS), a name still carried today.

[ 5 ] Since 1835, there have been 20 directors of the survey. In 2019, Karen Hanghøj was the first woman appointed to lead the survey.

[ 6 ] From the 1860s, the survey in Scotland operated under the identity of the Geological Survey of Scotland.

[ 7 ] Starting in 1975, female officers of the survey no longer had to resign upon getting married.

[ 8 ] Competences [ edit ] British Geological Survey roundel The BGS advises the British government on all aspects of geoscience, as well as providing impartial advice on geological matters to the public, academics and industry. BGS is a component body of UK Research and Innovation which "works in partnership with universities, research organisations, businesses, charities, and government to create the best possible environment for research and innovation to flourish". The core outputs of the BGS include geological, geophysical , geochemical and hydrogeological maps , descriptions and related digital databases. Scientists at the BGS produced the first comprehensive map of African groundwater reserves.

[ 9 ] One of the key strategic aims for the next decade is to complete the transition from 2-D mapping to a 3-D modelling, to understand the 'architecture' of the subsurface. The current five-year strategy identifies four key priorities for the BGS: 'maps and models for the 21st century; a more secure energy transition; 
improved water security; and living with geological hazards'.

[ 10 ] The BGS has an annual budget of £ 57 million, about half of which comes from the government's science budget, with the remainder coming from commissioned research from the public and private sectors.

Northern Ireland [ edit ] The Geological Survey of Northern Ireland (GSNI) is part of Northern Ireland 's Department for the Economy (DfE). The British Geological Survey provides staff, under contract to DfE, for the GSNI.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Geospatial Commission List of directors of the British Geological Survey Systems geology References [ edit ] ^ "About BGS – Governance" . British Geological Survey . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ "BGS Strategy 2023 to 2028" .

^ "Institute of Geological Sciences" .

^ Bowie, R. C. (1995).

"Data management in the National Geological Records Centre" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

97 (1): 117– 125.

doi : 10.1144/GSL.SP.1995.097.01.15 .

^ "Our history" .

^ Press, B. G. S. (3 July 2019).

"Karen Hanghøj named Director of the British Geological Survey" .

^ "Geological Survey history — Scotland" . British Geological Survey . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ Rod Bowie, Records Centre Manager, National Geological Records Centre, British Geological Survey, Keyworth (January 1995).

"Freedom and Equality-Women in Geology" .

Geological Society, London, Special Publications .

97 (1). British Geological Survey, Natural Environment Research Council : 117– 125.

doi : 10.1144/GSL.SP.1995.097.01.15 .

S2CID 129574405 . Retrieved 23 May 2018 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Scholl, Adam (12 June 2012).

"Map Room: Hidden Waters" . World Policy Journal. Archived from the original on 3 October 2015 . Retrieved 19 December 2012 .

^ "BGS maps out priorities with five-year strategy" .

B. G. S . 11 May 2023.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2023.

^ "GSNI" . GSNI / BGS . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Official website BGS Earthwise: The digital publication channel for the British Geological Survey BGS Annual Report BGS International Landslides at BGS.ac.uk Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Australia Czech Republic 2 Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_Geological_Survey&oldid=1294885871 " Categories : British Geological Survey 1835 establishments in the United Kingdom Geological surveys Geology of the United Kingdom Natural Environment Research Council National geological agencies Scientific organizations established in 1835 Rushcliffe Science and technology in Nottinghamshire Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2015 Use dmy dates from August 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 11:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents British Geological Survey 10 languages Add topic

