Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery 2 Subduction 3 Significance 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Kshiroda plate Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minor oceanic plate in the Tethys Sea Not to be confused with Shiroda .

Kshiroda plate The Kshiroda plate to the south of the Eurasian plate(>50 mya) Features Tibetan Plateau , Tethys Ocean , Indian Ocean , Himalayas The Kshiroda plate ( / ʃ ɪ ˈ r oʊ d ə / ) is a hypothetical oceanic tectonic plate which is believed to have existed more than 40 million years ago, to the south of the Eurasian plate , corresponding to the regions of modern South Asia.

Discovery [ edit ] The Kshiroda plate was discovered when geologists studying the boundary zone between the Indian and Eurasian plates, noticed that the data supported the existence of two parallel subduction zones between the plates.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This was studied in detail in 2015 by Oliver Jagoutz, a geologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Cambridge, Massachusetts , and his team, who identified the possibilities of a hidden tectonic plate in the region.

[ 3 ] The usage of the term "Kshiroda plate" began the same year 2015.

Subduction [ edit ] An oversimplified visualization of the subduction of the Kshiroda plate and the delamination of the Indian plate Around 50 million years ago, the Indian plate collided with the southern subduction zone of the Kshiroda oceanic plate causing the plate to shrink. It was pushed northwards and eventually collapsed more than 40 million years ago.

[ 3 ] It was pushed below the crust of the Eurasian plate and this led to the formation of the Tibetan Plateau and the Himalayas.

It is possible that the impact might have caused the delamination of the Indian plate beneath the Tibetan Plateau, a process which is still continuing.

[ 4 ] Significance [ edit ] The Kshiroda plate has great significance in the geology of South Asia . The subduction of the plate, which occurred before 40 million years ago, caused the upliftment of the Tibetan Plateau .

The Tethys Sea bed which used to rest on the Kshiroda plate was pushed above the Eurasian landmass leading to the formation of the earliest mountains of the Himalayas , [ 5 ] while the rest of the mountains were formed due to the folding of the Indian and Eurasian continental landmasses.

See also [ edit ] Indo-Eurasian collision system Indian plate Himalayas Palaeogeography Eurasian plate References [ edit ] ^ Yin, An; Harrison, T. Mark (May 2000).

"Geologic Evolution of the Himalayan-Tibetan Orogen" .

Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences .

28 (1): 211– 280.

Bibcode : 2000AREPS..28..211Y .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.earth.28.1.211 .

ISSN 0084-6597 .

^ Hall, Robert (2012-10-10).

"Late Jurassic–Cenozoic reconstructions of the Indonesian region and the Indian Ocean" .

Tectonophysics .

570– 571: 1– 41.

Bibcode : 2012Tectp.570....1H .

doi : 10.1016/j.tecto.2012.04.021 .

ISSN 0040-1951 .

^ a b Jagoutz, Oliver; Royden, Leigh; Holt, Adam F.; Becker, Thorsten W. (June 2015).

"Anomalously fast convergence of India and Eurasia caused by double subduction" .

Nature Geoscience .

8 (6): 475– 478.

Bibcode : 2015NatGe...8..475J .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo2418 .

ISSN 1752-0908 .

^ Liu, Lin; Shi, Danian; Klemperer, Simon L; Shi, Jianyu (2023-11-14).

"Slab tearing and delamination of the Indian lithospheric mantle during flat-slab subduction, southeast Tibet" .

Authorea Preprints .

doi : 10.22541/e (inactive 12 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ fultonk (2011-02-11).

"The Himalayas ~ Tectonic Motion: Making the Himalayas | Nature" .

Nature . Retrieved 2024-04-13 .

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kshiroda_plate&oldid=1300084526 " Category : Historical tectonic plates Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kshiroda plate Add languages Add topic

