Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 1.1 Underwater housings 1.1.1 Smartphone housings 1.2 Camera formats 2 Lighting Toggle Lighting subsection 2.1 Underwater flash 2.1.1 Snoot 2.2 Modeling lights 2.3 Video lights 3 Split images 4 Applications 5 Skills and training 6 Scientific potential 7 History and Advancement 8 Timeline 9 Notable underwater photographers 10 See also 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater photography 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of photography This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Underwater photography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A United States Navy Mass Communication Specialist conducting underwater photography training Neon goby ( Elacatinus oceanops ) swimming over a great star coral ( Montastraea cavernosa ) Wide-angle shot of coral reef in East Timor Underwater photography is the practice of capturing images beneath the surface of the water, often done while scuba diving , but can also be done while diving on surface supply , snorkeling , swimming, from a submersible or remotely operated underwater vehicle , or from automated cameras lowered from the surface.

Underwater photography can also be categorized as an art form and a method for recording data. 
Successful underwater imaging is usually done with specialized equipment and techniques. However, it offers exciting and rare photographic opportunities. Animals such as fish and marine mammals are common subjects, but photographers also pursue shipwrecks , submerged cave systems, underwater "landscapes", invertebrates , seaweeds , geological features, and portraits of fellow divers.

Equipment [ edit ] A Nikonos V amphibious camera Underwater housing for SLR with dome port, arms and lights Some cameras are made for use underwater, including modern waterproof digital cameras . The first amphibious camera was the Calypso , reintroduced as the Nikonos in 1963. The Nikonos range was designed specifically for use underwater.

Nikon ended the Nikonos series in 2001 [ 1 ] and its use has declined, as has that of other 35mm film systems.

Sea and Sea USA made the Motor Marine III, an amphibious range-finder camera for 35mm film.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Underwater housings [ edit ] A waterproof camera and waterproof light source setup for professional underwater photography A BlueROV2 equipped with a Panasonic Lumix BGH1 4K Cinema Camera with a Lumix 7-14mm lens GoPro Hero5 action camera in underwater housing Seaview SVII Camera using three dome ports for all round view Cameras made for dry work can also work underwater, protected by add-on housings, which are made for point and shoot cameras , compact cameras with full exposure controls, and single lens reflex cameras (SLRs). Most such housings are specific to the camera model. Materials range from relatively inexpensive injection molded plastic to higher-priced die-cast or machined from solid aluminum. Housings allow many options: users can choose housings specific to their everyday "land" cameras and use any lens, provided that it fits or they use the appropriate lens port accessory. Underwater photographers generally use wide-angle lenses or macro lenses , both of which allow close focus and therefore a shorter distance to the subject, which reduces the loss of clarity to scattering.

[ 4 ] Digital media can hold many more shots than standard film (which rarely has more than 36 frames per roll). This gives digital cameras an advantage, since it is impractical to change film underwater. Other comparisons between digital and film photography also apply, and the use of film under water has declined, as it has on land. It is also not possible to change regular lenses underwater, though some wet connectable telephoto, fisheye and macro extensions are available for some housings.

Underwater housings have control knobs and buttons that reach the camera inside, allowing use of most of its normal functions. These housings may also have connectors to attach external flash units. Some basic housings allow the use of the flash on the camera, but the on-board flash may not be powerful enough or properly placed for underwater use. More-advanced housings either redirect the on-board strobe to fire a slave strobe via a fiber-optic cable, or physically prevent the use of the on-board strobe. Housings are made waterproof by silicone or other elastomer O-rings at the closures and where control spindles and pushbuttons pass through the housing. High-end housings may use double O-rings on many of the critical pushbuttons and spindles to reduce the risk of leaks, which can destroy the electronics in cameras. Some cameras are inherently waterproof, or submersible to shallow depths; when these are in submersible housings, the consequences of a small leak are generally not serious.

There are optical problems with using cameras inside a watertight housing. Because of refraction , the image coming through the glass port will be distorted, especially with wide-angle lenses. A dome-shaped or fish-eye port corrects this distortion. Most manufacturers make these dome ports for their housings, often designing them to be used with specific lenses to maximize their effectiveness.

The Nikonos series allowed the use of water-contact optics—lenses designed to be used submerged, without the ability to focus correctly when used in air. There is also a problem with some digital cameras , which do not have sufficiently wide lenses built in; to solve this, there are housings made with supplementary optics in addition to the dome port, making the apparent angle of view wider. Some housings work with wet-coupled lenses, which are screwed on to the outside of the lens port and increase the field of view; these lenses may be added or removed under water, allowing both macro and wide-angle photography on the same dive.

With macro lenses , the distortion caused by refraction is not a problem, so normally a simple flat glass port is used. Refraction through a flat port increases the magnification of a macro lens; this is considered a benefit to photographers who are trying to capture very small subjects. Digital cameras may have several user selectable or programmable modes , which may include modes specifically for underwater use.

[ 5 ] Underwater housing for SLR with port extension, flat port and ring light Buoyancy of the housing may have to be adjusted by adding ballast or buoyancy chambers. Ideally these should be incompressible at working depth range so the buoyancy remains constant throughout the dive, and can be set with considerable precision. Most divers can manage a small divergence from neutral buoyancy, but a large divergence can make it difficult to hold the camera in place with one hand, which can often be useful, particularly with point and shoot cameras. When photographing on breath-hold, it is convenient if the camera will float back to the surface if dropped. On scuba it may be more convenient if it does not float away.

Smartphone housings [ edit ] Underwater housings for smartphones are available with a variety of depth ratings and features. These can be less expensive than dedicated underwater photography cameras. The simplest form is a waterproof pouch, best used for shallow-water photography.

[ 6 ] Some smartphone housings are limited by operating system. Others are compatible with almost any phone that will physically fit into the housing, but require Bluetooth and an app enabling the phone to communicate with the housing. Wireless communication allows the housing to be made with only one opening hull penetration and no moving parts penetrating the camera compartment. Some housings are pumped down to a near vacuum after sealing, which secures the cover and allows the seal to be tested before entering the water.

[ 7 ] Some (like the Diveroid Universal Lite [ 8 ] ) use physical capacitive buttons that interact with the touch screen.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2024 ) Camera formats [ edit ] Further information: Digital camera § Types of digital cameras Most types of digital camera have some underwater application. Those commonly seen in use are the models for which stock underwater housings are available, or which are inherently waterproof, such as rugged compact cameras , which may be used at shallow depths without a housing, but have housings available for greater depths.

Compacts, rugged compacts and bridge cameras have great versatility regarding focal length, they tend to have a wide angle to telephoto lens with macro capabilities making these functions available without need to change lenses, which cannot be done during a dive. Although wet change accessories are available to increase or decrease focal length and for greater magnification, the 2020 generation rugged compacts already have inherent very close focus ability, and fairly wide angle low end of the focal length. Some of the rugged compact cameras will fit into a large dry suit or BC pocket in their underwater housing, though not usually with an external strobe or video light, allowing a diver to conveniently carry the camera on a working dive in case it may be useful, or for a larger format photographer to carry it as a backup, or for opportunities where the main camera has an unsuitable lens fitted.

Action cameras are popular with divers who want a record of the dive, but not the task loading of operating the camera controls. The camera can be hand held for versatility, or can be head mounted for first person view, or mounted on other equipment, like a diver propulsion vehicle .

Mirrorless interchangeable-lens cameras and Digital single-lens reflex cameras have very similar ranges of applications, mostly for high end work, where the photographer wants the best possible image quality, and has the skills and desire to put in the necessary effort and accepts the limitations of being stuck with the same lens throughout the dive, and managing bulky equipment. These formats are almost always used with large external lighting systems which are needed in most circumstances to get the best results. A relatively large capital investment in equipment is associated with the format.

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2020 ) Lighting [ edit ] See also: Underwater vision Graph of light absorption coefficient of pure water Lighting for underwater photography has several aspects. There may be insufficient natural light to take a photo, in many cases the natural light has lost a significant part of the spectrum, or the photographer wishes to emphasize contrast between foreground and background. Where flash is used for the actual photograph, auxiliary light may be necessary or desirable to facilitate composition and focusing in low light conditions. Many digital cameras have video options, which require a steady light source, and in some cases a single video light can provide all these functions, and also serve as an adequate dive light for non-photographic applications.

The primary obstacle faced by underwater photographers is the loss of color and contrast when submerged to any significant depth . One issue faced is light attenuation.

[ 9 ] The longer wavelengths of sunlight (such as red or orange) are absorbed quickly by the surrounding water, so even to the naked eye everything appears blue-green. The loss of color increases not only vertically through the water column , but also horizontally, so subjects farther away from the camera also appear colorless and indistinct. This effect occurs in apparently clear water, such as that found around tropical coral reefs .

[ 10 ] Underwater photographers solve this problem by combining two techniques. The first is to get the camera as close to the photographic subject as possible, minimizing the horizontal loss of color. Many serious underwater photographers consider any more than about one yard or meter unacceptable. The second technique is the use of a flash or video lights to restore colour lost to depth.

Fill flash , used effectively, "paints" in missing colors by providing full-spectrum visible light to the overall exposure .

[ 11 ] Another environmental effect is range of visibility. The water is seldom optimally clear, and the dissolved and suspended matter can reduce visibility by both absorption and scattering of light.

Underwater flash [ edit ] Wide-angle image of French angelfish with proper balance between flash and sunlight The use of a flash or strobe is often regarded as the most difficult aspect of underwater photography. Some misconceptions exist about the proper use of flash underwater, especially as it relates to wide-angle photography . Generally, the flash should be used to supplement the overall exposure and to restore lost color, not as the primary light source. In situations such as the interior of caves or shipwrecks , wide-angle images can be 100% strobe light, but such situations are fairly rare. Usually, the photographer tries to create an aesthetic balance between the available sunlight and the strobe. Deep, dark or low visibility environments can make this balance more difficult, but the concept remains the same. Many modern cameras have simplified this process through various automatic exposure modes and the use of through-the-lens (TTL) metering. The increasing use of digital cameras has reduced the learning curve of underwater flash significantly, since the user can instantly review photos and make adjustments.

Color is absorbed as it travels through water, so that the deeper the observer, the less reds, oranges and yellow colors remain. The strobe replaces that color. It also helps to provide shadow and texture, and is a valuable tool for creativity.

Underwater photograph using internal flash illustrating backscatter An added complication is the phenomenon of backscatter , where the flash reflects off particles in the water. These particles show up in the final shot as bright dots.

[ 12 ] Even seemingly clear water contains enormous amounts of these particulates, even if they not readily seen by the naked eye. The best technique for avoiding backscatter is positioning the strobe away from the axis of the camera lens. Ideally, this means the flash will not light up the particulates in water directly in front of the lens, but will still illuminate the subject.

[ 13 ] Various systems of jointed arms and attachments are used to make off-camera strobes easier to manipulate.

Strobes positioned to reduce backscatter When using macro lenses , photographers are much more likely to use 100% strobe light for the exposure. The subject is normally very close to the lens, and the available ambient light is usually not sufficient.

There have been some attempts to avoid the use of artificial light entirely, but these have mostly failed. In shallow water, the use of custom white-balance provides excellent color without the use of strobe. In theory one could use color filters to overcome the blue-green shift, but this can be problematic. The amount of shift varies with depth and turbidity , and there would still be a significant loss of contrast. Many digital cameras have settings that will provide color balance , but this can cause other problems. For example, an image shifted toward the "warm" part of the spectrum can create background water which appears gray, purple or pink, and looks unnatural. There have been some successful experiments using filters combined with the raw image format function on some high-end digital cameras, allowing more detailed manipulation in the digital darkroom . This approach will probably always be restricted to shallower depths, where the loss of color is less extreme. In spite of that, it can be effective for large subjects such as shipwrecks which could not be lit effectively with strobes.

Macro image of a Whitemouth Moray Eel using 100% flash for the exposure Natural light photography underwater [ 13 ] can be beautiful when done properly with subjects such as upward silhouettes, light beams, and large subjects such as whales and dolphins.

Although digital cameras have revolutionized many aspects of underwater imaging, it is unlikely that flash will ever be eliminated completely. From an aesthetic standpoint, the flash emphasizes the subject and helps separate it from the blue background, especially in deeper water. Ultimately the loss of color and contrast is a pervasive optical problem that cannot always be adjusted in software such as Photoshop .

[ citation needed ] Snoot [ edit ] A snoot is a tube used to direct the illumination from the flash or other light source to a very restricted area, strongly illuminating the area of focus and leaving the surroundings relatively dark. It is used to selectively illuminate the subject to give dark backgrounds and a brightly lit subject. It is easier to use if the flash has an integral modeling light so the photographer can see how the illumination will be distributed during exposure. A snoot with the opening placed close to the subject at an angle can virtually eliminate backscatter.

This section needs expansion with: more details, example image, picture of a snoot in use. You can help by adding to it .

( December 2020 ) Modeling lights [ edit ] A modeling light is a low intensity light used to compose the picture when flash is intended for illumination. It allows a better view of the subject for focusing and framing the shot, but does not provide enough light to interfere with the flash illumination. Some flash units have integral modeling lights with an aluminum funnel and flash unit to direct the angle in which the light is exerted in. otherwise a diffuse low power dive light may work well for close up work.

This section needs expansion with: picture of a modeling light in use. You can help by adding to it .

( December 2020 ) Video lights [ edit ] A video light is a powerful light source used primarily for shooting video in environments with insufficient natural light, but can also be used as the primary light source for still photography. Placement of the video light follows the same recommendations as for flash photography, with the advantage that the illumination can be clearly seen and assessed before exposure. Considerably more energy is required for constant illumination in comparison with flash, and this method is best suited to cameras with sufficiently sensitive CCDs and for close up work. Another advantage is that the video light provides good illumination for general diving purposes. Video lights with adjustable intensity can be even more versatile. Video lights tend to be mounted similarly to flash. The intense light may disturb light sensitive animals, and they may react by retreating from the source. A large proportion of digital cameras have high definition video function, and video lights provide the option of switching between still and video using the same equipment.

This section needs expansion with: use of video lights for underwater photography – picture of video lights in use. You can help by adding to it .

( December 2020 ) Split images [ edit ] Split image showing surface-supplied divers riding a stage to the underwater workplace from a diving support vessel Another format considered part of underwater photography is the over/under or split image, a composition that includes roughly half above the surface and half underwater, with both in focus. One of the pioneers of the traditional technique was National Geographic photographer David Doubilet , who used it to capture scenes above and below the surface simultaneously. Split images are popular in recreational scuba magazines, often showing divers swimming beneath a boat, or shallow coral reefs with the shoreline seen in the background.

Over/under shots present some technical challenges beyond the scope of most underwater camera systems. Normally an ultra wide angle lens is used, similar to the way it would be used in everyday underwater photography. However, the exposure value in the above water part of the image is often higher (brighter) than in the one underwater. There is also the problem of refraction in the underwater segment, and how it affects the overall focus in relation to the air segment. There are specialized split filters designed to compensate for both of these problems, as well as techniques for creating even exposure across the entire image.

However, professional photographers often use extremely wide or fisheye lenses that provide extensive depth of field – and a very small aperture for even more extensive depth of field; this is intended for acceptably sharp focus both on the nearby underwater subject and the more distant elements above water. An external flash can also be very useful underwater, on a low setting, to balance the light: to overcome the difference in brightness of the elements above and below the water.

Over/under photos necessitate the lens or port to be partly below and partly above the surface. When bringing the outer optical surface out of the water, droplets can be left on the surface which can distort the image. This can be avoided to some extent by wiping off the droplets with a chamois leather cloth above the water and lowering the camera to working position. Keeping the port fully wet is an alternative option, which requires the shot to be taken before the water on the top part of the lens surface separates into droplets. Which approach works better will depend on the surface tension of water on the lens surface.

David Doubilet explained his technique for split field images in an interview for Nikon Corporation. "You need to use a D-SLR and a super wide-angle or fisheye lens and a sophisticated housing that has a dome, not a flat port. Underwater images are magnified by 25 percent, and the dome will correct for that. The technique requires a small f/stop—f/16 or smaller—for great depth of field, plus a lens capable of close-focus; you always focus on the subject below the water line. You also have to balance the light. I look for a light bottom—white sand is best—or a light underwater subject. I'll put the strobes down below and light the bottom and then expose for the top. If you shoot at, say, ISO 400, you'll have plenty of exposure for the top, and the strobes will take care of the bottom. Of course, you need subjects that suit the technique." [ 12 ] Digital darkroom techniques can also be used to "merge" two images together, creating the appearance of an over/under shot.

Applications [ edit ] Artistic photography , where the emotional impact on the viewer is a primary concern.

Records of the condition of equipment and structures by commercial divers, where the purpose is to accurately present visible evidence of the condition of the subject.

Records of the environment for personal and scientific purposes [ 9 ] Citizen science websites for recording Biodiversity using underwater photographs as records, such as iNaturalist , Reef Life Survey , iSpot etc., use photography as a reliable source of objective data where the observer is not required to be recognized as an expert in identification of the subject, but is trusted to provide sufficiently accurate information regarding time, location, and similar meta-data. Recreational diver photographic coverage of the underwater environment is much more frequent than scientific research capacity for popular dive sites.

Skills and training [ edit ] Since underwater photography is often performed while scuba diving, it is important that the diver-photographer be sufficiently skilled so that it remains a reasonably safe activity. Good scuba technique also improves the quality of images, since marine life is less likely to be scared away by a calm diver, and the environment is less likely to be damaged or disturbed by a diver competent in buoyancy, trim, and maneuvering skills. There is the possibility of encountering poor conditions, such as heavy currents, tidal flow , or poor visibility . Underwater photographers usually try to avoid these situations if reasonably practicable, but in many cases the desired subject can only be accessed under less than ideal conditions and the photographer must deal with reality.

Underwater diving training providers provide courses to help improve divers' diving skills and underwater photography skills.

[ 14 ] Good diving skills are necessary to avoid damaging the environment when maneuvering close to benthic subjects on reefs. Some underwater photographers have been implicated in reef damage.

[ 15 ] Scientific potential [ edit ] Underwater photography has become more and more popular since the early 2000s, resulting on millions of pictures posted every year on various websites and social media. This mass of documentation is endowed with an enormous scientific potential, as millions of tourists possess a much superior coverage power than professional scientists, who can not allow themselves to spend so much time in the field. 
As a consequence, several participative sciences programs have been developed, supported by geo-localization and identification web sites (such as iNaturalist ), along with protocols for auto-organization and self-teaching aimed at biodiversity-interested snorkelers, for them to turn their observations into sound scientific data, available for research. This kind of approach has been successfully used in Réunion island , allowing for tens of new records and even new species.

[ 16 ] Scientists use underwater photography to examine objects on the sea floor over time, such as through quadrats .

[ 9 ] History and Advancement [ edit ] Scuba diver filmng a coral reef nursery at Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary .

Underwater photography dates back to the early 20th century. Technological advancements, like the invention of the first waterproof camera housings and improvements in diving equipment , have made underwater photography more accessible. Today, digital cameras and advances in post-processing software have revolutionized underwater imaging, allowing photographers to capture high-resolution, color-rich images.

[ 17 ] Timeline [ edit ] Paul Bartsch with underwater camera (1926) Jacques-Yves Cousteau , pioneer of scuba diving and underwater photography and film-making.

Norwegian diving pioneer Odd Henrik Johnsen with underwater camera (1960s) Agnes Milowka.

1856 — William Thompson takes the first underwater pictures using a camera mounted on a pole.

1893 — Louis Boutan takes underwater pictures in Banyuls-sur-Mer while diving using surface supplied standard diving dress . He also develops an underwater flash and a remote control for deep waters using an electromagnet .

[ 18 ] 1914 — John Ernest Williamson shoots the first underwater motion picture in the Bahamas.

[ 19 ] 1926 — William Harding Longley and Charles Martin take the first underwater colour photos using a magnesium-powered flash.

1940– — Bruce Mozert begins to photograph at Silver Springs, Florida 1948 — Development of the Rolleimarin medium format camera housing started on the request of Hans Hass.

[ 20 ] 1954 — The Rolleimarin housing first marketed.

[ 20 ] 1957 — The CALYPSO-PHOT camera is designed by Jean de Wouters and promoted by Jacques-Yves Cousteau . It is first released in Australia in 1963. It features a maximum 1/1000 second shutter speed. A similar version is later produced by Nikon as the Nikonos , with a maximum 1/500-second shutter speed and becomes the best-selling underwater camera series.

1961 — The San Diego Underwater Photographic Society is established, one of the earliest organizations dedicated to the advancement of underwater photography.

Notable underwater photographers [ edit ] Tamara Benitez – Filipina cinematographer Christy Lee Rogers – Underwater fine art photographer Georges Beuchat – French inventor, diver and businessman Adrian Biddle – English cinematographer Jonathan Bird – American photographer, cinematographer, director and television host.

Eric Cheng – Taiwanese American entrepreneur and professional photographer Neville Coleman – Australian naturalist, underwater photographer, writer, publisher and educator Jacques Cousteau – French inventor of open circuit scuba, pioneer diver, author, film-maker and marine researcher John D. Craig – American businessman, writer, soldier, and diver Ben Cropp – Australian documentary filmmaker, conservationist and spearfisherman Bernard Delemotte – French diver and photographer David Doubilet – French diver and photographer John Christopher Fine – American marine biologist, wreck diver and author Rodney Fox – Australian diver, film maker and conservationist Ric Frazier – American photographer Stephen Frink – Underwater photographer and publisher Peter Gimbel – American filmmaker and underwater photojournalist Monty Halls – British TV broadcaster, diver and naturalist Hans Hass – Austrian biologist, film-maker, and underwater diving pioneer Henry Way Kendall – American particle physicist who won the Nobel Prize in Physics Rudie Kuiter – Dutch-born Australian underwater photographer, taxonomist, and marine biologist Joseph B. MacInnis – Canadian physician, author, poet and aquanaut Luis Marden – American photographer, explorer, writer, filmmaker, diver, navigator, and linguist Agnes Milowka – Australian cave diver Noel Monkman – New Zealand born Australian filmmaker specialising in underwater photography Steve Parish – British born Australian photographer and publisher Zale Parry – American pioneer scuba diver, underwater photographer and actress Pierre Petit – Early French photographer. First to attempt underwater photography Ronald C. Phillips – American marine botanist and professor. Produced coral and seagrass slides 1960s onwards for international scientific publications and university education Leni Riefenstahl – German film director, producer, screenwriter, editor, photographer, actress and dancer Peter Scoones – Underwater cameraman Brian Skerry – American photojournalist Wesley C. Skiles – American cave diver and underwater cinematographer E. Lee Spence – underwater archaeologist Philippe Tailliez – French pioneer of scuba diving and underwater photographer Ron Taylor and Valerie Taylor – Australian divers and shark cinematographers Albert Tillman – American educator and underwater diver.

John Veltri – American filmmaker and underwater photographer Stan Waterman – Cinematographer and underwater film producer J. Lamar Worzel – American geophysicist and underwater photographer Tamara Benitez Peter Scoones Brian Skerry See also [ edit ] Underwater diving portal Diving equipment – Equipment used to facilitate underwater diving Outline of photography – Art and practice of creating images by recording light Nature photography – Photography genre Underwater photography (sport) – Competitive underwater digital photography on scuba Underwater Photography World Championships – International event for the sport of underwater photography Underwater videography – Electronic underwater photography concerned with capturing moving images Action camera – These cameras can be used for underwater photography and videography References [ edit ] ^ 'NIKONOS-V camera body to be discontinued', September 18, 2001, "Nikon | News | NIKONOS-V camera body to be discontinued" . Archived from the original on 2013-01-02 . Retrieved 2012-09-02 .

, retrieved 03/09/2012.

^ "Sea and Sea" . Sea and Sea.

Archived from the original on 2012-06-11 . Retrieved 2012-06-20 .

^ Staff.

"Motor Marine III Instruction Manual" (PDF) . Sea and Sea . Retrieved 7 November 2016 .

^ "Picture This: A Beginners Guide to Underwater Photography" .

www.divetech.com . 22 November 2023 . Retrieved 2024-10-26 .

^ "Olympus TG-6 Underwater Camera Review" . Retrieved 16 December 2020 .

^ Stapley, Jon (20 June 2022).

"The best underwater housings for cameras and phones in 2024" .

Digital Camera World . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ Lebo, Matthias (23 January 2024).

"Comparing the most popular UW Smartphone Housings of 2024" .

YouTube . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ Coxworth, Ben (9 January 2024).

"Universal Lite turns almost any smartphone into an underwater camera" .

New Atlas . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ a b c "Practices of Science: Underwater Photography and Videography | manoa.hawaii.edu/ExploringOurFluidEarth" .

manoa.hawaii.edu . Retrieved 2025-02-03 .

^ Deep-six.com Archived 2024-07-23 at the Wayback Machine Color underwater ^ Scott Gietler Underwater Photography Guide Lighting with Strobes ^ a b "Underwater Photography Tips for Getting Started" .

Nikon . Nikon Inc. 2016 . Retrieved December 11, 2016 .

^ a b "Natural Light Photography" . Retrieved December 25, 2013 .

^ PADI Course Flowchart ^ Sink, K. (October 2004).

Appendix 2. Threats affecting marine biodiversity in South Africa (PDF) .

South African National Spatial Biodiversity Assessment 2004: Technical Report Vol. 4 Marine Component DRAFT (Report). pp.

97– 109.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-05-26 . Retrieved 2018-09-12 .

^ Bourjon, Philippe; Ducarme, Frédéric; Quod, Jean-Pascal; Sweet, Michael (2018).

"Involving recreational snorkelers in inventory improvement or creation: a case study in the Indian Ocean" .

Cahiers de Biologie Marine .

59 : 451– 460.

doi : 10.21411/CBM.A.B05FC714 .

^ Edge, Martin (2010).

The Underwater Photographer . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0240521640 .

^ Cárdenas, Fabricio (2014).

66 petites histoires du Pays Catalan [ 66 Little Stories of Catalan Country ] (in French). Perpignan: Ultima Necat.

ISBN 978-2-36771-006-8 .

OCLC 893847466 .

^ "Thirty leagues under the sea" .

The Independent . Nov 2, 1914 . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

^ a b "Welcome" (PDF) .

Club Rollei User Magazine . No. 26. July 2012 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bourjon, Philippe; Ducarme, Frédéric; Quod, Jean-Pascal; Sweet, Michael (2018).

"Involving recreational snorkelers in inventory improvement or creation: a case study in the Indian Ocean" .

Cahiers de Biologie Marine .

59 : 451– 460.

doi : 10.21411/CBM.A.B05FC714 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Underwater photography .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Photography Equipment Camera light-field digital field instant phone pinhole press rangefinder SLR still TLR toy view Darkroom enlarger safelight Film base format holder stock available films discontinued films Filter Flash beauty dish cucoloris gobo hot shoe lens hood monolight reflector snoot softbox Lens long-focus prime zoom wide-angle fisheye swivel telephoto Manufacturers Monopod Movie projector Slide projector Tripod head Zone plate Terminology 35 mm equivalent focal length Angle of view Aperture Backscatter Black-and-white Chromatic aberration Circle of confusion Clipping Color balance Color temperature Depth of field Depth of focus Exposure Exposure compensation Exposure value Zebra patterning F-number Film format large medium Film speed Focal length Guide number Hyperfocal distance Lens flare Metering mode Perspective distortion Photograph Photographic printing Albumen Photographic processes Reciprocity Red-eye effect Science of photography Shutter speed Sync Zone System Genres Abstract Aerial Aircraft Architectural Astrophotography Banquet Candid Conceptual Conservation Cloudscape Documentary Eclipse Ethnographic Erotic Fashion Fine-art Fire Forensic Glamour High-speed Landscape Monochrome Nature Neues Sehen Nude Photojournalism Pictorialism Pornography Portrait Post-mortem Ruins Selfie space selfie Social documentary Sports Still life Stock Straight photography Street Underwater Vernacular Wedding Wildlife Techniques Afocal Bokeh Brenizer Burst mode Contre-jour Crittercam ( Pigeon photography ) ETTR Fill flash Fireworks Hand-colouring Harris shutter High-speed Holography Infrared Intentional camera movement Kirlian Kite aerial Lo-fi photography Lomography Long-exposure Luminogram Macro Mordançage Multiple exposure Multi-exposure HDR capture Night Panning Panoramic Photogram Print toning Redscale Rephotography Rollout Scanography Schlieren photography Sabattier effect Slow motion Stereoscopy Stopping down Strip Slit-scan Sprocket hole Sun printing Tilt–shift Miniature faking Time-lapse Ultraviolet Vignetting Xerography Zoom burst Composition Diagonal method Framing Headroom Lead room Rule of thirds Simplicity Golden triangle (composition) History Timeline of photography technology Ambrotype Film photography Autochrome Lumière Box camera Calotype Camera obscura Daguerreotype Dufaycolor Heliography Lippmann plate Painted photography backdrops Photography and the law Glass plate Tintype Visual arts Regional Albania Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Greece India Japan Korea Luxembourg Norway Philippines Serbia Slovenia Sudan Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United States Uzbekistan Vietnam Digital photography Digital camera D-SLR comparison MILC camera back Digiscoping Comparison of digital and film photography Film scanner Image sensor CMOS APS CCD Three-CCD camera Foveon X3 sensor Image sharing Pixel Color photography Print film Chromogenic print Reversal film Color management color space primary color CMYK color model RGB color model Photographic processing Bleach bypass C-41 process Collodion process Cross processing Cyanotype Developer Digital image processing Dye coupler E-6 process Fixer Gelatin silver process Gum printing Instant film K-14 process Print permanence Push processing Stop bath Lists Largest photographs Most expensive photographs Museums devoted to one photographer Photographs considered the most important Photographers Norwegian Polish street women Photography periodicals Related Conservation and restoration of photographs film photographic plates Polaroid art Stereoscopy Say cheese Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐znm74
Cached time: 20250815220421
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.040 seconds
Real time usage: 1.318 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5437/1000000
Revision size: 40177/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 596406/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3679/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 101763/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.532/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18243981/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  839.394      1 -total
 24.81%  208.225      1 Template:Reflist
 22.45%  188.471      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 21.87%  183.581      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.75%  132.241     11 Template:Cite_web
 15.50%  130.142      6 Template:Annotated_link
 11.93%  100.175     36 Template:Navbox
  8.17%   68.579      6 Template:Ambox
  7.50%   62.968      1 Template:Short_description
  7.34%   61.591      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:291260:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815220421 and revision id 1306091200. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_photography&oldid=1306091200 " Categories : Underwater photography Underwater diving procedures Nature photography Photography by genre Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2013 Commons link from Wikidata Articles prone to spam from June 2012 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 22:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater photography 24 languages Add topic

