Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Rule 3 Ancestry 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter II of Russia 71 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Livvinkarjala Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Emperor of Russia from 1727 to 1730 Peter II Peter II in armour Emperor of Russia Reign 17 (6) May 1727 – 30 (19) January 1730 Coronation 25 February (7 March) 1728 Predecessor Catherine I Successor Anna Born ( 1715-10-23 ) 23 October 1715 Saint Petersburg , Tsardom of Russia Died 30 January 1730 (1730-01-30) (aged 14) Moscow , Russian Empire Burial Archangel Cathedral Names Pyotr Alekseyevich Romanov House Romanov Father Alexei Petrovich, Tsarevich of Russia Mother Charlotte Christine of Brunswick-Lüneburg Religion Russian Orthodox Signature Peter II Alexeyevich [ alt 1 ] ( Russian : Пётр II Алексеевич; 23 October 1715 – 30 January 1730) [ alt 2 ] was Emperor of Russia from 1727 until 1730, when he died at the age of 14. He was the only son of Tsarevich Alexei Petrovich [ a ] and Charlotte Christine of Brunswick-Lüneburg . After Catherine I 's death, Alexander Menshikov controlled Peter II, but was thwarted by his opponents and exiled by Peter. Peter was also influenced by favorites like Prince Aleksey Dolgorukov , leading to a neglect of state affairs and the tightening of serfdom . Peter's reign was marked by disengagement, disorder, and indulgence. He was engaged to Ekaterina Dolgorukova , but died suddenly of smallpox before the marriage, thus making him the last male agnatic member of the House of Romanov .

Early life [ edit ] The birth of Peter II of Russia, by Peter Schenk (1715) Peter was born in Saint Petersburg on 23 ( O.S. 12 ) October 1715. His father was the only living son of Peter the Great . His mother was well-connected to European royalty, and through her, Peter was a first cousin of Empress Maria Theresa of Austria.

Peter's mother died when he was only ten days old. His father, the tsarevich Alexei, accused of treason by his own father, Peter the Great , died in prison in 1718. So three-year-old Peter and his four-year-old sister, Natalya , became orphans. Their grandfather showed no interest in their upbringing or education: the Tsar had disliked their father and even their grandmother, his own first wife, and young Peter in particular reminded him of his only son Alexei, whom the Tsar suspected of treachery. Therefore, from his childhood, the young and orphaned Peter was kept in the strictest seclusion. His earliest governesses were the wives of a tailor and a vintner from the Dutch settlement, while a sailor named Norman taught him the rudiments of navigation. When he grew older, however, Peter was placed under the care of a Hungarian noble, Janos (Ivan) Zeikin (Zékány), [ 1 ] who seems to have been a conscientious teacher.

Menshikov was the de facto ruler of Russia when Peter II came to the throne Peter the Great died in 1725 and was succeeded by his second wife, Catherine I , a woman of low birth. The powerful minister Aleksander Danilovich Menshikov , who had aided in Catherine's accession, replaced the boy's teachers with the vice-chancellor, Count Ostermann . The program of education that Ostermann compiled included history, geography, mathematics, and foreign languages, but the overall education of the future emperor remained shallow and left much to be desired.

[ citation needed ] Peter himself did not display much interest in study; his favorite occupations were hunting and feasting.

By the time Catherine I died in 1727, it had become clear to those in power that the only grandson of Peter the Great could not be kept from his inheritance much longer. The majority of Russians and three-quarters of the nobility (especially the old-established nobility) were on his side, while the Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI (the husband of Peter's mother's elder sister, Elisabeth Christine of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel ) persistently urged Peter's claims through the imperial ambassador at Saint Petersburg . Through the efforts of Menshikov, the court named Peter as Catherine's heir apparent, even though Catherine had two daughters of her own. The relevant documentation also specified the betrothal of Peter to Menshikov's daughter Maria .

Rule [ edit ] Peter II's coat of arms of Russia (1727–1728) After Catherine's death in May 1727 and the proclamation of the 11-year-old Peter II as emperor, Menshikov took the young autocrat into his own house on Vasilievsky Island and had full control over all of his actions. For a few months in the summer of 1727, "[n]ot even Peter the Great was so feared or so obeyed", according to the Saxon ambassador. Menshikov became arrogant and domineering. He issued orders to the Emperor himself and then removed a silver plate that Peter had just given as a gift to his sister Natalya . To which the Emperor replied, "We shall see who is emperor, you or I." Soon, however, Menshikov became sick, and his opponents took advantage of his illness. Under the influence of Ostermann and the Dolgorukovs , Peter – long sick of Menshikov's wardship – stripped him of his rank (September 1727)  and exiled him to Siberia . The Emperor also dissolved his engagement with Menshikov's daughter.

The senate , the privy council and the guards took the oath of allegiance forthwith. At this time, German mathematician Christian Goldbach was appointed tutor to the young Peter II to take over from Andrey Osterman , whom Menshikov had appointed.

Peter II was quick-witted, but apparently a stubborn and wayward boy, much like his grandfather. Despite these similarities, the emperor had no desire to learn to rule, unlike Peter the Great . His young age meant that he could not adequately manage public affairs, and he almost never appeared at the Supreme Privy Council . This led to frustration among his subjects and in the imperial administration – officials did not dare to assume responsibility for important decisions. The Russian fleet became neglected, but Peter II showed no interest in the matter. Peter tightened serfdom by banning serfs from volunteering for military service and thus escaping their status.

[ 2 ] [ need quotation to verify ] With the fall of Menshikov and related court intrigues, the Emperor's main favorites became Prince Aleksey Dolgorukov and his son Ivan, who maintained great influence over the Emperor's decisions. According to contemporaries, Ivan Dolgorukov lived a reckless and profligate lifestyle, leading Peter II to spend much time feasting, playing cards and enjoying the company of women. He soon became addicted to alcohol.

Portrait of Tsar Peter II The coronation of Peter II took place in Moscow on 9 January 1728, with the Emperor and a huge entourage. Still, he was disengaged from the affairs of state. Foreign witnesses proclaimed: "All of Russia is in terrible disorder ... money is not paid to anyone. God knows what will happen with finances. Everyone steals, as much as he can." [ citation needed ] Moving the court and several other institutions from St. Petersburg back to Moscow (1728) was painful for the "Northern Capital", as well as for the nobility forced to move with it, as Peter the Great had put much effort into developing St. Petersburg into a large and lively city.

Peter II returned to St. Petersburg from time to time, but continued to lead an aimless life full of entertainment and distraction. He gradually fell under the thorough-going influence of the Dolgorukovs, and became smitten with the 18-year-old beauty Ekaterina Alekseyevna Dolgorukova . The Dolgorukov family schemed to tie themselves to the imperial bloodline, and persuaded Peter to become engaged to marry Ekaterina. However, it soon became clear that the young monarch had no interest in his fiancee, perhaps influenced by his aunt Elizabeth Petrovna , who did not like Ekaterina. Planning for the wedding went forward regardless, set to take place on  30 January  [ O.S.

19 January]  1730.

Portrait of Peter II's second fiancé, Ekaterina Alekseyevna Dolgorukova "Peter II has not reached the age when a person's personality has already shaped," historian Mykola Kostomarov wrote.

"While contemporaries praised his natural intelligence and good heart, they only hoped for that good to happen in the future. However, his behavior did not give chances to hope that he would be a good ruler. He hated learning and thinking about national affairs. He was totally engrossed in amusements, and was kept under someone else's influence." [ citation needed ] In late December 1729 Peter II fell dangerously ill. His condition deteriorated sharply after the frosty Epiphany Day (17 January  [ O.S.

6 January]  1730), when he participated in a feast. He was then rushed into the Lefortovo palace , standing at the back of his sleigh. The next day doctors diagnosed smallpox . The Dolgorukovs attempted to get the emperor to sign a testament naming Ekaterina as his heir, but they were not allowed into the dying emperor’s quarters: Peter II was already unconscious. In his delirium, he ordered horses so that he could visit his sister Natalya (who had died in 1728). A few minutes later, he died.

Emperor Peter II died as dawn broke on 30 January 1730 – the day scheduled for his marriage to Ekaterina Dolgorukova. He is buried in the Cathedral of the Archangel located at the Moscow Kremlin and was the only post-Petrine Russian monarch given that honor; along with Ivan VI (who was murdered and buried in the fortress of Shlisselburg ), he is the only post-Petrine monarch not buried in the Peter and Paul Cathedral in Saint Petersburg.

With Peter's death, the direct male line of the Romanov dynasty ended. He was succeeded on the Russian throne by his cousin Anna Ivanovna , daughter of Peter the Great's half-brother and co-ruler, Ivan V .

Ancestry [ edit ] Ancestors of Peter II of Russia 8.

Alexis I of Russia 4.

Peter the Great 9.

Natalia Kirillovna Naryshkina 2.

Alexei Petrovich, Tsarevich of Russia 10.

Feodor Abramovich Lopukhin 5.

Eudoxia Feodorovna Lopukhina 11. Ustinya Bogdanovna Rtischeva 1.

Peter II of Russia 12.

Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick 6.

Louis Rudolph, Duke of Brunswick 13.

Elisabeth Juliane of Holstein-Norburg 3.

Charlotte Christine of Brunswick 14.

Albert Ernest I, Prince of Oettingen-Oettingen 7.

Christine Louise of Oettingen-Oettingen 15.

Christine Friederike of Württemberg See also [ edit ] Tsars of Russia family tree Notes [ edit ] ^ Russian : Пётр II Алексеевич , romanized : Pyotr II Alekseyevich ^ Old Style date: 12 October 1715 – 19 January 1730 ^ Son of Peter the Great by his first wife, Eudoxia Lopukhina .

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Peter II of Russia .

^ Zékány János - Offices. Sándor Takáts: Z. J. Bpesti Hírlap, 1902. 332.

^ Riasanovsky, Nicholas Valentine (1963).

A History of Russia . Oxford University Press (published 2000). p. 250.

ISBN 9780195121797 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Peter II.

".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] See also: Bibliography of Russian history (1613–1917) Konstantin Arseniev (1839) (in Russian) The reign of Peter II (Царствование Петра II) at Runivers.ru in DjVu and PDF formats External links [ edit ] Romanovs. The fourth film; Peter Alexeevich; Anna Leopoldovna; Elizabeth Petrovna on YouTube – Historical reconstruction "The Romanovs". StarMedia. Babich-Design(Russia, 2013) Regnal titles Preceded by Catherine I Emperor of Russia 18 May 1727– 29 January 1730 Succeeded by Anna v t e List of Russian monarchs Grand princes of Vladimir and Moscow Yuri I the Long Arm Andrei I of Bogolyubovo Mikhail of Vladimir Vsevolod the Big Nest Yuri II of Vladimir Konstantin of Rostov Yuri II of Vladimir Yaroslav II of Vladimir Sviatoslav III of Vladimir Andrey II of Vladimir Alexander Nevsky Yaroslav of Tver Vasily of Kostroma Dmitry of Pereslavl Andrey of Gorodets Mikhail of Tver Yuri of Moscow Dmitry the Terrible Eyes Alexander of Tver Ivan I Simeon the Proud Ivan II the Fair Dmitry of Suzdal Dmitry of the Don Vasily I Vasily II the Blind Ivan III the Great Vasily III Ivan IV Tsars of all Russia Ivan IV the Terrible Feodor I Irina Boris Feodor II False Dmitry I Vasili IV Vladislav Michael Alexis Feodor III Peter I and Ivan V (co-rulers) Emperors of all Russia Peter I the Great Catherine I Peter II Anna Ivan VI Elizabeth Peter III Catherine II the Great Paul I Alexander I Nicholas I Alexander II the Liberator Alexander III the Peacemaker Nicholas II v t e Grand Dukes of Russia The generations are numbered from Peter I of Russia 1st generation Tsarevich Alexei Petrovich 2nd generation Peter II Peter III 3rd generation Paul I 4th generation Alexander I Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich Nicholas I Grand Duke Michael Pavlovich 5th generation Alexander II Grand Duke Constantine Nikolaevich Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich Grand Duke Michael Nikolaevich 6th generation Tsarevich Nicholas Alexandrovich Alexander III Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich Grand Duke Sergei Alexandrovich Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich Grand Duke Nicholas Konstantinovich Grand Duke Konstantine Konstantinovich Grand Duke Dmitri Konstantinovich Grand Duke Vyacheslav Konstantinovich Grand Duke Nicholas Nikolaevich Grand Duke Peter Nikolaevich Grand Duke Nicholas Mikhailovich Grand Duke Michael Mikhailovich Grand Duke George Mikhailovich Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich Grand Duke Sergei Mikhailovich Grand Duke Alexei Mikhailovich 7th generation Nicholas II Grand Duke Alexander Alexandrovich Grand Duke George Alexandrovich Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich Grand Duke Boris Vladimirovich Grand Duke Andrew Vladimirovich Grand Duke Dmitri Pavlovich Grand Duke John Konstantinovich 1 8th generation Tsesarevich Alexei Nikolaevich Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich 2 9th generation Grand Duke Michael Pavlovich 3 10th generation Grand Duke George Mikhailovich 3 1 born a Grand Duke, but stripped of his title by Alexander III 's ukase of 1886, limiting the style to sons and male-line grandsons of a tsar 2 title of pretence granted by Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich as claimant to the Russian throne 3 title of pretence granted by Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich as claimant to the Russian throne Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Poland Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_II_of_Russia&oldid=1295046169 " Categories : 1715 births 1730 deaths 18th-century Russian monarchs Deaths from smallpox Royalty from Saint Petersburg Emperors of Russia House of Romanov Monarchs who died as children Child monarchs from Europe Infectious disease deaths in Russia Russian people of German descent Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Poland) Russian royalty who died as children Hidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 10:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter II of Russia 71 languages Add topic

