Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Intellectual legacy Toggle Intellectual legacy subsection 2.1 Planning theory 2.2 Organization theory 3 Later life 4 References Toggle the table of contents Guy Benveniste Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American organization theorist (1927–2022) Guy Benveniste (February 27, 1927 - December 3. 2022) was an organization theorist who has written about the politics of planning and ways of encouraging bureaucracies to be more adaptive to change.

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] Benveniste was born in Paris, France , on February 27, 1927.  He left Vichy France in May 1942 to take refuge in Mexico. He attended Harvard University , where he received a BS and MS in engineering in 1948 and 1950. He worked as a construction engineer and an economist for the Mexican Light and Power Company before emigrating to the United States in 1954. He then joined the Stanford Research Institute in Menlo Park, California , where he undertook economic studies including the economics of solar energy and later became involved in economic development in third world countries.

In 1961, at the beginning of the Kennedy administration, he was named to a task force on the reorganization of the US AID agency. He joined the Kennedy administration in December 1961 working in the State Department on cultural and educational issues.

Benveniste joined the staff of the World Bank in mid-1962 when the Bank began financing education projects in developing countries. He went to Afghanistan and participated in justifying one of the Bank's first low-interest loans for education made to that country. In 1963, the Bank transferred him to Paris. Later that year he joined UNESCO , where he was instrumental in the creation of the UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning . He remained there until 1965.

Benveniste then obtained a PhD at Stanford University in the sociology of planning and was appointed to the faculty of the Graduate School of Education at the University of California at Berkeley in 1968.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Intellectual legacy [ edit ] Planning theory [ edit ] While at Berkeley, Benveniste published a series of books on the sociology of planning and bureaucracy. His Politics of Expertise and subsequent volumes [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] analyzed the process of planning or of giving technical advice. Benveniste argued that planners and experts had to consider political realities in the context of their technical arguments if their plans were not to be shelved or stay in limbo. In this way, he was an early proponent of and contributor to the literature on the problems of implementing ideas into action.

His first paper on the sociology of planning was published in 1968.

[ 7 ] He and other early writers argued that planners needed more than a good understanding of the technical problems of planning. They needed to understand the political and organizational context in which planning took place. Benveniste provided a theoretical argument to help articulate the technical reality to its political and organizational context. His work was always somewhat controversial since it suggested bending some truth to power.

[ 8 ] His publications span a quarter century. His first book, an analysis of planning in Mexico, was published in 1970.

[ 9 ] He was one of the first contributors to a better understanding of the political dimensions of planning and reform. As such his work received considerable attention at the time.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] He thus criticized the rational planning model and contributed to a better understanding of the urban planning process. Later, Benveniste espoused a far more active political role for planners in his Mastering the Politics of Planning (1994). This work received considerable attention, and a 1993 issue of the journal Planning Theory with nine articles was devoted to it.

[ 12 ] Organization theory [ edit ] Benveniste's contributions to organizational theory included Bureaucracy , published in 1977 [ 13 ] and  subsequent volumes.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Because of his interest with planners he focused on professionals and their roles in rapidly changing environments. In these works, Benveniste focused on the concept of profession and on the role of professionals in creating more flexible and adaptive organizations. He attempted to show that by giving more discretion to better-trained professionals it was possible to decentralize control in organizations.

[ 16 ] His The Twenty First Century Organization , published in 1994, was  translated and published in China.

[ 17 ] Later life [ edit ] Benveniste remained on the faculty at the University of California at Berkeley until his retirement in 1993. He then spent time painting and had several shows. For several years, he was represented in the Artist Gallery at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art .

References [ edit ] ^ "Guy Benveniste February 27, 1927 - December 3, 2022" . Chapel of the Chimes . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

^ Benveniste, Guy (2010).

From Paris to Berkeley . California: Create Space.

^ Anonymous (Spring 1993). "Retirements: Guy Benveniste".

Educator .

7 : 36– 37.

^ Benveniste, Guy (1972).

The Politics of Expertise . Berkeley: Glendassary.

ISBN 9780877097198 .

^ Benveniste, Guy (1977).

The Politics of Expertise, 2nd edition . San Francisco: Boyd & Fraser.

^ Benveniste, Guy (1981).

Regulation and Planning . San Francisco: Boyd & Fraser.

ISBN 9780878350759 .

^ Benveniste, Guy (October 1968). "Toward a Sociology of Planning".

Journal of Developing Areas .

3 : 27– 36.

^ White, Jay (November–December 1991). "From Modernity to Post modernity: Two Views of Planning and Public Administration".

Public Administration Review .

51 (6): 564– 568.

doi : 10.2307/976607 .

JSTOR 976607 .

^ Benveniste, Guy (1970).

Bureauracy and National Planning . New York: Praeger.

^ Peterson, Paul E. (December 1973). "The Politics of Expertise".

Social Service Review .

47 (4): 634– 635.

doi : 10.1086/643068 .

^ Morrow, William (1973). "Princes, Pundits, and Policy Planning".

Public Administration Review .

33 (3): 285– 289.

doi : 10.2307/974806 .

JSTOR 974806 .

^ Kaufman, Jerry (Summer 1993). "Commentary on Guy Benveniste's Mastering the Politics of Planning".

Planning Theory .

9 : 8– 76.

^ Benveniste, Guy (1977).

Bureaucracy . San Francisco: Boyd & Fraser.

^ Benveniste, Guy (1987).

Professionalizing the Organization . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 9781555420390 .

^ Benveniste, Guy (1994).

The Twenty First Century Organization . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

^ Cayer, Joseph (September 1995). "The Twenty First Century Organization".

American Review of Public Administration .

25 (3).

^ Benveniste, Guy (1998).

The Twenty First Century Organization (in Chinese). Beijing: Glocal.

v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guy_Benveniste&oldid=1234349527 " Categories : 1927 births 2022 deaths French academics French emigrants to the United States Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences alumni American organizational theorists 20th-century French social scientists French business theorists Researchers in organizational studies Stanford University alumni University of California, Berkeley people Scientists from Paris Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2024, at 22:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guy Benveniste Add languages Add topic

