Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Discovery 3 Superhumps 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cataclysmic variable star 24 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cataclysmic variable ) Stars with irregular large fluctuations in brightness A non-magnetic cataclysmic variable. A white dwarf accretes matter from its Roche lobe -filling companion.

In astronomy , cataclysmic variable stars ( CVs ) are stars which irregularly increase in brightness by a large factor, then drop back down to a quiescent state. They were initially called novae (from Latin ' new ' ), since those with an outburst brightness visible to the naked eye and an invisible quiescent brightness appeared as new stars in the sky.

Cataclysmic variable stars are binary stars that consist of two components; a white dwarf primary, and a mass transferring secondary. The stars are so close to each other that the gravity of the white dwarf distorts the secondary, and the white dwarf accretes matter from the companion. Therefore, the secondary is often referred to as the donor star , and it is usually less massive than the primary.

[ 1 ] The infalling matter, which is usually rich in hydrogen , forms in most cases an accretion disk around the white dwarf. Strong UV and X-ray emission is often detected from the accretion disc, powered by the loss of gravitational potential energy from the infalling material.

[ 2 ] The shortest currently observed orbit in a hydrogen-rich system is 51 minutes in ZTF J1813+4251 .

[ 3 ] Material at the inner edge of disc falls onto the surface of the white dwarf primary. A classical nova outburst occurs when the density and temperature at the bottom of the accumulated hydrogen layer rise high enough to ignite runaway hydrogen fusion reactions, which rapidly convert the hydrogen layer to helium . If the accretion process continues long enough to bring the white dwarf close to the Chandrasekhar limit , the increasing interior density may ignite runaway carbon fusion and trigger a Type Ia supernova explosion, which would completely destroy the white dwarf.

The accretion disc may be prone to an instability leading to dwarf nova outbursts, when the outer portion of the disc changes from a cool, dull mode to a hotter, brighter mode for a time, before reverting to the cool mode. Dwarf novae can recur on a timescale of days to decades.

Classification [ edit ] Cataclysmic variables are subdivided into several smaller groups, often named after a bright prototype star characteristic of the class. In some cases the magnetic field of the white dwarf is strong enough to disrupt the inner accretion disk or even prevent disk formation altogether. Magnetic systems often show strong and variable polarization in their optical light, and are therefore sometimes called polars ; these often exhibit small-amplitude brightness fluctuations at what is presumed to be the white dwarf's period of rotation.

Supernovae These are classed as cataclysmic variables and have extremely large outbursts that destroy the progenitor star.  Some result from white dwarfs in binary systems but others are very massive stars.

(Classical) novae These cataclysmic variables have very large outbursts, of 6 to 19 magnitudes, caused by thermonuclear fusion of material accreted onto the white dwarf.

Recurrent novae These have outbursts of about 4 to 9 magnitudes, repeating every 10 to 80 years.

[ 4 ] Examples include T Pyxidis and RS Ophiuchi .

Dwarf novae Dwarf novae, or U Geminorum stars , are cataclysmic variables which are observed to brighten repeatedly, though by a smaller amount than classical novae.

Z Camelopardalis stars Temporarily "halt" at a particular brightness below their peak SU Ursae Majoris stars Have " superoutbursts " which are brighter than the average SS Cygni stars Have outbursts of two distinct lengths Luminous red novae These are stellar mergers that become very red after outburst.

Polars AM Herculis stars are binaries in which the magnetic field of the white dwarf has synchronized the latter's rotational period with the binary orbital period. Matter from the donor star is magnetically channeled onto the white dwarf rather than forming a disc.

DQ Herculis , also called 'intermediate polars', have a slightly weaker magnetic field than AM Herculis stars; there is an accretion disc, but substructure in it is created by the field.

VY Sculptoris These are stars which occasionally drop in brightness by more than one magnitude, with very occasional dwarf-nova-type outbursts during the dim state. They may be a subclass of polars.

[ 5 ] AM Canum Venaticorum These are cataclysmic variables both of whose components are white dwarfs; the accretion disc is composed primarily of helium, and they are of interest as sources of gravitational waves .

SW Sextantis These are like dwarf novae but have the accretion disc in a steady state, so do not show outbursts; the disc emits non-uniformly. They are usually also eclipsing variables , though this appears to be a selection artefact .

[ 6 ] Z Andromedae (symbiotic variables) These are close binaries with a large cool component losing mass to a hotter compact component and accretion disc.

There are over 1600 known CV systems.

[ 7 ] The catalog was frozen as of 1 February 2006 though more are discovered each year.

Discovery [ edit ] Cataclysmic variables are among the classes of astronomical objects most commonly found by amateurs, since a cataclysmic variable in its outburst phase is bright enough to be detectable with very modest instruments, and the only celestial objects easily confused with them are bright asteroids whose movement from night to night is clear.

Verifying that an object is a cataclysmic variable is also fairly straightforward: they are usually quite blue objects, they exhibit rapid and strong variability, and they tend to have peculiar emission lines . They emit in the ultraviolet and X-ray ranges; they are expected also to emit gamma rays, from annihilation of positrons from proton-rich nuclei produced in the fusion explosion, but this has not yet been detected.

[ 8 ] Around six galactic novae (i.e. in our own galaxy ) are discovered each year, whilst models based on observations in other galaxies suggest that the rate of occurrence ought to be between 20 and 50; [ 9 ] this discrepancy is due partly to obscuration by interstellar dust, and partly to a lack of observers in the southern hemisphere and to the difficulties of observing while the Sun is up and at full moon .

Superhumps [ edit ] Main article: Superhump Some cataclysmic variables experience periodic brightenings caused by deformations of the accretion disk when its rotation is in resonance with the orbital period of the binary.

References [ edit ] ^ Lavalle, Mimi; University, Louisiana State.

"Binary star V Sagittae to explode as very bright nova by century's end" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2024-07-14 .

^ NASA (2017-12-11).

"Introduction to Cataclysmic Variables (CVs)" .

heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov . Retrieved 2024-10-06 .

^ "Astronomers Discover 'Cataclysmic' Star Pair, Confirming Decades-Old Prediction" .

CNET . Retrieved 2023-11-06 .

^ Mobberley, Martin (2009).

Cataclysmic Cosmic Events and How to Observe Them . New York: Springer. p.

59 .

ISBN 978-0-387-79945-2 .

^ Hameury, Jean-Marie; Lasota, Jean-Pierre (October 4, 2002). "VY Sculptoris stars as magnetic CVs".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

394 (1): 231– 239.

arXiv : astro-ph/0207084 .

Bibcode : 2002A&A...394..231H .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:20021136 .

S2CID 5498393 .

^ "Defining Characteristics of the SW Sextantis Stars" . Archived from the original on 2007-11-19.

^ Downes, Ronald; et al.

"A Catalog and Atlas of Cataclysmic Variables" .

^ Senziani, F; Skinner, G.K.; Jean, P.; Hernanz, M. (2008). "Detectability of gamma-ray emission from classical novae with Swift/BAT".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

485 (1): 223– 231.

arXiv : 0804.4791 .

Bibcode : 2008A&A...485..223S .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:200809863 .

S2CID 16650963 .

^ Darnley, M. J.; Bode, M. F.; Kerins, E.; Newsam, A. M.; An, J.; Baillon, P.; Belokurov, V.; Calchi Novati, S.; Carr, B. J.; Creze, M.; Evans, N. W.; Giraud-Heraud, Y.; Gould, A.; Hewett, P.; Jetzer, Ph.; Kaplan, J.; Paulin-Henriksson, S.; Smartt, S. J.; Tsapras, Y.; Weston, M. (2006).

"Classical novae from the POINT-AGAPE microlensing survey of M31 -- II. Rate and statistical characteristics of the nova population" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

369 (1): 257– 271.

arXiv : astro-ph/0509493 .

Bibcode : 2006MNRAS.369..257D .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.10297.x .

S2CID 85510790 .

External links [ edit ] A Catalog and Atlas of Cataclysmic Variables (Archival Edition) Catalogue of Cataclysmic Binaries, Low-Mass X-Ray Binaries and Related Objects (RKcat Edition 7.24, 31 Dec 2015 – The Final Edition) CVnet, a website and community for CV enthusiasts and researchers – features announcements of new discoveries A Beginner's Guide to Cataclysmic Variables – features a very good categorisation of the different classes of stars Cataclysmic Variables , NASA's High Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Research Center (HEASARC) page v t e White dwarf Formation Chandrasekhar limit Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Mira variable PG 1159 star Stellar evolution Fate Black dwarf Type Ia supernova Candidates Neutron star Pulsar Magnetar Related links Stellar black hole Related links Compact star Quark star Exotic star Extreme helium star Subdwarf B star Helium planet In binary systems Nova Remnant List Dwarf nova Micronova Symbiotic nova Cataclysmic variable star AM CVn star Polar Intermediate polar X-ray binary Supersoft X-ray source Binary pulsar Helium flash Carbon detonation Properties Pulsating Urca process Electron-degenerate matter Quasi-periodic oscillations White dwarf cooling anomaly Related Planetary nebula List RAMBOs White dwarf luminosity function Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae List Category v t e Variable stars Pulsating Cepheids and cepheid-like Type I ( Classical cepheids , Delta Scuti ) Type II ( BL Herculis , W Virginis , RV Tauri ) RR Lyrae Rapidly oscillating Ap SX Phoenicis Blue-white with early spectra Alpha Cygni Beta Cephei Slowly pulsating B-type PV Telescopii Blue large-amplitude pulsator Long-period Mira Semiregular Slow irregular Other Gamma Doradus Solar-like oscillations White dwarf Eruptive Protostar and PMS Herbig Ae/Be Orion FU Orionis T Tauri Giants and supergiants Luminous blue variable R Coronae Borealis ( DY Persei ) Yellow hypergiant Eruptive binary Double periodic FS Canis Majoris RS Canum Venaticorum Other Flare Gamma Cassiopeiae Lambda Eridani Wolf–Rayet Cataclysmic AM Canum Venaticorum Dwarf nova Luminous red nova Nova Polar Intermediate Supernova Hypernova SW Sextantis Symbiotic Symbiotic nova Z Andromedae Rotating Non-spherical Rotating ellipsoidal Stellar spots BY Draconis FK Comae Berenices Magnetic fields α 2 Canum Venaticorum Pulsar SX Arietis Eclipsing Algol Beta Lyrae Planetary transit W Ursae Majoris Star portal * List Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cataclysmic_variable_star&oldid=1278844339 " Categories : Binary stars Cataclysmic variable stars Semidetached binaries Stellar phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 23:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cataclysmic variable star 24 languages Add topic

