Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of Canadian science fiction 2 Canadian science fiction authors 3 Canadian science fiction in film and television 4 Awards 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Canadian science fiction Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science fiction A strong element in Canadian culture is rich, diverse, thoughtful and witty science fiction .

History of Canadian science fiction [ edit ] The first recorded Canadian works of science fiction or proto-science fiction include Napoléon Aubin 's unfinished serial, Mon Voyage à la Lune , a satirical Moon voyage published in 1839, and James De Mille 's novel, A Strange Manuscript Found in a Copper Cylinder , published posthumously in 1888.

[ 1 ] Another early instance is the 1896 work Tisab Ting, or, The Electrical Kiss , a pseudonymous first novel by an Ida May Ferguson of New Brunswick under the pseudonym "Dyjan Fergus". Set in late 20th century Montreal , it features an "electrical genius": a "learned Chinaman" who woos and wins a Canadian wife through his superior scientific knowledge as embodied in "the Electrical Kiss".

[ 2 ] It is of interest mainly because of its early publication date and female authorship; [ 3 ] a microfiche reprint was issued in 1980.

[ 4 ] In 1948, the 6th World Science Fiction Convention , also called Torcon, was held in Toronto . Although it was organized by members of a local science fiction fandom group called "The Derelicts" and chaired by local fan Edward "Ned" McKeown, the Guests of Honor, Robert Bloch (pro) and Bob Tucker (fan), were both Americans. Among those in attendance were Forrest J Ackerman , Bloch, Leslie A. Croutch , E. Everett Evans , James "Rusty" Hevelin , David H. Keller , Judith Merril , Sam Moskowitz , Chad Oliver , George O. Smith , Will Sykora , Tucker, and Donald Wollheim .

[ 5 ] Like many aspects of Canadian culture , Canadian science fiction emerged from a variety of isolated sources, including A. E. van Vogt , the fantasy works of John Buchan , the poetry of Phyllis Gotlieb , and a handful of other writers. In the late 20th century, political upheaval in the United States brought such talents as Spider Robinson and Judith Merril to Canada.

In 1973, the World Science Fiction Convention was held again in Toronto , bringing a new generation of interest to writers like Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens . This led to a range of activities and interest in the genre. Merril began hosting quarterly gatherings of authors in a loose group called "Toronto Hydra", a tradition she had brought from the New York SF community. In 1977, the Ottawa Science Fiction Society was founded, providing a venue for writers such as Charles R. Saunders and Charles de Lint through their club fanzine Stardock , as well as sponsoring Maplecon in its early years.

In the early 1980s, the Ontario Science Fiction Club was set up by Robert J. Sawyer , while the Bunch of Seven became the first known science fiction writing circle in Canada, helping the success of authors like S. M. Stirling and Tanya Huff , which later led to the Cecil Street Irregulars which included writers like Cory Doctorow . De Lint, Huff and Guy Gavriel Kay became notable for using Canadian settings in science fiction and fantasy, and William Gibson pioneered the cyberpunk subgenre with his novel Neuromancer .

In Quebec, Élisabeth Vonarburg and other authors developed a related tradition of French-Canadian SF. The Prix Boreal was established in 1979 to honour Canadian science fiction works in French. The Prix Aurora Awards (briefly preceded by the Casper Award) were founded in 1980 to recognize and promote the best works of Canadian science fiction in both French and English.

Regular annual science fiction conventions, notably Ad Astra , brought fans and writers together to further broaden awareness and appreciation of science fiction literature in Canada.

By the 1990s, Canadian science fiction was well established and internationally recognized; mainstream authors such as Margaret Atwood began including SF in their repertoire.

SF Canada , Canada's National Association of Speculative Fiction Professionals, was established in 1992.

[ 6 ] Canadian science fiction authors [ edit ] Main article: List of Canadian science fiction and fantasy authors Some of the most famous Canadian writers of science fiction include Margaret Atwood , John Clute , Charles de Lint , Cory Doctorow , James Alan Gardner , William Gibson , Ed Greenwood , Tanya Huff , H. L. Gold , Nalo Hopkinson , Guy Gavriel Kay , Judith Merril , Spider Robinson , Robert J. Sawyer , Karl Schroeder , Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens , A. E. van Vogt , and Robert Charles Wilson .

Canadian science fiction in film and television [ edit ] Main article: Canadian science fiction television The Canadian Broadcasting Company began producing science fiction as early as the 1950s. CTV produced The Starlost at the CFTO studios in Scarborough. In the early 1990s, Toronto and Vancouver became prominent centres of television and film production, with shows like Forever Knight and RoboCop , then The X-Files raised the profile of Canadian science fiction television much higher, although only Forever Knight was itself set in Canada. By the late 1990s, a significant fraction of science fiction and fantasy on television was produced in Canada. In the early 2000s, due to changes in tax laws, production companies shifted much of their operations from Toronto to Vancouver.

Some of the most popular science fiction movies and TV shows seen around the world are made primarily or entirely in Vancouver & Toronto which are both often called Hollywood North , or elsewhere in Canada.

Quebec produces shows in French . Canadian studios also produced a large volume of animation, notably specializing in 3D animation.

Canadian science fiction films of note include: eXistenZ Cube Nothing Johnny Mnemonic Scanners Screamers (1995) Last Night Awards [ edit ] Aurora Awards —Canadian science fiction novels (English and French), administered by the Canadian Science Fiction & Fantasy Association Prix Boréal - Canadian science fiction awards for works in French Sunburst Awards - annual juried award for Canadian speculative fiction novel in two categories: adult and young adult Constellation Awards - given to actors, writers, and technical artists for excellence in science fiction film and television, as selected by the Canadian viewing public References [ edit ] ^ David Ketterer, "A Historical Survey of Canadian Science Fiction", Science Fiction Studies , Vol. 10, No. 1 (Mar., 1983), p. 87.

^ unsigned review "Canadian Fiction" The Canadian Magazine Vol. VIII No. 3 (January, 1897); p. 284 ^ Ketterer, David, Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy, Indiana University Press, 1992; p. 17 ^ Fergus, Dyjan, Tisab Ting, or, the Electrical Kiss , Hunter, Rose, Toronto, 1896 (reproduced 1980), ISBN 0665030894 ^ Cameron, R.G., ed.

WSCFSAzine #11 (July 2008) "CELEBRATING THE 6Oth ANNIVERSARY OF THE 1948 WORLDCON IN TORONTO!" ^ "About SF Canada" . Archived from the original on 2011-11-10.

External links [ edit ] SF Canada , Canada's national association of SF professionals Made in Canada comprehensive website about Canadian science fiction (No longer updated) Canadian Science Fiction and Fantasy at the Library and Archives of Canada site SF Site - world-renowned resource on science fiction literature (based in Ottawa) The Merril Collection of Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Speculation - major science fiction library collection, part of the Toronto Public Library system v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Canadian literature Types Indigenous literatures Nova Scotia literature Quebec literature Genres Comics Poetry Science fiction People Writers Asian Canadian Black Canadian Jewish Canadian Science fiction and fantasy authors Short story writers Quebec writers more...

Publishers Book publishers in Upper Canada Douglas & McIntyre Dundurn Press ECW Press Formac Lorimer Macmillan of Canada McClelland & Stewart Nimbus Publishing Ryerson Press more...

Awards Atlantic Book Awards CBC Literary Prize CSFFA Hall of Fame Trophy Governor General's Awards Lorne Pierce Medal Trillium Book Award Related Bibliography of Canada Canadian content Canada Reads Canada portal Literature portal Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐dt9q9
Cached time: 20250812003334
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.316 seconds
Real time usage: 0.415 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 841/1000000
Revision size: 8984/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 99821/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 354/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33263/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.190/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5099783/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  317.049      1 -total
 38.23%  121.195      7 Template:Navbox
 31.76%  100.679      1 Template:Reflist
 30.05%   95.287      1 Template:Science_fiction
 19.51%   61.842      1 Template:ISBN
 18.73%   59.382      1 Template:Short_description
 11.35%   35.995      1 Template:Hlist
 11.03%   34.972      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.27%   26.215      1 Template:Cite_web
  6.21%   19.689      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1036822:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003334 and revision id 1295250108. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_science_fiction&oldid=1295250108 " Category : Canadian science fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 16:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Canadian science fiction Add languages Add topic

