Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By country Toggle By country subsection 1.1 Australia 1.2 Bangladesh 1.3 Belgium 1.4 Brazil 1.5 Canada 1.6 Hong Kong 1.7 India 1.8 Ireland 1.9 Netherlands 1.10 United Kingdom 1.11 United States 2 By sector Toggle By sector subsection 2.1 Catholic Church 2.2 In health sector 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tribunal 29 languages Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu मराठी 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Українська Vahcuengh Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person or institution with the authority to judge, adjudicate or determine claims or disputes For other uses, see Tribunal (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tribunal" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Andrew Birrell (after Henry Fuseli ), Caractacus at the Tribunal of Claudius at Rome (1792) A tribunal , generally, is any person or institution with authority to judge , adjudicate on, or determine claims or disputes—whether or not it is called a tribunal in its title.

[ 1 ] For example, an advocate who appears before a court with a single judge could describe that judge as "their tribunal". Many governmental bodies are titled "tribunals" to emphasize that they are not courts of normal jurisdiction . For instance, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda was a body specially constituted under international law ; in Great Britain , employment tribunals are bodies set up to hear specific employment disputes.

In many but not all cases, tribunal implies a judicial or quasi-judicial body with a lesser degree of formality than a court, in which the normal rules of evidence and procedure may not apply, and whose presiding officers are frequently neither judges nor magistrates. Private judicial bodies are also often-styled tribunals.

Tribunal is not conclusive of a body's function; in Great Britain, the Employment Appeal Tribunal is a superior court of record.

The term is derived from the tribunes , magistrates of the Classical Roman Republic .

Tribunal originally referred to the office of the tribunes, and the term is still sometimes used in this sense in historical writings. The tribunal was the platform upon which the presiding authority sat; having a raised position physically was symbolic of their higher position regarding the adjudication of the law.

By country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, tribunal generally implies a body with a lesser degree of formality than a court , with a simplified legal procedure, often presided over by a lawyer (solicitor or barrister) who is not a judge or magistrate (often referred to as a member of the tribunal). In many cases, the lawyers who function as tribunal members do so only part-time and spend the greater part of their time carrying out other aspects of legal practice, such as representing clients. In many cases, the formal rules of evidence that apply in courts do not apply in tribunals, which enables tribunals to hear forms of evidence that courts may not be allowed to consider. Tribunals generally deal with simpler matters; while legal representation is permitted and not uncommon, self-representation is much more common in tribunals than in courts, and tribunal members and registry staff are generally more accustomed to dealing with self-represented parties than courts are. Appeal from a tribunal is to a court.

Tribunals in Australia include the following: Administrative Review Tribunal New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Every state has a "supertribunal" that covers a wide range of administrative decisions and, in some cases, has civil jurisdiction.

[ 2 ] In several Australian states, tribunals function as the equivalent of a small claims court .

In the context of sport , "tribunal" frequently refers to the AFL Tribunal , the disciplinary body of the Australian Football League .

Bangladesh [ edit ] In Bangladesh, tribunal refers to a court that serves some special purpose, of which Bangladesh has several. These have been set up to ensure speedy trial and reduce case congestion in the normal courts. Besides this, Article 117 of the Constitution of Bangladesh empowers the parliament to set up one or more administrative tribunals. No court can entertain any proceeding or make any order regarding any matter within such tribunal's jurisdiction.

[ 3 ] Belgium [ edit ] In the judicial system of Belgium , the names of the lower trial courts can be translated into English as "tribunals" ( Dutch : rechtbank , French : tribunal , German : gericht ). In comparison, the higher appellate courts can be translated as "courts" ( Dutch : hof , French : cour , German : hof ).

Brazil [ edit ] The Judiciary of Brazil officially names "tribunal" the appeal court and the ones above it, always with more than one judge. The higher court is the Supremo Tribunal Federal (Supreme Federal Court), followed by the superior tribunals ( Superior Tribunal de Justiça , Tribunal Superior Eleitoral , Tribunal Superior do Trabalho , Superior Tribunal Militar ). The federal justice is divided into regions; each has its  Tribunal Regional Federal (Regional Federal Court). Also, each state has its own Tribunal de Justiça (Justice Court).

Canada [ edit ] Civil Resolution Tribunal , an online Tribunal in British Columbia (BC).

Landlord and Tenant Board , formerly the Ontario Rental Housing Tribunal.

Ontario Condominium Authority , facilitates dispute resolution between condo owners and boards regarding issues such as noise complaints.

See also: List of Canadian tribunals Hong Kong [ edit ] The following tribunals exist within the Judiciary of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China : Lands , Small Claims , Labour , Obscene Articles . For public inquiries, commissions are set up instead under the Commissions of Inquiry Ordinance.

India [ edit ] There are tribunals for settling various administrative and tax-related disputes, including Central Administrative Tribunal, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal , Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal , National Green Tribunal, Competition Appellate Tribunal and Securities Appellate Tribunal, among others.

[ 4 ] The National Company Law Tribunal is a quasi-judicial body in India that adjudicates issues relating to Indian companies .

National Company Law Appellate Tribunal was constituted under Section 410 of the Companies Act, 2013, for hearing appeals against National Company Law Tribunal orders, effective 1 June 2016.

In several states, Food Safety Appellate Tribunals have been created to hear appeals against orders of adjudicating officers for food safety (additional deputy commissioners).

Armed Forces Tribunal is a military tribunal in India. It was established under the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 .

Permanent Lok Adalat (PUS) is a law court (also known as People's Court) and special tribunal set up in some districts throughout the country. It has been established under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 .

Ireland [ edit ] See also: Public Inquiry  §  List of selected Irish public inquiries In the Republic of Ireland , tribunal popularly refers to a public inquiry established under the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 . The main difference between a Parliamentary Inquiry (non-statutory) and a Tribunal of Inquiry in Ireland is that non-statutory inquiries are not vested with the powers, privileges, and rights of the High Court. Tribunals of Inquiry are. Tribunals are established by resolution of the Houses of the Oireachtas to enquire into matters of urgent public importance . It is not a function of Tribunals to administer justice; their work is solely inquisitorial . Tribunals are obliged to report their findings to the Oireachtas . They can enforce the attendance and examination of witnesses and produce documents relevant to the work. Tribunals can consist of one or more people. A layperson or non-lawyer may be the Sole member of a tribunal.

Netherlands [ edit ] The room where the Vierschaar adjucated in the former Amsterdam City Hall (now the Royal Palace ) Historically, before the separation of lawmaking, law enforcement, and justice duties in the Netherlands, all sentences were delivered by a tribunal of seven schepenen , or magistrates, appointed by the local count. Such a tribunal was called a Vierschaar , so named for a rope—or cord—drawn ( schaar or scheren ) in a four-square dimension, wherein the judges sat on four benches. These benches were also positioned in a square, with the defendant standing in the middle. Towns had the Vierschaar privilege to hear disputes. The Vierschaar was usually located in the town hall, and many historical town halls still have such a room, usually decorated with scenes from the Judgement of Solomon .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Tribunals in the United Kingdom The tribunal system of the United Kingdom is part of the national system of administrative justice . The system grew on an ad hoc basis from the beginning of the twentieth century, but reforms were introduced in 2007 to place most tribunals in a unified system with recognised judicial authority, routes of appeal and regulatory supervision.

[ 5 ] United States [ edit ] "Tribunal" is used in the U.S. generally to refer to courts or judicial bodies, as in the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct . The Ohio Rules of Professional Conduct, for instance, define "tribunal" as "a court, an arbitrator in a binding arbitration , or a legislative body, administrative agency, or other body acting in an adjudicative capacity." [ 6 ] By sector [ edit ] Catholic Church [ edit ] Main article: Canon law of the Catholic Church In the Catholic Church , ecclesiastical courts are called tribunals. Tribunals are distinguished by grade, while proceedings are distinguished by instance; for example, an archdiocesan tribunal may hear a cause in the first instance if the cause is first brought before the archdiocesan tribunal. Or, if the cause was first heard before the diocesan tribunal and is now appealed to the archdiocesan tribunal, the latter may hear the cause in the second instance. Only the Roman Rota can hear causes in the third instance, with limited exceptions. Other tribunals are incompetent in the third instance because of grade ( ratione gradus ) since they do not have the jurisdiction to judge in the third instance. Tribunals include: diocesan or eparchal tribunals (including archdiocesan or archeparchal tribunals) interdiocesan tribunals, that is, a tribunal erected by the Holy See for more than one diocese , either as a tribunal of the first instance or as an appellate tribunal in the second instance the synod of bishops of patriarchal churches is the highest tribunal within the territory of the patriarchal church, without prejudice to the primacy of the Apostolic See [ 7 ] ordinary tribunal of the patriarchal church, distinct from the eparchial tribunal of the patriarchal church [ 8 ] ordinary tribunals of the Apostolic See Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura , the highest tribunal in the canon law of the Catholic Church Tribunal of the Roman Rota , the highest appellate tribunal competent in most causes in the second and third instances and some causes in the first instance Apostolic Penitentiary , a tribunal for matters concerning the internal forum Supreme tribunal of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith for certain more grave delicts (canonical crimes) In health sector [ edit ] Tribunals also play an integral role in health sectors within and across nations. They are often referred to as "adjunctive tribunals". These quasi-judicial bodies possess regulatory, oversight, and dispute-resolution powers to aid health decision-making and governance. At the same time, the actual effects of adjunctive tribunals on health services are disputed, as little evidence exists to evaluate their efficacy. More empirical evaluations are needed to ensure that tribunals operate in a more evidence-based, systematic manner within the health sector.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Constitutional court International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia Iraqi Special Tribunal Lindsay Tribunal Nuremberg Trials Public Inquiry Revolutionary Tribunal Revolutionary tribunal (Russia) State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia The Elder Scrolls III: Tribunal ( Morrowind expansion pack) Tribunal for Local Governments in Kerala Tribune Waitangi Tribunal World Courts of Women Canadian tribunals References [ edit ] Look up tribunal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vierschaar .

^ Walker, David M. (1980).

Oxford Companion to Law .

Oxford University Press . p. 1239.

ISBN 0-19-866110-X .

^ Downes, Garry (2004).

"Tribunals in Australia: Their Roles and Responsibilities" .

Administrative Appeals Tribunal .

^ The Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh, Article-117 ^ "Government to restructure tribunals, autonomous organisations" , The Economic Times , 21 February 2016 ^ Richardson, Genevra (2009).

"tribunals" . In Cane, Peter; Conaghan, Joanne (eds.).

The New Oxford Companion to Law . Oxford Reference.

ISBN 9780199290543 .

^ "Ohio Rules of Professional Conduct" (PDF) . 1 September 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2022.

^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , canon 1062 §1 .

^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , canon 1063 §1 .

^ S.J. Hoffman, L. Sossin. 2012. "Empirically Evaluating the Impact of Adjudicative Tribunals in the Health Sector: Context, Challenges and Opportunities," Health Economics, Policy and Law 7(2): 147-174. doi:10.1017/S1744133111000156 ^ L. Sossin, S.J. Hoffman. 2010. "The Elusive Search for Accountability: Evaluating Adjudicative Tribunals," Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice 28(2): 343-360.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐nt78g
Cached time: 20250814215622
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.410 seconds
Real time usage: 0.521 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1333/1000000
Revision size: 15821/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 54752/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1557/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36699/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.270/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23174560/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  428.343      1 -total
 20.42%   87.451      1 Template:Reflist
 17.97%   76.973      6 Template:Langx
 16.86%   72.231      1 Template:Law
 16.53%   70.809      1 Template:Navbox
 13.18%   56.442      1 Template:Cite_book
 12.03%   51.524      1 Template:Short_description
 10.75%   46.042      2 Template:Sister_project
 10.45%   44.769      2 Template:Side_box
  9.67%   41.436      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:396605:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215622 and revision id 1304602839. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tribunal&oldid=1304602839 " Categories : Tribunals Courts by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2020 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 01:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tribunal 29 languages Add topic

