Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Major ecological regions Toggle Major ecological regions subsection 2.1 Amazonia 2.2 Caribbean 2.3 Central America 2.4 Central Andes 2.5 Eastern South America 2.6 Northern Andes 2.7 Orinoco 2.8 Southern South America 3 History 4 Endemic animals and plants Toggle Endemic animals and plants subsection 4.1 Animals 4.2 Plants 5 Neotropical terrestrial ecoregions 6 Citations 7 General and cited bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Neotropical realm 47 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو West-Vlams 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Neotropical ) One of Earth's eight biogeographic realms For the musical artist, see Neotropic (band) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Neotropical realm" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Neotropical realm (in purple) The Neotropical realm is one of the eight biogeographic realms constituting Earth's land surface. Physically, it includes the tropical terrestrial ecoregions of the Americas and the entire South American temperate zone.

Definition [ edit ] In biogeography , the Neotropic or Neotropical realm is one of the eight terrestrial realms . This realm includes South America, Central America , the Caribbean Islands , and southern North America.  In Mexico, the Yucatán Peninsula and southern lowlands, and most of the east and west coastlines, including the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula are Neotropical.  In the United States southern Florida and coastal Central Florida are considered Neotropical.

[ 1 ] The realm also includes temperate southern South America. In contrast, the Neotropical Floristic Kingdom excludes southernmost South America, which instead is placed in the Antarctic kingdom .

The Neotropic is delimited by similarities in fauna or flora . Its fauna and flora are distinct from the Nearctic realm (which includes most of North America) because of the long separation of the two continents. The formation of the Isthmus of Panama joined the two continents two to three million years ago, precipitating the Great American Interchange , an important biogeographical event.

The Neotropical realm and the borders running through it The Neotropic includes more tropical rainforest ( tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ) than any other realm, extending from southern Mexico through Central America and northern South America to southern Brazil, including the vast Amazon rainforest . These rainforest ecoregions are one of the most important reserves of biodiversity on Earth. These rainforests are also home to a diverse array of indigenous peoples , who to varying degrees persist in their autonomous and traditional cultures and subsistence within this environment. The number of these peoples who are as yet relatively untouched by external influences continues to decline significantly, however, along with the near-exponential expansion of urbanization , roads, pastoralism and forest industries which encroach on their customary lands and environment. Nevertheless, amidst these declining circumstances this vast "reservoir" of human diversity continues to survive, albeit much depleted. In South America alone, some 350–400 indigenous languages and dialects are still living (down from an estimated 1,500 at the time of first European contact ), in about 37 distinct language families and a further number of unclassified and isolate languages . Many of these languages and their cultures are also endangered. Accordingly, conservation in the Neotropical realm is a hot political concern, and raises many arguments about development versus indigenous versus ecological rights and access to or ownership of natural resources .

Major ecological regions [ edit ] The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) subdivides the realm into bioregions , defined as "geographic clusters of ecoregions that may span several habitat types, but have strong biogeographic affinities, particularly at taxonomic levels higher than the species level (genus, family)." Laurel forest and other cloud forest are subtropical and mild temperate forest , found in areas with high humidity and relatively stable and mild temperatures.

Tropical rainforest , tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests are highlight [ clarification needed ] in Southern North America, Amazonia, Caribbean, Central America, Northern Andes and Central Andes.

[ citation needed ] Amazonia [ edit ] The Amazonia bioregion is mostly covered by tropical moist broadleaf forest , including the vast Amazon rainforest , which stretches from the Andes Mountains to the Atlantic Ocean, and the lowland forests of the Guianas . The bioregion also includes tropical savanna and tropical dry forest ecoregions.

[ 2 ] Caribbean [ edit ] Main article: Caribbean bioregion Central America [ edit ] Main article: Central America bioregion Central Andes [ edit ] Main article: Andes The Central Andes lie between the gulfs of Guayaquil and Penas and thus encompass southern Ecuador, Chile, Peru, western Bolivia, and northwest and western Argentina.

[ 3 ] Eastern South America [ edit ] Eastern South America includes the Caatinga xeric shrublands of northeastern Brazil, the broad Cerrado grasslands and savannas of the Brazilian Plateau , and the Pantanal and Chaco grasslands. The diverse Atlantic forests of eastern Brazil are separated from the forests of Amazonia by the Caatinga and Cerrado, and are home to a distinct flora and fauna.

[ 4 ] Northern Andes [ edit ] Main article: Andes North of the Gulf of Guayaquil in Ecuador and Colombia, a series of accreted oceanic terranes (discrete allochthonous fragments) have developed that constitute the Baudo, or Coastal, Mountains and the Cordillera Occidental.

[ 5 ] Orinoco [ edit ] The Orinoco is a region of humid forested broadleaf forest and wetland primarily comprising the drainage basin for the Orinoco River and other adjacent lowland forested areas. This region includes most of Venezuela and parts of Colombia, as well as Trinidad and Tobago .

Southern South America [ edit ] See also: Southern South America The temperate forest ecoregions of southwestern South America, including the temperate rain forests of the Valdivian temperate rain forests and Magellanic subpolar forests ecoregions, and the Juan Fernández Islands and Desventuradas Islands , are a refuge for the ancient Antarctic flora , which includes trees like the southern beech ( Nothofagus ), podocarps , the alerce ( Fitzroya cupressoides ), and Araucaria pines like the monkey-puzzle tree ( Araucaria araucana ). These rainforests are endangered by extensive logging and their replacement by fast-growing non-native pines and eucalyptus .

History [ edit ] See also: History of South America South America was originally part of the supercontinent of Gondwana , which included Africa, Australia, India, New Zealand, and Antarctica, and the Neotropic shares many plant and animal lineages with these other continents, including marsupial mammals and the Antarctic flora .

After the final breakup of the Gondwana about 110 million years ago, South America was separated from Africa and drifted north and west. 66 million years ago, the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event altered local flora and fauna.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Much later, about two to three million years ago, South America was joined with North America by the formation of the Isthmus of Panama , which allowed a biotic exchange between the two continents, the Great American Interchange . South American species like the ancestors of the Virginia opossum ( Didelphis virginiana ) and the armadillo moved into North America, and North Americans like the ancestors of South America's camelids , including the llama ( Lama glama ), moved south. The long-term effect of the exchange was the extinction of many South American species, mostly by outcompetition by northern species.

Endemic animals and plants [ edit ] Animals [ edit ] The Neotropical realm has 31 endemic bird families, which is over twice the number of any other realm. They include tanagers , rheas , tinamous , curassows , antbirds , ovenbirds , toucans , and seriemas . Bird families originally unique to the Neotropics include hummingbirds (family Trochilidae) and wrens (family Troglodytidae).

Mammal groups originally unique to the Neotropics include: Order Xenarthra : anteaters , sloths , and armadillos New World monkeys Solenodontidae , the solenodons Caviomorpha rodents , including capybaras , guinea pigs , hutias , and chinchillas American opossums (order Didelphimorphia ) and shrew opossums (order Paucituberculata ) The Neotropical realm has 63 endemic fish families and subfamilies, which is more than any other realm.

[ 8 ] Neotropical fishes include more than 5,700 species, and represent at least 66 distinct lineages in continental freshwaters (Albert and Reis, 2011). The well-known red-bellied piranha is endemic to the Neotropic realm, occupying a larger geographic area than any other piranha species. Some fish groups originally unique to the Neotropics include: Order Gymnotiformes : Neotropical electric fishes Family Characidae : tetras and allies Family Loricariidae : armoured catfishes Subfamily Cichlinae : Neotropical cichlids Subfamily Poeciliinae : guppies and relatives Examples of other animal groups that are entirely or mainly restricted to the Neotropical region include: Caimans New World coral snakes Poison dart frogs Dactyloidae ("anoles") Rock iguanas ( Cyclura ) Preponini and Anaeini butterflies (including Agrias ) Brassolini and Morphini butterflies (including Caligo and Morpho ) Callicorini butterflies Heliconiini butterflies Ithomiini butterflies Riodininae butterflies Eumaeini butterflies Firetips or firetail skipper butterflies Euglossini bees Augochlorini bees Pseudostigmatidae ("giant damselflies") Mantoididae (short-bodied mantises) Canopidae , Megarididae , and Phloeidae (pentatomoid bugs) Aetalionidae and Melizoderidae (treehoppers [ 9 ] ) Gonyleptidae (harvestmen) Plants [ edit ] According to Simberloff. as of 1984 there were a total of 92,128 species of flowering plants (Angiosperms) in the Neotropics.

[ 10 ] Plant families endemic and partly subendemic to the realm are, according to Takhtajan (1978), Hymenophyllopsidaceae , Marcgraviaceae , Caryocaraceae , Pellicieraceae , Quiinaceae , Peridiscaceae , Bixaceae , Cochlospermaceae , Tovariaceae , Lissocarpaceae ( Lissocarpa ), Brunelliaceae , Dulongiaceae , Columelliaceae , Julianiaceae , Picrodendraceae , Goupiaceae , Desfontainiaceae , Plocospermataceae , Tropaeolaceae , Dialypetalanthaceae ( Dialypetalanthus ), Nolanaceae ( Nolana ), Calyceraceae , Heliconiaceae , Cannaceae , Thurniaceae and Cyclanthaceae .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Plant families that originated in the Neotropic include Bromeliaceae , Cannaceae and Heliconiaceae .

[ 13 ] Plant species with economic importance originally unique to the Neotropic include: [ 14 ] Potato ( Solanum tuberosum ) Tomato ( Solanum lycopersicum ) Cacao tree ( Theobroma cacao ), source of cocoa and chocolate Maize ( Zea mays ) Passion fruit ( Passiflora edulis ) Guava ( Psidium guajava ) Lima bean ( Phaseolus lunatus ) Cotton ( Gossypium barbadense ) Cassava ( Manihot esculenta ) Sweet potato ( Ipomoea batatas ) Amaranth ( Amaranthus caudatus ) Quinoa ( Chenopodium quinoa ) Neotropical terrestrial ecoregions [ edit ] The outlined ecoregions of the Neotropical realm, each of a colored biome. Note that this realm has 11 of 14 biomes , or major habitat types, as defined by Olson & Dinerstein, et al. (2001).

[ 15 ] 01.

Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests 02.

Tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests 03.

Tropical and subtropical coniferous forests 04.

Temperate broadleaf and mixed forests 05.

Temperate coniferous forests 06.

Taiga and Boreal forest 07.

Tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands 08.

Temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands 09.

Flooded grasslands and savannas 10.

Montane grasslands and shrublands 11.

Tundra 12.

Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub 13.

Deserts and xeric shrublands 14.

Mangroves Rock and Ice, or Abiotic Land Zones Neotropical tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests ecoregions v t e Alto Paraná Atlantic forests Argentina , Brazil , Paraguay Araucaria moist forests Argentina , Brazil Atlantic Coast restingas Brazil Bahia coastal forests Brazil Bahia interior forests Brazil Bolivian Yungas Bolivia , Peru Caatinga enclaves moist forests Brazil Caquetá moist forests Brazil , Colombia Catatumbo moist forests Venezuela Cauca Valley montane forests Colombia Cayos Miskitos–San Andrés and Providencia moist forests Colombia , Nicaragua Central American Atlantic moist forests Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Panama Central American montane forests El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua Chiapas montane forests Mexico Chimalapas montane forests Mexico Chocó–Darién moist forests Colombia , Ecuador , Panama Cocos Island moist forests Costa Rica Cordillera de la Costa montane forests Venezuela Cordillera Oriental montane forests Colombia , Venezuela Costa Rican seasonal moist forests Costa Rica , Nicaragua Cuban moist forests Cuba Eastern Cordillera Real montane forests Colombia , Ecuador , Peru Eastern Panamanian montane forests Colombia , Panama Fernando de Noronha-Atol das Rocas moist forests Brazil Guayanan Highlands moist forests Brazil , Colombia , Guyana , Suriname , Venezuela Guianan moist forests Brazil , French Guiana , Guyana , Suriname , Venezuela Guianan piedmont and lowland moist forests Brazil , Venezuela Gurupa várzea Brazil Hispaniolan moist forests Dominican Republic , Haiti Iquitos várzea Bolivia , Brazil , Peru Isthmian–Atlantic moist forests Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Panama Isthmian–Pacific moist forests Costa Rica , Panama Jamaican moist forests Jamaica Japurá–Solimões–Negro moist forests Brazil , Colombia , Venezuela Juruá–Purus moist forests Brazil Leeward Islands moist forests Antigua , British Virgin Islands , Guadeloupe , Montserrat , Nevis , Saint Kitts , British Virgin Islands Madeira–Tapajós moist forests Bolivia , Brazil Magdalena Valley montane forests Colombia Magdalena–Urabá moist forests Colombia Marajó várzea Brazil Maranhão Babaçu forests Brazil Mato Grosso tropical dry forests Brazil Monte Alegre várzea Brazil Napo moist forests Colombia , Ecuador , Peru Negro–Branco moist forests Brazil , Colombia , Venezuela Northeastern Brazil restingas Brazil Northwestern Andean montane forests Colombia , Ecuador Oaxacan montane forests Mexico Orinoco Delta swamp forests Guyana , Venezuela Pantanos de Centla Mexico Paramaribo swamp forests Guyana , Suriname Pernambuco coastal forests Brazil Pernambuco interior forests Brazil Peruvian Yungas Peru Petén–Veracruz moist forests Mexico Puerto Rican moist forests Puerto Rico Purus várzea Brazil Purus–Madeira moist forests Brazil Rio Negro campinarana Brazil , Colombia Santa Marta montane forests Colombia Serra do Mar coastal forests Brazil Sierra de los Tuxtlas Mexico Sierra Madre de Chiapas moist forests El Salvador , Guatemala , Mexico Solimões–Japurá moist forests Brazil , Colombia , Peru South Florida rocklands United States Southern Andean Yungas Argentina , Bolivia Southwest Amazon moist forests Bolivia , Brazil , Peru Talamancan montane forests Costa Rica , Panama Tapajós–Xingu moist forests Brazil Tepuis Brazil , Guyana , Suriname , Venezuela Tocantins–Araguaia–Maranhão moist forests Brazil Trinidad and Tobago moist forests Trinidad and Tobago Trindade-Martin Vaz Islands tropical forests Brazil Uatuma–Trombetas moist forests Brazil , Guyana , Suriname Ucayali moist forests Peru Venezuelan Andes montane forests Colombia , Venezuela Veracruz moist forests Mexico Veracruz montane forests Mexico Western Ecuador moist forests Colombia , Ecuador Windward Islands moist forests Dominica , Grenada , Martinique , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Xingu–Tocantins–Araguaia moist forests Brazil Yucatán moist forests Belize , Guatemala , Mexico Neotropical tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests ecoregions v t e Apure–Villavicencio dry forests Venezuela Atlantic dry forests Brazil Bahamian dry forests Bahamas Bajío dry forests Mexico Balsas dry forests Mexico Bolivian montane dry forests Bolivia Cauca Valley dry forests Colombia Cayman Islands dry forests Cayman Islands Central American dry forests Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua Gran Chaco Argentina , Brazil , Paraguay , Bolivia Chiapas Depression dry forests Guatemala , Mexico Chiquitano dry forests Bolivia , Brazil Cuban dry forests Cuba Ecuadorian dry forests Ecuador Hispaniolan dry forests Dominican Republic , Haiti Jalisco dry forests Mexico Jamaican dry forests Jamaica Lara–Falcón dry forests Venezuela Lesser Antillean dry forests Anguilla , Antigua and Barbuda , Grenada , Martinique , Saint Lucia , Montserrat , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Magdalena Valley dry forests Colombia Maracaibo dry forests Venezuela Marañón dry forests Peru Panamanian dry forests Panama Patía Valley dry forests Colombia Puerto Rican dry forests Puerto Rico Revillagigedo Islands dry forests Mexico Sierra de la Laguna dry forests Mexico Sinaloan dry forests Mexico Sinu Valley dry forests Colombia Southern Pacific dry forests Mexico Trinidad and Tobago dry forests Trinidad and Tobago Tumbes–Piura dry forests Ecuador , Peru Veracruz dry forests Mexico Yucatán dry forests Mexico Neotropical tropical and subtropical coniferous forests ecoregions v t e Bahamian pineyards The Bahamas Belizian pine forests Belize Central American pine–oak forests El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua Cuban pine forests Cuba Hispaniolan pine forests Haiti , Dominican Republic Miskito pine forests Honduras , Nicaragua Sierra de la Laguna pine–oak forests Mexico Sierra Madre de Oaxaca pine–oak forests Mexico Sierra Madre del Sur pine–oak forests Mexico Trans-Mexican Volcanic Belt pine–oak forests Mexico Neotropical temperate broadleaf and mixed forests ecoregions v t e Juan Fernandez Islands temperate forests Chile Magellanic subpolar forests Argentina , Chile San Félix–San Ambrosio Islands temperate forests Chile Valdivian temperate forests Argentina , Chile Neotropical tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions v t e Beni savanna Bolivia Campos rupestres Brazil Cerrado Bolivia , Brazil , Paraguay Clipperton Island shrub and grasslands France ( Clipperton Island ) Córdoba montane savanna Argentina Guianan savanna Brazil , Guyana , Venezuela Humid Chaco Argentina , Brazil , Paraguay , Uruguay Llanos Venezuela , Colombia Uruguayan savanna Argentina , Brazil , Uruguay Neotropical temperate grasslands, savannas, and shrublands ecoregions v t e Argentine Espinal Argentina Argentine Monte Argentina Humid Pampas Argentina , Uruguay Patagonian grasslands Argentina , Chile , United Kingdom ( Falkland Islands ) Patagonian steppe Argentina , Chile , United Kingdom ( Falkland Islands ) Semi-arid Pampas Argentina Neotropical flooded grasslands and savannas ecoregions v t e Central Mexican wetlands Mexico Cuban wetlands Cuba Enriquillo wetlands Dominican Republic , Haiti Everglades United States Guayaquil flooded grasslands Ecuador Orinoco wetlands Venezuela Pantanal Bolivia , Brazil , Paraguay Paraná flooded savanna Argentina Southern Cone Mesopotamian savanna Argentina Neotropical montane grasslands and shrublands ecoregions v t e Central Andean dry puna Argentina , Bolivia , Chile Central Andean puna Argentina , Bolivia , Peru Central Andean wet puna Bolivia , Peru Cordillera Central páramo Ecuador , Peru Cordillera de Merida páramo Venezuela High Monte Argentina Northern Andean páramo Colombia , Ecuador Santa Marta páramo Colombia Talamanca Paramo Costa Rica , Panama Southern Andean steppe Argentina , Chile Zacatonal Mexico , Guatemala Neotropical Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions v t e Chilean Matorral Chile Neotropical deserts and xeric shrublands ecoregions v t e Araya and Paria xeric scrub Venezuela Aruba–Curaçao–Bonaire cactus scrub Aruba , Bonaire , Curaçao Atacama Desert Chile , Peru Caatinga Brazil Cayman Islands xeric scrub Cayman Islands Cuban cactus scrub Cuba Galápagos Islands xeric scrub Ecuador Guajira–Barranquilla xeric scrub Colombia , Venezuela La Costa xeric shrublands Venezuela Leeward Islands xeric scrub Anguilla , Antigua and Barbuda , British Virgin Islands , Guadeloupe , Saint Martin , Saint Barthélemy , Saba , US Virgin Islands Malpelo Island xeric scrub Colombia Motagua Valley thornscrub Guatemala Paraguana xeric scrub Venezuela San Lucan xeric scrub Mexico Sechura Desert Peru Tehuacán Valley matorral Mexico Windward Islands xeric scrub Barbados , Dominica , Grenada , Martinique , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago Brazil Neotropical mangroves ecoregions v t e Alvarado mangroves Mexico Amapá mangroves Brazil Bahamian mangroves Bahamas , Turks and Caicos Islands Bahia mangroves Brazil Belizean Coast mangroves Belize Belizean reef mangroves Belize Bocas del Toro–San Bastimentos Island–San Blas mangroves Costa Rica , Panama Coastal Venezuelan mangroves Venezuela Esmeraldas–Pacific Colombia mangroves Colombia , Ecuador Florida mangroves United States Greater Antilles mangroves Cuba , Dominican Republic , Haiti , Jamaica , Puerto Rico Guianan mangroves French Guiana , Guyana , Suriname , Venezuela Gulf of Fonseca mangroves El Salvador , Honduras , Nicaragua Gulf of Guayaquil–Tumbes mangroves Ecuador , Peru Gulf of Panama mangroves Panama Ilha Grande mangroves Brazil Lesser Antilles mangroves Lesser Antilles Magdalena–Santa Marta mangroves Colombia Manabí mangroves Ecuador Maranhão mangroves Brazil Marismas Nacionales–San Blas mangroves Mexico Mayan Corridor mangroves Mexico Mexican South Pacific Coast mangroves Mexico Moist Pacific Coast mangroves Costa Rica , Panama Mosquitia–Nicaraguan Caribbean Coast mangroves Costa Rica , Honduras , Nicaragua Northern Dry Pacific Coast mangroves El Salvador , Guatemala Northern Honduras mangroves Guatemala , Honduras Pará mangroves Brazil Petenes mangroves Mexico Piura mangroves Peru Ría Lagartos mangroves Mexico Rio Negro–Rio San Sun mangroves Costa Rica , Nicaragua Rio Piranhas mangroves Brazil Rio São Francisco mangroves Brazil Southern Dry Pacific Coast mangroves Costa Rica , Nicaragua Tehuantepec–El Manchón mangroves Mexico Trinidad mangroves Trinidad and Tobago Usumacinta mangroves Mexico Citations [ edit ] ^ Ojeda, Ricardo A.; Novillo, Agustina (2024). "Diversity and Conservation of Neotropical Mammals".

Encyclopedia of Biodiversity . pp.

204– 222.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-822562-2.00150-X .

ISBN 978-0-323-98434-8 .

The Neotropical Region is one of the major biogeographic divisions for both plants and animals on Earth. It spans from central Mexico and the Caribbean islands to southern South America. The Neotropical Region contains the largest number of mammal species in the New World, and is the region with the largest number of endemic mammal families.

^ "About the Amazon" .

wwf.panda.org . Retrieved 2025-07-03 .

^ "Central Andes mountains, South America" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "Amazon Rainforest | Plants, Animals, Climate, & Deforestation | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2025-06-27 . Retrieved 2025-07-03 .

^ "Northern Andes mountains, South America" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "Dinosaur-killing asteroid strike gave rise to Amazon rainforest" .

BBC News . 2 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 .

^ Carvalho, Mónica R.; Jaramillo, Carlos; Parra, Felipe de la; Caballero-Rodríguez, Dayenari; Herrera, Fabiany; Wing, Scott; Turner, Benjamin L.; D’Apolito, Carlos; Romero-Báez, Millerlandy; Narváez, Paula; Martínez, Camila; Gutierrez, Mauricio; Labandeira, Conrad; Bayona, German; Rueda, Milton; Paez-Reyes, Manuel; Cárdenas, Dairon; Duque, Álvaro; Crowley, James L.; Santos, Carlos; Silvestro, Daniele (2 April 2021).

"Extinction at the end-Cretaceous and the origin of modern Neotropical rainforests" .

Science .

372 (6537): 63– 68.

Bibcode : 2021Sci...372...63C .

doi : 10.1126/science.abf1969 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 33795451 .

S2CID 232484243 . Retrieved 9 May 2021 .

^ van der Sleen, Peter, and James S. Albert, eds. (2018) Field Guide to the Fishes of the Amazon, Orinoco, and Guianas . Princeton University Press, 2017.

ISBN 9780691170749 ^ "Treehoppers: Aetalionidae, Melizoderidae, and Membracidae (Hemiptera)" .

treehoppers.insectmuseum.org .

^ Simberloff, Daniel (March–April 1984). "The Next Mass Extinction".

Garden .

8 (2): 4– 5.

^ Тахтаджян А. Л. Флористические области Земли / Академия наук СССР. Ботанический институт им. В. Л. Комарова. — Л.: Наука, Ленинградское отделение, 1978. — 247 с. — 4000 экз.

DjVu , Google Books .

^ Takhtajan, A. (1986).

Floristic Regions of the World . (translated by T.J. Crovello & A. Cronquist). University of California Press, Berkeley, PDF , DjVu .

^ "Neotropic Ecozone" . July 2009.

^ "Amazon Rainforest | Plants, Animals, Climate, & Deforestation | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2025-06-27 . Retrieved 2025-07-03 .

^ Olson, D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D., Burgess, N. D., Powell, G. V. N., Underwood, E. C., D'Amico, J. A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E., Morrison, J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. F., Ricketts, T. H., Kura, Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Hedao, P., Kassem, K. R. (2001). Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on Earth.

Bioscience 51(11):933–938, [1] Archived 2012-09-17 at the Wayback Machine .

General and cited bibliography [ edit ] Albert, J. S., and R. E. Reis (2011).

Historical Biogeography of Neotropical Freshwater Fishes . University of California Press, Berkeley. 424 pp.

ISBN 978-0-520-26868-5 .

Bequaert, Joseph C. "An Introductory Study of Polistes in the United States and Canada with Descriptions of Some New North and South American Forms (Hymenoptera; Vespidæ)".

Journal of the New York Entomological Society 48.1 (1940): 1–31.

Cox, C. B.; P. D. Moore (1985).

Biogeography: An Ecological and Evolutionary Approach (Fourth Edition). Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford.

Dinerstein, E., Olson, D. Graham, D. J. et al. (1995).

A Conservation Assessment of the Terrestrial Ecoregions of Latin America and the Caribbean . World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Olson, D. M., B. Chernoff, G. Burgess, I. Davidson, P. Canevari, E. Dinerstein, G. Castro, V. Morisset, R. Abell, and E. Toledo. 1997.

Freshwater biodiversity of Latin America and the Caribbean: a conservation assessment . Draft report. World Wildlife Fund-U.S., Wetlands International, Biodiversity Support Program, and United States Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C.

Reis, R. E., S. O. Kullander, and C. J. Ferraris Jr. 2003.

Check List of the Freshwater Fishes of South and Central America . Edipucrs, Porto Alegre. 729 pp.

Udvardy, M. D. F. (1975).

A classification of the biogeographical provinces of the world . IUCN Occasional Paper no. 18. Morges, Switzerland: IUCN.

van der Sleen, Peter, and James S. Albert, eds.

Field Guide to the Fishes of the Amazon, Orinoco, and Guianas . Princeton University Press, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Central and South American wildlife .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Neotropic .

List of terrestrial ecoregions Eco-Index , a bilingual searchable reference of conservation and research projects in the Neotropics; a service of the Rainforest Alliance NeoTropic Acosta, Guillermo et al., 2018.

"Climate change and peopling of the Neotropics during the Pleistocene-Holocene transition" .

Boletín de la Sociedad Geológica Mexicana .

doi : 10.18268/BSGM2018v70n1a1 .

v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐62h4k
Cached time: 20250816061703
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.660 seconds
Real time usage: 0.870 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2999/1000000
Revision size: 22597/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 124485/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4381/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 121020/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.349/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7780975/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  653.526      1 -total
 28.09%  183.605      1 Template:Reflist
 14.46%   94.471      1 Template:Cite_book
 10.27%   67.091      1 Template:Short_description
  9.78%   63.937     11 Template:Navbar-header
  8.94%   58.422      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.29%   54.175      1 Template:Ambox
  7.93%   51.828      1 Template:Neotropical_tropical_and_subtropical_moist_broadleaf_forest_ecoregions
  7.81%   51.009      4 Template:Navbox
  6.44%   42.098      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45394:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816061703 and revision id 1306148959. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neotropical_realm&oldid=1306148959 " Categories : Neotropical realm Ecoregions of North America Ecoregions of Central America Ecoregions of South America Ecoregions of the Caribbean Tropical flora Biogeographic realms Biogeography Natural history of Central America Natural history of North America Natural history of South America Natural history of the Caribbean Phytogeography Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neotropical realm 47 languages Add topic

