Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 First boomtowns 2 Attributes 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Australia 3.2 Brazil 3.3 Canada 3.4 United Kingdom 3.5 United States 3.6 Others 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Boomtown 4 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Community with sudden economic & population growth This article is about boomtowns in demography. For other uses, see Boomtown (disambiguation) .

World's Richest Acre Park in Downtown Kilgore , where the greatest concentration of oil wells in the world once stood in Kilgore, Texas , United States A boomtown is a community that undergoes sudden and rapid population and economic growth , or that is started from scratch. The growth is normally attributed to the nearby discovery of a precious resource such as gold , silver , or oil , although the term can also be applied to communities growing very rapidly for different reasons, such as a proximity to a major metropolitan area , large infrastructure projects, or an attractive climate.

First boomtowns [ edit ] Trieste , Italy , from the opening of the free port, a boomtown of Central Europe in the northernmost part of the Adriatic .

California attracted tens of thousands of gold prospectors during the Gold Rush of 1849 .

Early boomtowns, such as Leeds , Liverpool , and Manchester , experienced a dramatic surge in population and economic activity during the Industrial Revolution at the turn of the 19th century. In pre-industrial England these towns had been relative backwaters, compared to the more important market towns of Bristol , Norwich , and York , but they soon became major urban and industrial centres. Although these boomtowns did not directly owe their sudden growth to the discovery of a local natural resource, the factories were set up there to take advantage of the excellent Midlands infrastructure and the availability of large seams of cheap coal for fuel.

[ 1 ] Another typical boom town is Trieste in Italy. In the 19th century the free port and the opening of the Suez Canal began an extremely strong economic development. At the beginning of the First World War, the former fishing village with a deep-water port, which used to be small but geographically centrally located, was the third largest city of the Habsburg monarchy . Due to the many new borders, World War II and the Cold War, the city was completely isolated, abandoned and shrank for a long time. The handling of goods in the port and property prices fell sharply. Only when the surrounding countries joined the EU did Trieste return to the economic center of Europe.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the mid-19th century, boomtowns that were based on natural resources began to proliferate as companies and individuals discovered new mining prospects across the world. The California Gold Rush of the Western United States stimulated numerous boomtowns in that period, as settlements seemed to spring up overnight in the river valleys, mountains, and deserts around what was thought to be valuable gold mining country. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, boomtowns called mill towns would quickly arise due to sudden expansions in the timber industry; they tended to last the decade or so it took to clearcut nearby forests. Modern-day examples of resource-generated boomtowns include Fort McMurray in Canada , as the extraction of nearby oilsands requires a vast number of workers, and Johannesburg in South Africa , based on the gold and diamond trade.

Attributes [ edit ] Boomtowns are typically characterized as "overnight expansions" in both population and money, as people stream into the community for mining prospects, high-paying jobs, attractive amenities or climate, or other opportunities. Typically, newcomers are drawn by high salaries or the prospect of "striking it rich" in mining; meanwhile, numerous indirect businesses develop to cater to workers often eager to spend their large paychecks. Often, boomtowns are the site of both economic prosperity and social disruption , as the local culture and infrastructure , if any, struggles to accommodate the waves of new residents. General problems associated with this fast growth can include: doctor shortages, inadequate medical and/or educational facilities, housing shortages, sewage disposal problems, and a lack of recreational activities for new residents.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The University of Denver separates problems associated with a mining-specific boomtown into three categories: [ 5 ] [ 7 ] deteriorating quality of life, as growth in basic industry outruns the local service sector's ability to provide housing, health services, schooling, and retail declining industrial productivity in mining because of labor turnover, labor shortages, and declining productivity an underserving by the local service sector in goods and services because capital investment in this sector does not build up adequately The initial increasing population in Perth, Western Australia , Australia (considered to be a modern-day boomtown) gave rise to overcrowding of residential accommodation as well as squatter populations.

[ 8 ] "The real future of Perth is not in Perth's hands but in Melbourne (and London) where Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton run their organizations", indicating that some boomtowns' growth and sustainability are controlled by an outside entity.

[ 8 ] Boomtowns are typically extremely dependent on the single activity or resource that is causing the boom (e.g., one or more nearby mines, mills, or resorts), and when the resources are depleted or the resource economy undergoes a "bust" (e.g., catastrophic resource price collapse), boomtowns can often decrease in size as fast as they initially grew. Sometimes, all or nearly the entire population can desert the town, resulting in a ghost town .

This can also take place on a planned basis. Since the late 20th century, mining companies have developed temporary communities to service a mine-site, building all the accommodation shops and services, using prefabricated housing or other buildings, making dormitories out of shipping containers, and removed all such structures as the resource was worked out.

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] "Canvas Town" – South Melbourne , Victoria .  Temporary accommodation for the thousands who poured into Melbourne each week in the early 1850s during the Victorian gold rush .

Ararat (1850s Victorian Gold Rush ) Ballarat (1850s–1880s Victorian Gold Rush ) Bathurst (1850s Australian gold rushes ) Bendigo (1850s–1880s Victorian Gold Rush ) Broken Hill (1880s silver – lead – zinc boom) Castlemaine (1850s Victorian Gold Rush ) Charters Towers (1870s gold rush) Gold Coast (1980s–2000s due to internal Australian migration trends) Kalgoorlie (1890s gold rush) Melbourne (1850s–1880s Victorian Gold Rush and associated speculative "land boom") Perth Brazil [ edit ] Altamira , Pará Balsas , Maranhão Belém ( Amazon rubber cycle ) Brasília , Federal District , development of capital Goiânia , Goiás Laranjal do Jari , Amapá Luís Eduardo Magalhães , Bahia Manaus ( Amazon rubber cycle ) Ouro Preto , Minas Gerais ( Ouro Preto Gold Rush ) Palmas , Tocantins Parauapebas , Pará Rondonópolis , Mato Grosso Serra Pelada District , Curionópolis , Pará ( Serra Pelada Gold Rush ) Sinop , Mato Grosso Sorriso , Mato Grosso Tucuruí , Pará São Paulo , São Paulo Canada [ edit ] Calgary , Alberta (during the 1970s oil boom in the province of Alberta ) Barkerville , British Columbia Barrie, Ontario , residential development and factory retail outlets Brampton, Ontario , residential development and retail Dawson City , Yukon ( Klondike Gold Rush ) Edmonton , Alberta , railroad, cattle, residential development and retail Elliot Lake , Ontario Estevan , Saskatchewan Faro , Yukon Fisherville , British Columbia (gold rush boom town of 1864–1865) Fort McMurray , Alberta , oil extraction Greater Sudbury , Ontario Halifax , Nova Scotia , as a port city during the First World War , prior to The Halifax Explosion Kingston, Ontario , construction of Rideau Canal , penitentiary, post-secondary education, knowledge and services and residential development Kirkland Lake , Ontario Mississauga, Ontario , bedroom community and transportation ( Toronto Pearson International Airport ) Niagara Falls, Ontario , tourism, marriage conduction and tax-free retail Oil Springs, Ontario , oil drilling Ottawa , NCR , lumber/federal bureaucracy and high technology Petrolia, Ontario Sept-Îles , a city in the Côte-Nord region of eastern Québec, Canada Shawinigan , Quebec Sydney , Nova Scotia Vaughan , Ontario, residential development and retail Yellowknife , Northwest Territory , mining United Kingdom [ edit ] Aberdeen , North Sea oil boom, known as the "oil capital of Europe" Barrow-in-Furness , late 19th and early 20th centuries as the world's largest steelworks and major shipyard Belfast , Northern Ireland , fastest-growing settlement in the British Isles in the 19th century due to industry and its port Consett , Jarrow , Leeds , Liverpool , industry and shipping, emigrants Manchester , rapid economic growth in the early 19th century Preston, Lancashire , the boomtown of the Industrial Revolution Winster , Derbyshire, England (17th century lead mining community) United States [ edit ] San Francisco in 1851, during the heyday of the California gold rush .

Anderson, Indiana , automotive industry Atlanta, Georgia (rapidly rebuilt and became a commercial center in the years following the Civil War) Atlantic City, New Jersey resort boomtown, 1870–1940 Basic City, Virginia , railroads and mining, 1880s–1900s Beaumont, Texas , oil Belleville, California , gold-mining boomtown, 1860–1870 Birmingham, Alabama , coal and iron ore, 1880s Blackwater, Missouri , railroads and mining, 1870–1940 Bodie, California Borger, Texas Buffalo, New York , shipping via Erie Canal, steel production, 1825–1890 Burkburnett, Texas Butte, Montana , copper and other resources Caldwell, Kansas Cement, California , 1902 1927 Central City, Colorado Chester, Pennsylvania , shipbuilding and manufacturing during World Wars I and II Chicago, Illinois , railroads, commodity resources, business Cincinnati, Ohio , trade, shipping Colstrip, Montana Columbia, California Cripple Creek, Colorado Deadwood, South Dakota Denver, Colorado Detroit, Michigan rise of the automobile industry, 1910–1950 Dodge City, Kansas El Paso, Texas Elkhart, Indiana recreational vehicle and manufactured housing industry Ellsworth, Kansas Endicott, New York ( shoe manufacturing boomtown, 1900s–1920s) [ 9 ] Fairbanks, Alaska , during the Klondike Gold Rush and the building of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Gary, Indiana , steel Gillette, Wyoming Goldfield, Nevada Graysonia, Arkansas Guthrie, Oklahoma , oil Hancock, Michigan Harrisburg, Illinois Holyoke, Massachusetts , paper, silk and wool textiles, 1860–1914 Houghton, Michigan Humble, Texas Idaho City, Idaho , gold rush, 1860s Jeffrey City, Wyoming Kilgore, Texas La Paz, Arizona , gold-mining boomtown, 1862–1864 Leadville, Colorado Minneapolis, Minnesota Lumber Industry 1852–1880 Newport, Wisconsin , sprang up because of a bridge expected to be built across the Wisconsin River there New Bedford, Massachusetts , whaling Nome, Alaska Odessa, Texas , oil Ontario, Oregon , cannabis industry, beginning in the late 2010s [ 10 ] Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania , steel, trade Pocatello, Idaho , railroad, 1870s–1920s Richland, Washington Rochester, New York , starting in the 1820s, with the opening of the Erie Canal Sacramento, California St. Elmo, Colorado , gold and silver mining St. Joseph, Florida San Francisco, California , US settlement after winning Mexican War Salt Lake City, Utah San Luis, Arizona Seattle, Washington , became a prosperous port city during the Klondike Gold Rush in 1897 subsequently after its great fire which also brought in an influx of jobs and newcomers Sioux City, Iowa Sunland Park, New Mexico , cannabis industry, beginning in the early 2020s [ 10 ] Tombstone, Arizona Texarkana, TX/AR Virginia City, Nevada , silver-mining boomtown, 1860s Wenatchee, Washington and other towns in the area are currently undergoing massive electrical infrastructure growth to support bitcoin mining due to the cheap local electricity [ 11 ] Wentzville, Missouri Williston, North Dakota , oil Others [ edit ] Batam , Indonesia , free trade Carbonia, Italy Dubai, UAE - due to economic policies favoring zero income taxes, regulation-free banking, tax incentives , free trade , real estate investment, pro- Western diplomacy (sanctuary for international navy ships to dock at ports).

Dublin , Ireland - due to catering to genealogical tourism of Americans descended from emigrés from previous centuries Dunedin , New Zealand due to the 1860s Gold Rush Bangalore , India–  due to outsourcing of call centers and the IT industry Hyderabad, India –  due to outsourcing of call centers and the IT industry New Town , Kolkata –  due to growth of IT industry Johannesburg , South Africa - Gold/silver/diamond rush Karachi, Pakistan - manufacturing Kimberley, South Africa , diamonds and gold Leipzig , Germany [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Monterrey, Nuevo León, Mexico , industrialization due to metallurgic and brewing industries and their related supply chains Nizhnevartovsk , Russia , oil Novosibirsk , Russia , planned development as a scientific and industrial center; hosted evacuated population and industry during World War II Roubaix, France [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Shenzhen, China Ullensaker, Norway See also [ edit ] Yellowcake boomtown Zoom town References [ edit ] ^ Brooks, Ann; Haworth, Bryan (1993).

Boom town Manchester 1800–1850 . Manchester: Portico Library.

^ Triest und die neue Seidenstraße ^ Triest–  ungelöstes Hafenproblem ^ "Die ÖBB und der Hafen Triest verstärken Zusammenarbeit" In: Wiener Zeitung 18.03.2019.

^ a b "No. 2, Controlling Boomtown Development".

Case Studies on Energy Impacts . 1976.

^ "Boomtown Social Effects" .

Fossil Fuel Connections . Retrieved 2025-01-14 .

^ Duff, Mary K.; Gilmore, John S. (1975).

Boomtown Growth Management . The University of Denver Research Institute.

^ a b Weller, Richard (2009).

Boomtown 2050 .

^ Aswad, Ed; Meredith, Suzanne M. (2003).

Endicott-Johnson . Charleston, SC: Arcadia. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0738513065 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

^ a b Goodman, J. David (7 January 2024).

"Marijuana Buyers From Texas Fuel a 'Little Amsterdam' in New Mexico" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2024 .

^ Roberts, Paul (March 2018).

"This Is What Happens When Bitcoin Miners Take Over Your Town" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ "Boomtown Leipzig – Der neue Hype im Osten" .

ARTE Info .

Archived from the original on 2015-08-26.

^ Immobilien, Dima (15 April 2016).

"Boomtown Leipzig– Immobilienmarkt explodiert– Dima Immobilien" .

dima-immobilien.de .

Archived from the original on 2018-05-10.

^ Strikwerda, Carl (1984). "Regionalism and Internationalism: The Working-Class Movement in the Nord and the Belgian Connection, 1871–1914". In Sweets, John F. (ed.).

Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Western Society for French History . Vol. 12. p. 221.

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015012965524 .

ISSN 0099-0329 .

Contemporaries never tired of calling Roubaix an "American city," because of its raw, fast-growing character, or of referring to Roubaix and its sister cities of Lille and Tourcoing as the "French Manchester." ^ Clark, Peter (2009).

European Cities and Towns: 400–2000 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 246.

ISBN 978-0199562732 .

Archived from the original on October 4, 2015 . Retrieved 2015-10-01 .

Roubaix was another new town, originally a craft village, whose many textile mills attracted a population of 100,000 and generated massive social and environmental problems.

External links [ edit ] Look up boomtown in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Authority control databases VIAF Boom towns are usually established in 5–12 years Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boomtown&oldid=1301430341 " Categories : Economic growth Types of towns Urban studies and planning terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 20:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boomtown 4 languages Add topic

