Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Post-structuralism 2 Examples in literature Toggle Examples in literature subsection 2.1 Related concepts 2.2 Allusion 3 Plagiarism 4 Non-literary uses 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Additional citations 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Intertextuality 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shaping of a text's meaning by another text in literary studies "Intertext" redirects here. For the publisher, see Intertext Publications .

Intertextuality is the shaping of a text's meaning by another text, either through deliberate compositional strategies such as quotation , allusion , calque , plagiarism , translation , pastiche or parody , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] or by interconnections between similar or related works perceived by an audience or reader of the text.

[ 6 ] These references are sometimes made deliberately and depend on a reader's prior knowledge and understanding of the referent, but the effect of intertextuality is not always intentional and is sometimes inadvertent.  Often associated with strategies employed by writers working in imaginative registers (fiction, poetry, and drama and even non-written texts like performance art and digital media), [ 7 ] [ 8 ] intertextuality may now be understood as intrinsic to any text.

[ 9 ] Intertextuality has been differentiated into referential and typological categories. Referential intertextuality refers to the use of fragments in texts and the typological intertextuality refers to the use of pattern and structure in typical texts.

[ 10 ] A distinction can also be made between iterability and presupposition . Iterability makes reference to the "repeatability" of certain text that is composed of "traces", pieces of other texts that help constitute its meaning. Presupposition makes a reference to assumptions a text makes about its readers and its context.

[ 11 ] As philosopher William Irwin wrote, the term "has come to have almost as many meanings as users, from those faithful to Julia Kristeva 's original vision to those who simply use it as a stylish way of talking about allusion and influence ".

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] James Joyce 's 1922 novel Ulysses bears an intertextual relationship to Homer 's Odyssey .

Julia Kristeva coined the term "intertextuality" ( intertextualité ) [ 13 ] in an attempt to synthesize Ferdinand de Saussure 's semiotics : his study of how signs derive their meaning from the structure of a text ( Bakhtin's dialogism ); his theory suggests a continual dialogue with other works of literature and other authors; and his examination of the multiple meanings, or " heteroglossia ", of texts (especially novels) or individual words.

[ 12 ] According to Kristeva, [ 14 ] "the notion of intertextuality replaces the notion of intersubjectivity " when we realize that meaning is not transferred directly from writer to reader but is instead mediated or filtered by "codes" imparted to the writer and reader by other texts. For example, when we read James Joyce 's Ulysses we decode it as a modernist literary experiment or as a response to the epic tradition, or as part of some other conversation , or as part of many conversations at once. This intertextual view of literature, as shown by Roland Barthes , supports the concept that the meaning of a text does not reside in the text, but is produced by the reader in relation both to the text in question and the complex network of texts evoked by the reading process.

While the theoretical concept of intertextuality is associated with post-modernism , the device itself is not new.

New Testament passages quote from the Old Testament and Old Testament books such as Deuteronomy or the prophets refer to the events described in Exodus (for discussions on using 'intertextuality' to describe the use of the Old Testament in the New Testament, see Porter 1997; Oropeza 2013; Oropeza & Moyise, 2016).

[ citation needed ] Whereas a redaction critic would use such intertextuality to argue for a particular order and process of the authorship of the books in question, literary criticism takes a synchronic view that deals with the texts in their final form, as an interconnected body of literature . This interconnected body extends to later poems and paintings that refer to Biblical narratives, just as other texts build networks around Greek and Roman Classical history and mythology.

Post-structuralism [ edit ] More recent post-structuralist theory, such as that formulated in Daniela Caselli's Beckett 's Dantes : Intertextuality in the Fiction and Criticism (MUP 2005), re-examines "intertextuality" as a production within texts, rather than as a series of relationships between different texts. Some postmodern theorists [ 15 ] like to talk about the relationship between "intertextuality" and "hypertextuality" (not to be confused with hypertext , another semiotic term coined by Gérard Genette ); intertextuality makes each text a "living hell of hell on earth" [ 16 ] and part of a larger mosaic of texts, just as each hypertext can be a web of links and part of the whole World-Wide Web . The World-Wide Web has been theorized as a unique realm of reciprocal intertextuality, in which no particular text can claim centrality, yet the Web text eventually produces an image of a community—the group of people who write and read the text using specific discursive strategies.

[ 17 ] Examples in literature [ edit ] Some examples of intertextuality in literature include: Perhaps the earliest example of a non-anonymous author alluding to another is when Euripides , in his Electra (410s BC), spoofs (in lines 524-38) the recognition scene from Aeschylus 's The Libation Bearers .

[ 18 ] The House of Asterion (1947) by Jorge Luis Borges : A retelling of the Greek myth of Theseus and the Minotaur told from the perspective of Asterion, the Minotaur .

East of Eden (1952) by John Steinbeck : A retelling of the account of Genesis, set in the Salinas Valley of Northern California.

Ulysses (1922) by James Joyce : A retelling of Homer's Odyssey , set in Dublin.

Absalom, Absalom!

(1936) by William Faulkner : A retelling of the Absalom story from Samuel , set in antebellum Mississippi.

Earthly Powers (1980) by Anthony Burgess : A retelling of Anatole France 's Le Miracle du grand saint Nicolas during the 20th century.

The Dead Fathers Club (2006) by Matt Haig : A retelling of Shakespeare's Hamlet , set in modern England.

A Thousand Acres (1991) by Jane Smiley : A retelling of Shakespeare's King Lear , set in rural Iowa.

Perelandra (1943) by C. S. Lewis : Another retelling of the account of Genesis, also leaning on Milton's Paradise Lost , but set on the planet Venus.

Wide Sargasso Sea (1966) by Jean Rhys : A metatextual intervention on Charlotte Brontë 's Jane Eyre , the story of the " mad woman in the attic " told from her perspective.

The Legend of Bagger Vance (1996) by Steven Pressfield : A retelling of the Bhagavad Gita, set in 1931 during an epic golf game.

Bridget Jones's Diary (1996) by Helen Fielding : A modern " chick lit " romantic comedy replaying and referencing Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice .

Tortilla Flat (1935) by John Steinbeck : A retelling of the Arthurian legends, set in Monterey, California , during the interwar period.

Mourning Becomes Electra (1931) by Eugene O'Neill : A retelling of Aeschylus' The Oresteia , set in post-American Civil War New England.

The Gospel of Matthew narrates the early years of the life of Jesus while following a pattern from the Hebrew Bible 's Book of Exodus .

[ 19 ] Frankissstein (2019) by Jeanette Winterson : A retelling of Mary Shelley 's 1818 classic Frankenstein , examining updated issues of the monstrous, i.e. sex-bots and cryonics .

Related concepts [ edit ] Linguist Norman Fairclough states that "intertextuality is a matter of recontextualization ".

[ 20 ] According to Per Linell, recontextualization can be defined as the "dynamic transfer-and-transformation of something from one discourse/text-in-context ... to another".

[ 21 ] Recontextualization can be relatively explicit—for example, when one text directly quotes another—or relatively implicit—as when the "same" generic meaning is rearticulated across different texts.

[ 22 ] : 132–133 A number of scholars have observed that recontextualization can have important ideological and political consequences. For instance, Adam Hodges has studied how White House officials recontextualized and altered a military general's comments for political purposes, highlighting favorable aspects of the general's utterances while downplaying the damaging aspects.

[ 23 ] Rhetorical scholar Jeanne Fahnestock has found that when popular magazines recontextualize scientific research they enhance the uniqueness of the scientific findings and confer greater certainty on the reported facts.

[ 24 ] Similarly, John Oddo stated that American reporters covering Colin Powell's 2003 U.N. speech transformed Powell's discourse as they recontextualized it, bestowing Powell's allegations with greater certainty and warrantability and even adding new evidence to support Powell's claims.

[ 22 ] Oddo has also argued that recontextualization has a future-oriented counterpoint, which he dubs "precontextualization".

[ 25 ] According to Oddo, precontextualization is a form of anticipatory intertextuality wherein "a text introduces and predicts elements of a symbolic event that is yet to unfold".

[ 22 ] : 78 For example, Oddo contends, American journalists anticipated and previewed Colin Powell's U.N. address, drawing his future discourse into the normative present.

Allusion [ edit ] While intertextuality is a complex and multileveled literary term, it is often confused with the more casual term 'allusion'. Allusion is a passing or casual reference; an incidental mention of something, either directly or by implication.

[ 26 ] This means it is most closely linked to both obligatory and accidental intertextuality, as the 'allusion' made relies on the listener or viewer knowing about the original source. It is also seen as accidental, however, as the allusion is normally a phrase so frequently or casually used that the true significance is not fully appreciated. Allusion is most often used in conversation, dialogue or metaphor. For example, "I was surprised his nose was not growing like Pinocchio's." This makes a reference to The Adventures of Pinocchio , written by Carlo Collodi when the little wooden puppet lies.

[ 27 ] If this was obligatory intertextuality in a text, multiple references to this (or other novels of the same theme) would be used throughout the hypertext.

Plagiarism [ edit ] Intertextuality in art: "Nur eine Waffe taugt" (Richard Wagner, Parsifal, act III), by Arnaldo dell'Ira , ca. 1930 Sociologist Perry Share describes intertextuality as "an area of considerable ethical complexity".

[ 28 ] Intertextuality does not necessarily involve citations or referencing punctuation (such as quotation marks) and can be mistaken for plagiarism .

[ 29 ] : 86 While the two concepts are related, the intentions behind using another's work is critical in distinguishing the two. When making use of intertextuality, usually a small excerpt of a hypotext assists in the understanding of the new hypertext's original themes, characters, or contexts.

[ 29 ] [ page needed ] Aspects of existing texts are reused, often resulting in new meaning when placed in a different context.

[ 30 ] Intertextuality hinges on the creation of new ideas, while plagiarism attempts to pass off existing work as one's own.

Students learning to write often rely on imitation or emulation and have not yet learned how to reformulate sources and cite them according to expected standards, and thus engage in forms of "patchwriting," which may be inappropriately penalized as intentional plagiarism.

[ 31 ] Because the interests of writing studies differ from the interests of literary theory, the concept has been elaborated differently with an emphasis on writers using intertextuality to position their statement in relation to other statements and prior knowledge.

[ 32 ] Students often find it difficult to learn how to combine referencing and relying on others' words with marking their novel perspective and contribution.

[ 33 ] Non-literary uses [ edit ] In addition, the concept of intertextuality has been used analytically outside the sphere of literature and art. For example, Devitt (1991) examined how the various genres of letters composed by tax accountants refer to the tax codes in genre-specific ways.

[ 34 ] In another example, Christensen (2016) [ 35 ] introduces the concept of intertextuality to the analysis of work practice at a hospital. The study shows that the ensemble of documents used and produced at a hospital department can be said to form a corpus of written texts. On the basis of the corpus, or subsections thereof, the actors in cooperative work create intertext between relevant (complementary) texts in a particular situation, for a particular purpose. The intertext of a particular situation can be constituted by several kinds of intertextuality, including the complementary type, the intratextual type and the mediated type. In this manner the concept of intertext has had an impact beyond literature and art studies.

In scientific and other scholarly writing intertextuality is core to the collaborative nature of knowledge building and thus citation practices are important to the social organization of fields, the codification of knowledge, and the reward system for professional contribution.

[ 36 ] Scientists can be skillfully intentional in the use of references to prior work in order to position the contribution of their work.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Modern practices of scientific citation, however, have only developed since the late eighteenth century [ 39 ] and vary across fields, in part influenced by disciplines’ epistemologies.

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Citationality Détournement Honkadori Interdiscursivity Julia Kristeva Literary theory Meta Post-structuralism Semiotics The Shape of Time: Remarks on the History of Things Transmedia storytelling Transtextuality Type scene Umberto Eco References [ edit ] ^ Gerard Genette (1997) Paratexts p.18 ^ Kaźmierczak, Marta (2019-12-15).

"Intertextuality as Translation Problem: Explicitness, Recognisability and the Case of "Literatures of Smaller Nations" " .

Russian Journal of Linguistics .

23 (2): 362– 382.

doi : 10.22363/2312-9182-2019-23-2-362-382 .

ISSN 2312-9212 .

^ Hallo, William W. (2010) The World's Oldest Literature: Studies in Sumerian Belles-Lettres p.608 ^ Cancogni, Annapaola (1985) The Mirage in the Mirror: Nabokov's Ada and Its French Pre-Texts pp.203-213 ^ Hebel, Udo J (1989).

Intertextuality, Allusion, and Quotation: An International Bibliography of Critical Studies (Bibliographies and Indexes in World Literature) . Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0313265174 .

^ "Definition of Intertextuality" , "Dictionary.com", Retrieved on 15 March 2018.

^ Clayton, John B. (1991).

Influence and Intertextuality in Literary History . Univ of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 9780299130343 .

^ Gadavanij, Savitri.

"Intertextuality as Discourse Strategy" , School of Language and Communication, Retrieved 15 March 2018.

^ Roozen, Kevin (2015). "Texts Get Their Meaning from Other Texts".

Naming What We Know: Threshold Concepts of Writing Studies . Logan: Utah State UP. pp.

44– 47.

ISBN 978-0-87421-989-0 .

^ Mayer, Rolf (1990). "Abstraction, Context, and Perspectivization – Evidentials in Discourse Semantics".

Theoretical Linguistics .

16 ( 2– 3).

doi : 10.1515/thli.1990.16.2-3.101 .

ISSN 0301-4428 .

S2CID 62219490 .

^ Porter, James E. (1986). "Intertextuality and the discourse community".

Rhetoric Review .

5 (1): 34– 47.

doi : 10.1080/07350198609359131 .

ISSN 0735-0198 .

S2CID 170955347 .

^ a b Irwin,2, October 2004, pp. 227–242, 228.

^ analysis of Jehan de Saintré , (in the collective volume Théorie d'ensemble , Paris, Seuil, 1968).

^ Kristeva, Julia (1980).

Desire in language : a semiotic approach to literature and art . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 66.

ISBN 0231048068 .

OCLC 6016349 .

^ Gerard Genette, Palimpsests: literature in the second degree , Channa Newman and Claude Doubinsky (trans.), University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln NE and London.

^ Kristeva, 66.

^ Mitra, Ananda (1999).

"Characteristics of the WWW Text: Tracing Discursive Strategies" .

Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication .

5 (1): 1.

doi : 10.1111/j.1083-6101.1999.tb00330.x .

^ Lefkowitz, Mary ; Romm, James (2016).

The Greek Plays: Sixteen Plays by Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides . New York: Modern Library. p. 102.

ISBN 9780812993004 .

^ intertextual.bible/text/matthew-2.20-exodus-4.19 ^ Fairclough, Norman.

Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for Social Research.

New York: Routledge, 2003, p. 51.

^ Linell, Per. "Discourse across boundaries: On recontextualizations and the blending of voices in professional discourse," Text , 18, 1998, p. 154.

^ a b c Oddo, John.

Intertextuality and the 24-Hour News Cycle: A Day in the Rhetorical Life of Colin Powell's U.N. Address.

East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 2014.

^ Hodges, Adam. "The Politics of Recontextualization: Discursive Competition over Claims of Iranian Involvement in Iraq, " Discourse & Society , 19(4), 2008, 483-505.

^ Fahnestock, Jeanne. "Accommodating Science: The Rhetorical life of Scientific Facts," Written Communication , 3(3), 1986, 275-296.

^ Oddo, John. "Precontextualization and the Rhetoric of Futurity:  Foretelling Colin Powell's U.N. Address on NBC News," Discourse & Communication , 7(1), 2013, 25-53.

^ "the definition of plagiarism" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2018-03-19 .

^ "Allusion dictionary definition | allusion defined" .

www.yourdictionary.com . Retrieved 2018-03-19 .

^ Share, Perry (January 2005).

"Managing intertextuality–meaning, plagiarism and power" .

ResearchGate .

^ a b Ivanić, Roz (1998).

Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing . Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Co.

^ Jabri, Muayyad (December 2003).

"Change as shifting identities: a dialogic perspective" (PDF) .

Journal of Organizational Change Management .

17 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-03-20 . Retrieved 2018-03-19 .

^ Howard, Rebecca Moore. (1995). Plagiarisms, authorships, and the academic death penalty.

College English 57.7 , 788-806.

^ C. Bazerman (2004). Intertextualities: Volosinov, Bakhtin, literary theory, and literacy studies.  In A. Ball & S. W. Freedman (Eds.), Bakhtinian perspectives on languages, literacy, and learning (pp. 53-65). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Berkenkotter, C., Huckin, T., & Ackerman, J. (1991). Social Context and Socially Constructed Texts: The Initiation of a Graduate Student into a Writing Research Community. In Textual dynamics of the professions (pp. 191-215). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

^ Devitt, A. (1991). Intertextuality in tax accounting. In Textual Dynamics of the Professions:  Historical and Contemporary Studies of Writing in Professional Communities .  Madison WI:  University of Wisconsin Press. Pages 336-357.

^ Christensen, L.R. (2016). On Intertext in Chemotherapy: an Ethnography of Text in Medical Practice. Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative Computing and Work Practices. Volume 25, Issue 1, pp 1-38 ^ Merton, R. K. (1957). Priorities in scientific discovery. American Sociological Review, 22(6), 635-659.

^ Swales, J. (1981). Aspects of article introductions. Language Studies Unit, University of Aston in Birmingham.

^ Bazerman, C. (1993). Intertextual self-fashioning: Gould and Lewontin's representations of the literature. In R. Selzer (Ed.), Understanding scientific prose (pp. 20-41). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

^ Bazerman, C. (1991). How natural philosophers can cooperate: The rhetorical technology of coordinated research in Joseph Priestley's History and Present State of Electricity. In C. Bazerman & J. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions (pp. 13-44). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

^ C. Bazerman (1987). Codifying the social scientific style: The APA Publication Manual as a behaviorist rhetoric. In J. Nelson, A. Megill, & D. McCloskey (Eds.). The rhetoric of the human sciences (pp. 125-144). Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

Additional citations [ edit ] De Lange, Attie; Comhrink, Annette. 'The matrix and the echo': Intertextual re-modelling in Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead. in Literator , vol. 123, 1991, pp. 69–74..

Griffig, Thomas.

Intertextualität in linguistischen Fachaufsätzen des Englischen und Deutschen (Intertextuality in English and German Linguistic Research Articles).

Frankfurt a.M.: Lang, 2006.

Kliese, M. (2013).

Little Lamb analysis . CQUniversity e-courses, LITR19049 - Romantic and Contemporary Poetry.

Oropeza, B.J. "Intertextuality." In The Oxford Encyclopedia of Biblical Interpretation . Steven L. McKenzie, editor-in-chief. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013, Vol. 1, 453–63 B. J. Oropeza and Steve Moyise, eds.

Exploring Intertextuality: Diverse Strategies for New Testament Interpretation of Texts (Eugene, Ore.: Cascade Books, 2016).

Pasco, Allan H.

Allusion: A Literary Graft . 1994. Charlottesville: Rookwood Press, 2002.

Porter, Stanley E. "The Use of the Old Testament in the New Testament: A Brief Comment on Method and Terminology." In Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals (eds. C. A. Evans and J. A. Sanders; JSNTSup 14; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press, 1997), 79–96.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Intertextuality .

v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intertextuality&oldid=1292364354 " Categories : Intertextuality Literary concepts Post-structuralism Transmediation Text Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 16:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intertextuality 37 languages Add topic

