Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Mechanism of retardation 3 Uses 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Fire retardant gel 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Superabsorbent polymer mixture Fire retardant gel protects a person's hand from a burning fuel.

Fire-retardant gels are superabsorbent polymer slurries with a "consistency almost like petroleum jelly." [ 1 ] Fire-retardant gels can also be slurries that are composed of a combination of water, starch, and clay.

[ 2 ] Used as fire retardants , they can be used for structure protection and in direct-attack applications against wildfires .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Fire-retardant gels are short-term fire suppressants typically applied with ground equipment.

[ 5 ] They are also used in the movie industry to protect stunt persons from flames when filming action movie scenes.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] The practical use of gels was limited until the 1950s as advances in copolymerization techniques led to reproducible, batchwise preparation of swellable resins with uniform cross-linking.

[ 8 ] This technology was later used in the development of a "substantially continuous, adherent, particulate coating composition of water-swollen, gelled particles of a crosslinked, water-insoluble, water-swellable polymer." [ 9 ] The water-absorbent polymers in fire-retardant gels are similar to those used in diapers.

[ 10 ] Mechanism of retardation [ edit ] The polymer in gels soaks up hundreds of times its weight in water creating millions of tiny drops of water surrounded by and protected by a polymer shell. The result is a "bubblet" or a drop of water surrounded by a polymer shell in contrast to a bubble which is air surrounded by liquid. As the gel and water are sprayed onto an exposed surface, millions of tiny "bubblets" are stacked one on top of another.  The stacking of the water "bubblets" form a thermal protective "blanket" over the surface to which it is applied. In order for the heat of the fire to penetrate the protected surface, it must burn off each layer of the gel "bubblets" coating.  Each layer holds the heat away from the next layer of bubblets beneath.  The polymer shell of each bubblets and their stacking significantly prevent water evaporation.

The stacking of the bubblets is similar to aspirated fire fighting foam or compressed air foam systems , except that bubblets are water filled, whereas foam bubbles are only filled with air.  Due to the high specific heat of water, it requires more energy to raise the temperature of water than air.  Therefore, water-filled bubblets will absorb more heat than the air-filled foam bubbles (which are more effective for vapor suppression).  When gel is applied to a surface such as an exterior wall, the water-filled bubblets can absorb much of the heat given off by the fire, thereby slowing the fire from reaching the wall.

Gels can provide thermal protection from fire for extended periods even at 3,500 °F (1,930 °C).  Depending on the fire conditions, applied fire retardant gels offer fire protection for periods of 6 to 36 hours.

[ 11 ] After the retained water is completely evaporated from a gel, fire resistance is lost, but can be restored by re-wetting the surface if gel material is still adherent.

[ 3 ] Uses [ edit ] Fire retardant gels create a fire protective gel coating that completely repels flaming embers and is extremely effective in cases of emergency in protecting structures from the flame fronts typical of most wildfires.

[ 12 ] During a fire in the Black Hills National Forest , "nearly all homes coated with a slimy gel were saved while dozens of houses nearby burned to the ground." [ 13 ] Certain supplemental fire protection insurance may include the application of fire-retardant gel to homes during wildfire. Claimed to work "best when applied hours before a fire approaches", gel is applied using specially designed trucks by private firms.  However, danger may be high and private firms may interfere with fire efforts.  In response to such a concern, Sam DiGiovanna, chief of Firebreak response program, a private response team, stated: "If whoever is running the fire thinks it's too dangerous to go into a particular area, we don't go into that area." [ 14 ] These gels are useful when filming scenes in which it is desired to give the illusion that someone is on fire. To do so, the gel is applied to an area of the body. Next, a fuel is placed on top of the gel. When ready to film the scene, the fuel is lit on fire. The gel insulates the person from the energy released from the burning fuel. The energy from the burning fuel goes into the gel, but not the stunt person. Thus, the stunt person is protected from being burned.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ The Associated Press (October 13, 2007).

"Firefighters say Gel Works, But Don't Expect Rush to Stockpile It" .

^ US 8834750 , Glenn, Gregory M., "Starch-based fire retardant", published 2013-04-26 ^ a b "CDF Evaluation Letter of Barricade II Gel" (PDF) . January 24, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

^ "UDSA Forest Service Specification for Water Enhancers (gels) for Wildland Firefighting" (PDF) . June 1, 2007 . Retrieved 2008-11-24 .

^ "After the Fire: Cleaning Up Fire Retardant and Fire Suppressants" (PDF) . July 28, 2013 . Retrieved 2020-10-01 .

^ a b Howder, Collin R.; Groen, Kyle D.; Kuntzleman, Thomas S. (2010-08-09). "JCE Classroom Activity #107. And the Oscar Goes to...A Chemist!".

Journal of Chemical Education .

87 (10): 1060– 1061.

Bibcode : 2010JChEd..87.1060H .

doi : 10.1021/ed900013z .

^ a b Kuntzleman, Thomas S.; Mork, Dakota J.; Norris, Levi D.; Maniére-Spencer, Christopher D. (2013-05-29). "Creating and Experimenting with Fire Gel, an Inexpensive and Readily Prepared Insulating Material".

Journal of Chemical Education .

90 (7): 947– 949.

Bibcode : 2013JChEd..90..947K .

doi : 10.1021/ed3006506 .

^ US 2810716 , Markus, Richard L., "Batchwise copolymerization technique", published 1957-10-22 ^ US 3229769 , Bashaw, Robert N., "Method for controlling the spread of fire", published 1966-01-18 ^ "BARRICADE II FIRE BLOCKING GEL MSDS" (PDF) . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

^ "BARRICADE II Residential FAQs" . Retrieved 2013-05-22 .

^ "PROTECT YOUR HOME FROM AN APPROACHING WILDFIRE" . Retrieved 2020-10-05 .

^ Kafka, Joe (Associated Press writer) (October 9, 2007).

"New Fire-Retardant Gel Can Save Homes" . PHYSORG.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008 . Retrieved 2009-06-11 .

^ Pierce, Emmet (March 25, 2008).

"Insurers adding fire-retardant gel as policy option" . Union-Tribune (SignOnSanDiego.com) . Retrieved 2009-06-11 .

James H. Meidl: "Flammable Hazardous Materials", Glencoe Press Fire Science Series, 1970.

External links [ edit ] v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_retardant_gel&oldid=1274323424 " Categories : Fire suppression Fire suppression agents Wildfire suppression Fire protection Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 February 2025, at 17:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire retardant gel 1 language Add topic

