Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Face value 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Čeština Deutsch Español Français Galego Hrvatski עברית Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Polski Русский Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Face value (disambiguation) .

Nominal value of a currency given by the issuing authority This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Romanian stamp from 1947 showing a face value of 12 Lei The face value , sometimes called nominal value , is the value of a coin , bond , stamp or paper money as printed on the coin, stamp or bill itself [ 1 ] by the issuing authority.

The face value of coins, stamps, or bill is usually its legal value. However, their market value need not bear any relationship to the face value. For example, some rare coins or stamps may be traded at prices considerably above their face value. Coins may also have a salvage value due to more or less valuable metals that they contain.

Overview [ edit ] The face value of bonds usually represents the principal or redemption value .

Interest payments are expressed as a percentage of face value. Before maturity, the actual value of a bond may be greater or less than face value, depending on the interest rate payable and the perceived risk of default . As bonds approach maturity , actual value approaches face value.

In the case of stock certificates, face value is the par value of the stock. In the case of common stock , par value is largely symbolic. In the case of preferred stock , dividends may be expressed as a percentage of par value.

The face value of a life insurance policy is the death benefit. In the case of so-called " double indemnity " life insurance policies, the beneficiary receives double the face value in case of accidental death.

The face value of property , casualty or health insurance policies is the maximum amount payable, as stated on the policy's face or declarations page.

Face value can be used to refer to the apparent value of something other than a financial instrument, such as a concept or plan.  In this context, "face value" refers to the apparent merits of the idea, before the concept or plan has been tested.

Face value also refers to the price printed on a ticket to a sporting event, concert, or other event (the price the ticket was originally sold for by the organization hosting the event). The practice of re-selling tickets for more than face value (or a certain amount above face value) is commonly known as ticket scalping .

Taking someone at face value is assuming another person's suggestion, offer, or proposal is sincere, rather than a bargaining ploy.

[ original research?

] See also [ edit ] Numismatics portal Money portal Denomination (currency) Denomination (postage stamp) Gresham's law Nominal value Par value Place value Token money References [ edit ] ^ A dictionary of business and management (5th ed.). Oxford [England]: Oxford University Press. 2009.

ISBN 9780199234899 .

OCLC 277068142 .

Further reading [ edit ] Buchanan, T.B. (1894).

Principles of Money and Coinage . Chamber of Commerce and Board of Trade. p.

22 . Retrieved September 5, 2017 .

Allen, L. (2009).

The Encyclopedia of Money . ABC-CLIO. p. 193.

ISBN 978-1-59884-251-7 . Retrieved September 5, 2017 .

Conant, C.A. (1905).

Book II-The principles of the value of money: The importance of definitions . The Principles of Money and Banking. Harper. p. 280 . Retrieved September 5, 2017 .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Face_value&oldid=1290266993 " Categories : Numismatic terminology Philatelic terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from September 2017 This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 19:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Face value 22 languages Add topic

