Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms of global labor arbitrage Toggle Forms of global labor arbitrage subsection 1.1 Foreign outsourcing 2 See also 3 Notes Toggle the table of contents Global labor arbitrage 1 language Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Shift of jobs to more inexpensive nations The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Global labor arbitrage is an economic phenomenon where, as a result of the removal of or disintegration of barriers to international trade , jobs move to nations where labor and the cost of doing business (such as environmental regulations ) are inexpensive and/or impoverished labor moves to nations with higher paying jobs.

[ 1 ] Two common barriers to international trade are tariffs (politically imposed) and the costs of transporting goods across oceans.  With the advent of the Internet , the decrease of the costs of telecommunications , and the possibility of near-instantaneous document transfer, the barriers to the trade of intellectual work product, which is, essentially, any kind of work that can be performed on a computer (such as computer programming ) or that makes use of college education, have been greatly reduced.

Often, a prosperous nation (such as the United States ) will remove its barriers to international trade, integrating its labor market with those of nations with a lower cost of labor (such as India , China , and Mexico ), resulting in a shifting of jobs from the prosperous nation to the developing one. The result is an increase in the supply of labor relative to the demand for labor, which means a decrease in costs and a decrease in wages.

Forms of global labor arbitrage [ edit ] Global labor arbitrage can take many forms, including but not limited to: Foreign outsourcing [ edit ] Main article: Offshore outsourcing Capital moves to nations with cheap labor, lower taxes and or fewer environmental regulations or other costs of doing business for the purpose of producing goods and services for export to other markets.

[ 2 ] The classic example is the case of a factory or office closing in Nation A and then moving to Nation B for the purpose of producing goods or services at lower labor costs for export back to Nation A's market. This can result in layoffs for workers in Nation A. For example, in the United States, the amount of manufacturing jobs has decreased while the importation of manufactured goods from other nations has increased (along with the United States' trade deficit). These trends are now affecting the service sector as well.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Absolute advantage Balance of trade Global workforce Exploitation of labour Youth unemployment Notes [ edit ] ^ The "global labor arbitrage" phenomenon has been described by economist Stephen S. Roach . See Mike Whitney, "Labor arbitrage," Entrepreneur , June 2006.

^ Miszczynski, Milosz (2016-06-22).

"Labour arbitrage: the lifecycle of a global production node" .

Journal of Organizational Ethnography .

5 (2): 106– 122.

doi : 10.1108/JOE-04-2016-0009 .

ISSN 2046-6749 .

^ Nadeem, S (2009) "The Uses and Abuses of Time: Globalization and Time Arbitrage in India’s Outsourcing Industries," Global Networks .

v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Global_labor_arbitrage&oldid=1301934228 " Categories : Arbitrage International trade Global workforce Offshoring Economic globalization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2013 United States-centric This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Global labor arbitrage 1 language Add topic

