Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Arab historiography 2 Modern salafism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Islamic views on the crusades 1 language বাংলা Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia There was little interest in the crusades in Islamic culture prior to the 20th century. But since the 1950s, the crusades have become an ideological staple in Salafism and jihadism .

Arab historiography [ edit ] The crusaders of the 12th century mostly fought the Turkish Seljuks ,  and later the Ayyubid dynasty , and were thus indirectly (and intermittently directly) allied with the Arab Abbasid Caliphate .
For this reason, according to Hillenbrand (2000), Arab historians tended to align with a western viewpoint, discussing the "Frankish wars" in the context of their own fight against the Turkic expansion.

[ 1 ] Phillips (2005) summarizes the general indifference by stating that "most Muslims" see the Crusades as "just another invasion among many in their history".

[ 2 ] Contemporary Islamic accounts did not recognise any religious or military motive for the Crusaders, who instead were simply viewed as arriving from nowhere before wreaking havoc upon Muslims.

[ 3 ] The veneration of Saladin as chivalrous opponent of the Crusaders likewise finds no reflection in Islamic tradition before the visit of German Emperor Wilhelm II to Saladin's tomb in 1898.

[ 4 ] The visit, coupled with anti-imperialist sentiments, led nationalist Arabs to reinvent the image of Saladin and portray him as a hero of the struggle against the West. The image of Saladin they used was the romantic one created by Walter Scott and other Europeans in the West at the time. It replaced Saladin's reputation as a figure who had been largely forgotten in the Muslim world, eclipsed by more successful figures such as Baybars of Egypt.

[ 5 ] Modern Arab states have sought to commemorate Saladin through various measures, often based on the image created of him in the 19th-century west.

[ 6 ] Modern salafism [ edit ] Renewed interest in the period is comparatively recent, arising in the context of modern salafi propaganda calling for war on the Western "crusaders".

[ 7 ] The term ṣalībiyyūn "crusader", a 19th-century loan translation from Western historiography, is now in common use as a pejorative; Salafi preacher Wagdy Ghoneim has used it interchangeably with naṣārā and masīḥiyyīn as a term for Christians in general.

[ 8 ] The Partition of the Ottoman Empire was, at the time, popularly depicted as a final
triumph in the long history of the crusades against Islam:  The London Punch magazine published a drawing of King Richard the Lionheart watching the post-WWI British army entering Jerusalem with the caption, “At last, my dream come true.” [ 9 ] In a similar fashion, when the French General Henri Gouraud took command of Syria, he remarked, “Behold Saladin, we have returned." [ 10 ] Madden (1999) argued that this European romanticising connection of the crusades  with contemporary colonialism
was what has "reshaped the Muslim memory" of the medieval crusades.

[ 11 ] Beginning in the 1950s, following the influential History of the Crusades by Steven Runciman , 
western intellectual mainstream tended to depict the crusades as a shameful episode of colonialism. 
This, once again, tended to influence Muslim perception of the period, fuelling Arab nationalism and Islamist propagandistic depictions of westerners as hostile invaders: "Arab nationalists and Islamists agreed fully with this [Runcimann's] interpretation of the crusades. Poverty, corruption, and violence in the Middle East were said to be the lingering effects of the crusades and subsequent European colonialism." (Madden, p. 203).

Khashan (1997) has argued that the revival of "crusading" narrative in the west is connected with the end of the Cold War and the search for a new "good vs. evil" dichotomy in which to cast world politics.

[ 12 ] Khan (2003) argues that the contemporary jihadist propaganda is substantially derived from the 
writings of early Islamists like Sayyid Qutb and Abul Ala Maududi who were educated in Western institutions in the 1950s and thus 
submerged in the "politically correct" narrative following Runcimann which was current in western academia at the time.

[ 13 ] The "crusader" rhetoric was fully developed in Islamist extremism and Jihadism by the end of the 1990s.
Notably, a fatwa signed by Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri in 1998 called for jihad against "the crusader-Zionist alliance" (referring to the United States and Israel ).

[ 14 ] By 2008, The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World claimed that "many Muslims consider the Crusades to be a symbol of Western hostility toward Islam".

[ failed verification ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Historiography of the Crusades References [ edit ] ^ Carole Hillenbrand (2000).

The Crusades: Islamic Perspectives . Psychology Press. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-415-92914-1 .

^ Phillips, Jonathan (2005).

The Fourth Crusade and the Sack of Constantinople . Penguin.

ISBN 0143035908 .

[ page needed ] ^ Hillenbrand, Carole. The crusades: Islamic perspectives. Routledge, 2018.

^ The Kaiser laid a wreath on the tomb baring the inscription, "A Knight without fear or blame who often had to teach his opponents the right way to practice chivalry." Grousset (1970).

^ Riley Smith, Jonathan, "The Crusades, Christianity and Islam", (Columbia 2008), p. 63-66 ^ Madden, Thomas F.: The Concise History of the Crusades ; 1999, 3rd edition, Rowman & Littlefield, 2013. pp. 201-204.

^ "There is a straight line for propagandists to draw," Highly charged , BBC News, May 4, 2005 ^ "Waǧdī Ghunaym uses the term 'ṣalībiyyīn' not so much in the meaning of foreign 'crusaders' but interchangeably with naṣārā and masīḥiyyīn to designate all Christians, including the Copts in Egypt." A.  Hofheinz, "#WhyIHateIkhwan  Islamist-secular polarisation in Egyptian social media" , University of Oslo (2013).

^ Madden p. 198.

^ Madden, p. 199.

^ Madden, p. 201.

^ "In this atmosphere [post-Cold War] in which the conflict between ‘good’ and ‘evil’ has ceased to inspire American policy makers, playing up the militant Islamic threat seemed a useful way to revive the East-West confrontation.Hilal Khashan, “The New World Order and the Tempo of Militant Islam," British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, Vol. 24, No. 1 (May 1997): 10 ^ Muqtedar Khan, “Radical Islam, Liberal Islam,” Current History (December 2003): 419 ^ "Text of Fatwah Urging Jihad Against Americans" . Archived from the original on April 22, 2006 . Retrieved May 15, 2006 .

^ John Trumpbour, "Crusades" in The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World , ed. John L. Esposito. Oxford Islamic Studies Online, http://www.oxfordislamicstudies.com/article (accessed Feb 17, 2008).

[ page needed ] v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category Portals : Islam Christianity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamic_views_on_the_crusades&oldid=1291052722 " Categories : Historiography of the Crusades Jihadism Islamism Reactions Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2016 Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from September 2016 This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 19:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamic views on the crusades 1 language Add topic

