Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Related terminology 2 Ship draft measurements Toggle Ship draft measurements subsection 2.1 Variations 3 Draft marks 4 Implications Toggle Implications subsection 4.1 Large ships 4.2 Waterways 4.3 Pleasure boats 4.4 Submarines 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Draft (hull) 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Draft" hull – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Depth of a vessel below its waterline Graphical representation of the waterline of a ship (blue line), absent a lower projecting keel or propeller, with the draft (lower image) indicated as dimension d ; for other dimensions used to describe a ship, see also ship measurements .

Draft markings on the stern of the Cutty Sark , an example of the Imperial system of such markings.

The draft or draught of a ship is a determined depth of the vessel below the waterline , measured vertically to its hull 's lowest—its propellers , or keel , or other reference point.

[ 1 ] Draft varies according to the loaded condition of the ship. A deeper draft means the ship will have greater vertical depth below the waterline. Draft is used in under keel clearance calculations, where the draft is calculated with the available depth of water (from Electronic navigational charts ) to ensure the ship can navigate safely, without grounding. Navigators can determine their draught by calculation or by visual observation (of the ship's painted load lines ).

[ 2 ] Related terminology [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A ship's draft/draught is the "depth of the vessel below the waterline measured vertically to the lowest part of the hull , propellers , or other reference point".

[ 1 ] That is, the draft or draught is the maximum depth of any part of the vessel, including appendages such as rudders, propellers and drop keels if deployed.

[ citation needed ] The related term air draft is the maximum height of any part of the vessel above the water.

[ citation needed ] Draft determines the minimum depth of water a ship or boat can safely navigate in relation to the under keel clearance available.

[ 2 ] The more heavily a vessel is loaded, the deeper it sinks into the water, and the greater its draft (also referred to as its displacement).

[ 2 ] After construction, the shipyard creates a table showing how much water the vessel displaces based on its draft and the density of the water (salt or fresh).

[ citation needed ] The draft can also be used to determine the weight of cargo on board by calculating the total displacement of water, accounting for the content of the ship's bunkers , and using Archimedes' principle .

[ citation needed ] The difference between the forward and aft drafts of a ship is termed its trim .

Ship draft measurements [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Metric bow scale Imperial system in Roman numeration of the bow scale The draft aft ( stern ) is measured at the perpendicular of the stern .

[ 2 ] The draft forward ( bow ) is measured at the perpendicular of the bow.

[ 2 ] The mean draft is typically calculated from the averaging of the stern and bow drafts, with correction for water level variation and value of the position of forward (F) with respect to the average perpendicular numerical value (given in the ship's drawings or stability manual)) [ 3 ] [ 2 ] An alternative visual approximation is that given by reading the draught at the waterline, at or very near to amidships.

[ 2 ] The trim of a ship is the difference between the forward and aft drafts relative to the designed waterline. When the aft draft relative to the designed water line (DWL) is greater the vessel is deemed to have a positive trim, or to be trimmed by the stern, and it has a negative trim, or is trimmed by the bow, when the forward draft relative to DWL is the greater.

[ 4 ] In such a case it may be referred to as being down-by-the-head .

[ citation needed ] In commercial ship operations, the ship will usually quote the mean draft as the vessel's draft.

[ citation needed ] However, in navigational situations, the maximum draft, usually the aft draft, will be known on the bridge and will be shared with the pilot .

[ citation needed ] Variations [ edit ] The draft of a ship can be affected by multiple factors, besides the variations caused by changes in displacement: Variation by trim [ 5 ] Variation by list [ 5 ] Variations in water density due to temperature and salinity Variation as a result of a ship moving in shallow waters, or squat [ 6 ] Variation due to movable appendages, such as centreboards, daggerboards, drop keels, leeboards, and retractable rudders Projection of non-retractable rudders, propellers or thrusters below the hull When measured to the lowest projecting portion of the vessel, it is called the "draft, extreme"; when measured at the bow, it is called "draft, forward"; and when measured at the stern, the "draft, aft"; the average of the draft, forward, and the draft, aft is the "draft, mean", and the mean draft when in full load condition is the "draft load".

Draft marks [ edit ] Draft marks on a ship's bow Load line mark and draft marks on the side of a ship These are markings and numbers located on both sides of a vessel, as close as possible to the bow and stern , and then also, often amidships .

[ 1 ] The number and its associated marking indicate the distance from the marking to the bottom lowest fixed reference point of the vessel (e.g., its keel ).

[ 1 ] The numbers and markings were large and clear; for instance, on U.S. naval vessels, the numbers were, historically, as a standard, 6 inches tall, with spacing of 12 inches bottom to bottom, vertically.

[ 1 ] These hull markings constitute a "banded" scale, [ clarification needed ] and may be accompanied by international load line markings.

[ citation needed ] The scale may use Imperial units or metric units ; the Imperial system is as stated above (markings 6 inches high, spaced at 12 inch intervals, where the bottom of each marking is the draft in feet); in metric marking, the bottom of each draft mark is the draft in decimeters and each mark is one decimeter high, spaced at intervals of 2 decimeters.

[ citation needed ] An internal draft gauge or draft indicator is used on larger ships. It consists of a pressure gauge attached to a seacock below the light-load line and calibrated to reflect the draft of the ship.

[ 7 ] Implications [ edit ] Large ships [ edit ] Larger ships need to keep the propeller immersed when they are light (without cargo ), and may ballast further to reduce windage or for better directional stability or seakeeping, or to distribute load along the hull to reduce hogging and sagging stresses. To achieve this they use sailing ballast distributed among ballast tanks to stabilize the ship, following the unloading of cargo. The draft of a large ship has little direct link with its stability because stability depends mainly on the relative positions of the metacenter of the hull and the center of gravity. However, a "light" ship may have an excessively high stability which can cause uncomfortable rolling of the ship. A fully laden ship (with a large draft) can have either a high or low stability, depending on the height of the center of gravity , which is affected by the distribution of cargo.

The draft of a ship can be increased by longitudinal motion in shallow water, a hydrodynamic effect known as squat , which causes a local pressure reduction under the vessel.

[ 6 ] This in effect causes a ship to 'vertically sink 'down' leading to a reduction in under keel clearance .

[ 6 ] Large ships experience a draft increase to heel effect where the ship's beam angles on one side during an alteration of course (sometimes known as turning effect).

[ 8 ] Waterways [ edit ] Draft is a significant factor limiting navigable waterways, especially for large vessels. This includes many shallow coastal waters and reefs, but also some major shipping lanes, therefore restriction on the maximum draft (the draft limit , a distance from the seabed or riverbed to the water level) is sometimes established (in particular, all ports set up draft limits).

Panamax class ships—the largest ships able to transit the Panama Canal —do have a draft limit (and an "air draft" limit for passing under bridges) but are usually limited by beam , or sometimes length overall ,  for fitting into locks . However, ships can be longer, wider and higher in the Suez Canal , the limiting factor for Suezmax ships is draft. Some supertankers are able to transit the Suez Canal when unladen or partially laden, but not when fully laden.

Canals are not the only draft-limited shipping lanes. A Malaccamax ship, is the deepest draft able to transit the very busy but relatively shallow Strait of Malacca . The Strait  only allows ships to have 0.4 m (1.31 ft) more draft than the Suez Canal.

Capesize , Ultra Large Crude Carriers and a few Chinamax carriers, are some of the ships that have too deep a draft when laden, for either the Strait of Malacca or the Suez Canal.

Pleasure boats [ edit ] A small draft allows pleasure boats to navigate through shallower water. This makes it possible for these boats to access smaller ports, to travel along rivers and even to 'beach' the boat. A large draft may increase ultimate stability in, depending on the hull form, as the center of gravity can be lower. A broad beamed boat like a catamaran can provide high initial stability with a small draft, but the width of the boat increases.

Submarines [ edit ] A term called keel depth is used for submarines , which can submerge to different depths at sea, specifying the current distance from the water surface to the bottom of the submarine's keel.  It is used in navigation to avoid underwater obstacles and hitting the ocean floor, and as a standard point on the submarine for depth measurements. Submarines usually also have a specified draft used while operating on the surface, for navigating in harbors and at docks.

See also [ edit ] Air draft Hull (watercraft) Naval architecture Waterline References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Piozet, Charles and the Div. of Personnel Supervision with assistance of the Bur. of Ships (March 2023) [June 1942].

"Nomenclature of Naval Vessels: Glossary of Shipbuilding Terms" (2nd ed.) . Retrieved 26 March 2024 .

When measured to the lowest projecting portion of the vessel, it is called the "draft, extreme"; when measured at the bow, it is called "draft, forward"; and when measured at the stern, the "draft, aft"; the average of the draft, forward, and the draft, aft is the "draft, mean", and the mean draft when in full load condition is the "draft load". ... TRIM. The arithmetic sum of the drafts forward and aft above and below the mean water-line. The angle of trim is the angle between the plane of flotation and the mean water-line plane. A vessel "trims by the head" or "trims by the stern" when the vessel inclines forward or aft so that her plane of flotation is not coincident with her mean water-line plane.

^ a b c d e f g Barrass, C. B. (2009).

Ship Squat and Interaction . Edinburgh: Witherby Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-1-905331-60-4 .

^ "Draft Surveys: Methodology, Calculations, and common errors" . 19 October 2020.

^ Derrett, D.R. (2006). "12".

Ship Stability for Masters and Mates . Sixth: Elsevier. pp.

143– 144.

^ a b Gilardoni, Eduardo O.; Presedo, Juan P. (2017).

Navigation in Shallow Waters . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . pp.

140– 141.

ISBN 978-1-85609-667-6 .

^ a b c Gilardoni, Eduardo O.; Presedo, Juan P. (2017).

Navigation in Shallow Waters . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . p. 67.

ISBN 978-1-85609-667-6 .

^ René de baron Kerchove (1961). "Draft Gauge".

International Maritime Dictionary: An Encyclopedic Dictionary of Useful Maritime Terms and Phrases, Together with Equivalents in French and German (2 ed.). Van Nostrand Reinhold. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-442-02062-0 .

OCLC 1039382382 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Gilardoni, Eduardo O.; Presedo, Juan P. (2017).

Navigation in Shallow Waters . Livingston, Scotland: Witherby Publishing Group . p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-85609-667-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hayler, William B.; Keever, John M. (2003).

American Merchant Seaman's Manual . Cornell Maritime Prress.

ISBN 0-87033-549-9 .

Turpin, Edward A.; McEwen, William A. (1980).

Merchant Marine Officers' Handbook (4th ed.). Centreville, MD: Cornell Maritime Press.

ISBN 0-87033-056-X .

Barrass, C. B. (2009).

Ship Squat and Interaction . Edinburgh: Witherby Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-1-905331-60-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Draft marks .

v t e Ship measurements Length Length overall Length between perpendiculars Length at the waterline Breadth Beam Depth Draft Moulded depth Freeboard Load line (Plimsoll Line) Under keel clearance Height Air draft Volume Worldwide Tonnage Gross tonnage Compensated gross tonnage Net tonnage Underdeck tonnage Specialized Panama Canal/Universal Measurement System Thames measurement tonnage Archaic Gross register tonnage Net register tonnage Capacity Current Deadweight tonnage Twenty-foot equivalent unit ( Intermodal containers ) Archaic Builder's Old Measurement Moorsom System Weight Displacement Loaded displacement Standard displacement Light displacement Normal displacement Stability Inclining test List Angle of loll Metacentric height (GM) Limits Aframax Baltimax Capesize Chinamax Handymax/Supramax Handysize Malaccamax Panamax and § Neopanamax Péniche Q-Max (Qatar-max) Seawaymax Suezmax VLCC and ULCC Yamalmax NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐m79tz
Cached time: 20250812020211
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.506 seconds
Real time usage: 0.638 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3445/1000000
Revision size: 16919/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 107416/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14859/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58892/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.335/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8681900/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  560.877      1 -total
 24.24%  135.965      1 Template:Reflist
 16.51%   92.581      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.46%   92.325      3 Template:Navbox
 16.39%   91.912      1 Template:Ship_measurements
 15.36%   86.162      2 Template:Cite_web
 10.79%   60.517      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.37%   58.180      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.02%   56.208      1 Template:Side_box
  9.52%   53.382      4 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9223115:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020211 and revision id 1301058036. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Draft_(hull)&oldid=1301058036 " Categories : Nautical terminology Navigation Ship measurements Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from March 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Draft (hull) 41 languages Add topic

