Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bibliography 2 Biography 3 Reforms 4 Domestic policies 5 Death Toggle Death subsection 5.1 Assessments 6 In fiction and popular culture 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Shang Yang 43 languages العربية Asturianu Башҡортса Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Malagasy مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Qin State statesman, chancellor and reformer (c. 390–338 BC) For the contemporary Chinese painter, see Shang Yang (artist) . For the plant scientist, see Shang Fa Yang .

Shang Yang Statue of Shang Yang Chinese 商鞅 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Shāng Yāng Bopomofo ㄕㄤ ㄧㄤ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Shang Iang Wade–Giles Shang 1 Yang 1 Tongyong Pinyin Shang Yang IPA [ʂáŋ jáŋ] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Sēung Yēung Jyutping soeng1 joeng1 IPA [sœŋ˥ jœŋ˥] Southern Min Tâi-lô Siong Ng Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) * s.taŋ ʔaŋ Part of a series on Chinese legalism Figures Guan Zhong Marquess Wen of Wei Li Kui Duke Xiao of Qin Shang Yang Shen Buhai Wu Qi Shen Dao Zhang Yi Han Fei Li Si Qin Shi Huang Han figures Jia Yi Emperor Wen of Han Emperor Wu of Han Chao Cuo Gongsun Hong Zhang Tang Huan Tan Wang Fu Zhuge Liang Later figures Emperor Wen of Sui Du You Wang Anshi Li Shanchang Zhang Juzheng Xu Guangqi Relevant texts Guanzi The Book of Lord Shang Shenzi (both books) Han Feizi Wuzi Wei Liaozi Annals of Lü Buwei Huang-Lao Relevant articles Rectification of names Wu wei Discourses on Salt and Iron Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius v t e Shang Yang ( Chinese : 商鞅 ; c. 390 – 338 BC), also known as Wei Yang ( Chinese : 衞鞅 ) and originally surnamed Gongsun , was a statesman , chancellor and reformer of the State of Qin . Arguably becoming the "most famous and influential statesman of the Warring States period ", [ 1 ] Gongsun was born in the Zhou vassal state of Wey , [ 2 ] migrating to take up office in the Qin state. His policies laid the administrative, political and economic foundations that would eventually enable Qin to conquer the other six rival states, unifying China into a centralized rule for the first time in history under the Qin dynasty . Scholars consider it likely that both he and his followers contributed to The Book of Lord Shang .

[ 3 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Shang Yang's traditional biography is in Chapter 68 of the Shiji , with some additional details in other chapters. Although embellished, Sinologist Yuri Pines did not consider it pure fiction, given relevant paleographic discoveries. The winning court debate that saw him acquire office is purportedly depicted in the first "Revising the Laws" chapter of the Book of Lord Shang .

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Shang Yang was born as the son of a concubine to the ruling family of the minor state Wey (衞) . His surname (氏, lineage name) was Gongsun and his personal name Yang. As a member of the Wei family, he was also known as Wei Yang.

[ 5 ] At a young age, Gongsun studied law and obtained a position under Prime Minister Shuzuo of Wei (魏, not the same as his birth state). With the support of Duke Xiao of Qin , he left his lowly position in Wei [ 6 ] to become the chief adviser in Qin. His numerous reforms transformed the peripheral Qin state into a militarily powerful and strongly centralized kingdom. Changes to the state's legal system (which were said to have been built upon Li Kui 's Canon of Laws ) propelled the Qin to prosperity. Enhancing the administration through an emphasis on meritocracy , his policies weakened the power of the feudal lords.

In 341 BC, Qin attacked the state of Wei. Gongsun personally led the Qin army to defeat Wei, and eventually Wei ceded the land west of the Yellow River to Qin. For his role in the war, Gongsun received 15 cities in Shang as his personal fief, becoming known as the lord of Shang (Shang Jun) or Shang Yang.

[ 7 ] According to the Records of the Grand Historian , with his personal connections while serving in the court of Wei, Shang Yang invited Gongzi Ang, the Wei general, to negotiate a peace treaty. As soon as Ang arrived, he was taken prisoner, and the Qin army attacked, successfully defeating their opponents.

[ 5 ] Shang Yang oversaw the construction of Xianyang .

[ 8 ] Mark Edward Lewis considered reorganization of the military as potentially responsible for the orderly plan of roads and fields throughout north China. This might be far fetched, but Gongsun was as much a military reformer as a legal one.

[ 9 ] The Shang Yang school of thought was favoured by Emperor Wu of Han , [ 10 ] and John Keay mentions that Tang figure Du You was drawn to Shang Yang.

[ 11 ] Reforms [ edit ] He is credited by Han Fei , often considered to be the greatest representative of Chinese Legalism (法家), with the creation of two theories; "fixing the standards" ( Chinese : 定法 ) "equality before the law" ( Chinese : 一民 ) Believing in the rule of law and considering loyalty to the state above that of the family, Yang introduced two sets of changes to the State of Qin. The first, in 356 BC, were- Li Kui 's Book of Law was implemented, with the important addition of a rule providing punishment equal to that of the perpetrator for those aware of a crime but failing to inform the government.  He codified reforms into enforceable laws. The laws were stringent and multitudinous reformed by Yang and the punishments were strict.

[ 12 ] Assigning land to soldiers based upon their military successes and stripping nobility unwilling to fight of their land rights. The army was separated into twenty military ranks , based upon battlefield achievements. The reform of military made Qin citizens willing to join the army and helped the Qin dynasty build the military power necessary to unify China.

[ 13 ] As manpower was short in Qin, Yang encouraged the cultivation of unsettled lands and wastelands and immigration, favouring agriculture over luxury commerce (though also paying more recognition to especially successful merchants).

Yang introduced his second set of changes in 350 BC, which included a new standardized system of land allocation and reforms to taxation .

The vast majority of Yang's reforms were taken from policies instituted elsewhere, such as from Wu Qi of the State of Chu ; however, Yang's reforms were more thorough and extreme than those of other states, and monopolized policy in the hands of the ruler.

[ 14 ] Under his tenure, Qin quickly caught up with and surpassed the reforms of other states.

Domestic policies [ edit ] Yang introduced land reforms , privatized land, rewarded farmers who exceeded harvest quotas, enslaved farmers who failed to meet quotas, and used enslaved subjects as (state-owned) rewards for those who met government policies.

As manpower was short in Qin relative to the other states at the time, Yang enacted policies to increase its manpower. As Qin peasants were recruited into the military, he encouraged active migration of peasants from other states into Qin as a replacement workforce; this policy simultaneously increased the manpower of Qin and weakened the manpower of Qin's rivals. Yang made laws forcing citizens to marry at a young age and passed tax laws to encourage raising multiple children. He also enacted policies to free convicts who worked in opening wastelands for agriculture.

Yang partly abolished primogeniture (depending on the performance of the son) and created a double tax on households that had more than one son living in the household, to break up large clans into nuclear families.

Yang moved the capital from the city of Yueyang to Xianyang , in order to reduce the influence of nobles on the administration. Xianyang remained Qin's capital until its fall in 207 BC.

Death [ edit ] Yang was deeply despised by the Qin nobility [ 5 ] and became vulnerable after the death of Duke Xiao. The next ruler, King Huiwen , ordered the nine familial exterminations against Yang and his family, on the grounds of fomenting rebellion. Yang had previously humiliated the new duke "by causing him to be punished for an offense as though he were an ordinary citizen." [ 15 ] According to Zhan Guo Ce , Yang went into hiding; at one point Yang was refused a room at an inn because one of his own laws prevented admission of a guest without proper identification.

Yang was executed by jūliè ( 車裂 : dismemberment by being fastened to five chariots , cattle or horses and being torn to pieces); [ 16 ] [ 17 ] his whole family was also executed.

[ 5 ] Despite his death, King Huiwen kept the reforms enacted by Yang.

A number of alternate versions of Yang's death have survived. According to Sima Qian in his Records of the Grand Historian , Yang first escaped to Wei. However, he was hated there for his earlier betrayal of Gongzi Ang and was expelled. Yang then fled to his fiefdom, where he raised a rebel army but was killed in battle. After the battle, King Hui of Qin had Yang's corpse torn apart by chariots as a warning to others.

[ 5 ] Following the execution of Yang, King Huiwen turned away from the central valley south to conquer Sichuan ( Shu and Ba ) in what Steven Sage calls a "visionary reorientation of thinking" toward material interests in Qin's bid for universal rule.

[ 18 ] Assessments [ edit ] A. F. P. Hulsewé considered Shang Yang the "founder of the school of law ", and considers his unification of punishments one of his most important contributions; that is, giving the penalty of death to any grade of person disobeying the king's orders. Shang Yang even expected the king, though the source of law (authorizing it), to follow it. This treatment is in contrast to ideas more typical of archaic society, more closely represented in the Rites of Zhou as giving different punishments to different strata of society.

Hulsewe points out that Sima Tan considered equal treatment the "school of law's" most salient point: "They do not distinguish between close and far relatives, nor do they discriminate between noble and humble, but in a uniform manner they decide on them in law." [ 19 ] The Han dynasty adopted essentially the same denominations of crimes, and conception of equality, as Shang Yang set down for Qin, without collective punishment of the three sets of relatives.

[ 19 ] Shang Yang appeared to act according to his own teachings, [ 19 ] and translator Duvendak (1928) references him as being considered "like a bamboo‑frame which keeps a bow straight, and one could not get him out of his straightness", even if spoken of by some pre-modern Chinese in ill regard with the fall of Qin. Duvendak believed that Shang Yang should be of interest not just to Sinologists , but Western Jurists as well.

Despite traditional history's dim view, Sima Qian recounts the immediate effect of his policies as such: After [the ordinances] had been in effect for ten years, the commoners of Qin were delighted; no one picked up articles lost on the road, there were no bandits or thieves in the mountains, households were well provided for and the people were well off. The commoners were brave in the duke’s battles but cowardly in private feuds and the townships and cities were in good order. (Sima Qian 1994a, 90) [ 20 ] In fiction and popular culture [ edit ] Portrayed by Shi Jingming in The Legend of Mi Yue (2015) as a guest appearance, depicting his execution.

Portrayed by Wang Zhifei in the TV series The Qin Empire as a main character.

Appears as a Great Person in 2025's Civilization VII . Shang Yang appears for the Han civilization, adding +3 influence to the palace when activated on it.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Shizi Notes [ edit ] ^ Pines 2024 , p. 24b.

^ Antonio S. Cua (ed.), 2003, p. 362, Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy [1] "The fifth important legalist, Shang Yang (Wei Yang, c. 390–338 B.C.E.), was born in Wei; his original surname was Gongsun." ^ Pines, Yuri, "Legalism in Chinese Philosophy", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), 1.1 Major Legalist Texts, http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/chinese-legalism/ ^ Pines 2024b , p. 24.

^ a b c d e 商君列传 (vol. 68) , Records of the Grand Historian , Sima Qian ^ pg 79 of Classical China ^ Bamboo Annals Ancient Text, Records of Wei ^ John Man 2008. p. 51.

Terra Cotta Army .

^ Paul R. Goldin, Persistent Misconceptions about Chinese Legalism . p. 18 [2] Sanctioned Violence in Early China, SUNY Series in Chinese Philosophy and Culture (Albany, 1990), 63 ^ Creel 1970, What Is Taoism?, 115 ^ Arthur F. Wright 1960. p. 99.

The Confucian Persuasion ^ Sanft, Charles (2014).

"Shang Yang Was a Cooperator: Applying Axelrod's Analysis of Cooperation in Early China" .

Philosophy East and West .

64 (1): 174– 191.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2014.0003 .

ISSN 1529-1898 .

S2CID 144996247 .

^ Sanft, Charles (2014). "Shang Yang Was a Cooperator: Applying Axelrod's Analysis of Cooperation in Early China".

Philosophy East and West .

64 (1): 174– 191.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2014.0003 .

ISSN 1529-1898 .

S2CID 144996247 .

^ Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1982-09-15).

What Is Taoism?: And Other Studies in Chinese Cultural History . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-12047-8 .

^ pg 80 of Classical China , ed. William H. McNeill and Jean W. Sedlar, Oxford University Press , 1970. LCCN: 68-8409 ^ 和氏 , Han Feizi , Han Fei ^ 东周列国志 , 蔡元放 ^ Sage, Steven F. (1992-01-01).

Ancient Sichuan and the Unification of China . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1037-0 .

^ a b c Hulsewé, Anthony François Paulus (1955).

remnants of han law . Brill Archive.

^ Shang, Yang (2003).

The Book of Lord Shang: A Classic of the Chinese School of Law . The Lawbook Exchange, Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-58477-241-5 .

^ "HAN CHINA - ANTIQUITY AGE CIVILIZATION" .

civilization.2k.com .

2K Games . Retrieved July 17, 2025 .

References [ edit ] * Pines, Yuri (2024).

Dao Companion to China's fa Tradition . Hebrew University of Jerusalem: Springer.

ISBN 9789048129270 .

Pines, Yuri (2024b), Chapter 1 Shang Yang and The Book of Lord Shang. In: Pines, Y. (eds) Dao Companion to China's fa Tradition (PDF) , Springer, Cham, pp.

23– 56, doi : 10.2307/600068 , JSTOR 600068 Xie, Qingkui, "Shang Yang" Archived 2007-05-09 at archive.today .

Encyclopedia of China (Political Science Edition), 1st ed.

Zhang, Guohua, "Shang Yang" [ permanent dead link ] .

Encyclopedia of China (Law Edition), 1st ed.

国史概要 (第二版) ISBN 7-309-02481-8 戰國策 ( Zhan Guo Ce ), 秦第一 Further reading [ edit ] Li Yu-ning, ShangYang's Reforms (M.E. Sharpe Inc., 1977).

Sterckx, Roel.

Chinese Thought. From Confucius to Cook Ding.

London: Penguin, 2019.

External links [ edit ] China portal Law portal History portal Biography portal Hansen, Chad.

"Lord Shang (died 338 BC)" .

Chad Hansen's Chinese Philosophy Pages .

Duyvendak, J. J. L.

"商君書 – Shang Jun Shu" .

Chinese Text Project .

"秦一" .

Chinese Text Project .

Works by Yang Shang at Project Gutenberg Links to related articles v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands 2 Norway Greece Korea Sweden Israel Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shang_Yang&oldid=1302323579 " Categories : 390s BC births 338 BC deaths 4th-century BC Chinese people 4th-century BC executions 4th-century BC Chinese philosophers Chinese legal scholars Chinese legal writers Chinese reformers Chinese political philosophers Executed people from Henan Legalism (Chinese philosophy) People executed by the Qin dynasty Philosophers from Henan Philosophers of law Politicians from Puyang Social philosophers Theoretical historians Victims of familial execution People of Wey (state) Zhou dynasty philosophers Zhou dynasty government officials Qin state people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Pages with plain IPA Webarchive template archiveis links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Year of birth uncertain Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shang Yang 43 languages Add topic

