Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology and usage 2 Estimates Toggle Estimates subsection 2.1 Criticism of estimates 3 Proposed causes and enabling factors Toggle Proposed causes and enabling factors subsection 3.1 Ideology 3.2 Political system 3.3 Leaders 4 Debate over famines 5 Comparisons to other mass killings 6 Memorials and museums 7 Related crimes Toggle Related crimes subsection 7.1 Soviet Union 7.2 China 7.2.1 Under Mao Zedong 7.2.2 Under Xi Jinping 7.3 Cambodia 7.4 Ethiopia 7.5 North Korea 7.6 Romania 7.7 Yugoslavia 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Mass killings under communist regimes 16 languages العربية বাংলা Български Esperanto فارسی Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Polski Português Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political map of the world showing past and present communist states Communist states that existed in the past Communist states that exist in the present day Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Genocide Issues List of genocides Genocides in history Genocides in history (before 1490) 1490–WWI WWI–WWII 1946–1999 21st century Effects on youth Denial Massacre Rape Incitement In relation to Colonialism / War Perpetrators, victims, and bystanders Prevention Psychology Recognition politics Risk factors Stages Types Anti-Indigenous Cultural Paper Utilitarian Studies Outline Bibliography Education Related topics Compulsory sterilization Democide Ethnic cleansing Ethnocide Forced assimilation Category v t e Mass killings under communist regimes occurred through a variety of means during the 20th and 21st centuries, including executions , famine , deaths through forced labour , deportation , starvation , and imprisonment . Some of these events have been classified as genocides or crimes against humanity . Other terms have been used to describe these events, including classicide , democide , red holocaust , and politicide . The mass killings have been studied by authors and academics and several of them have postulated the potential causes of these killings along with the factors which were associated with them. Some authors have tabulated a total death toll, consisting of all of the excess deaths which cumulatively occurred under the rule of communist states , but these death toll estimates have been criticised. Most frequently, the states and events which are studied and included in death toll estimates are the Holodomor and the Great Purge in the Soviet Union , the Great Chinese Famine and the Cultural Revolution in the People's Republic of China , and the Cambodian genocide in Democratic Kampuchea (now Cambodia ). Estimates of individuals killed range from a low of 10–20 million to as high as 148 million.

The concepts of connecting disparate killings to the status of the communist states which committed them, and of trying to ascribe common causes and factors to them, have been both supported and criticized by the academic community. Some academics view these concepts as an indictment of communism as an ideology , while other academics view them as being overly simplistic and rooted in anti-communism . There is academic debate over whether the killings should be attributed to the political system, or primarily to the individual leaders of the communist states ; similarly, there is debate over whether all the famines which occurred during the rule of communist states can be considered mass killings. Mass killings which were committed by communist states have been compared to killings which were committed by other types of states. Monuments to individuals and groups considered to be victims of communism exist in almost all the capitals of Eastern Europe , as well as many other cities in the world.

Terminology and usage [ edit ] See also: Genocide definitions and Mass killing § Terminology Several different terms are used to describe the intentional killing of large numbers of noncombatants.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] According to historian Anton Weiss-Wendt , the field of comparative genocide studies has very "little consensus on defining principles such as definition of genocide, typology, application of a comparative method, and timeframe." [ 7 ] According to professor of economics Attiat Ott, mass killing has emerged as a "more straightforward" term.

[ 8 ] The following terminology has been used by individual authors to describe mass killings of unarmed civilians by communist governments , individually or as a whole: Classicide – sociologist Michael Mann has proposed classicide to mean the "intended mass killing of entire social classes ." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Classicide is considered " premeditated mass killing" narrower than genocide in that it targets a part of a population defined by its social status, but broader than politicide in that the group is targeted without regard to their political activity.

[ 11 ] Crime against humanity – historian Klas-Göran Karlsson uses crimes against humanity , which includes "the direct mass killings of politically undesirable elements, as well as forced deportations and forced labour." Karlsson acknowledges that the term may be misleading in the sense that the regimes targeted groups of their own citizens, but he considers it useful as a broad legal term which emphasizes attacks on civilian populations and because the offenses demean humanity as a whole.

[ 12 ] Historian Jacques Sémelin , as well as Michael Mann, [ 13 ] believe that crime against humanity is more appropriate than genocide or politicide when speaking of violence by communist regimes.

[ 5 ] Democide – political scientist Rudolph Rummel defined democide as "the intentional killing of an unarmed or disarmed person by government agents acting in their authoritative capacity and pursuant to government policy or high command." [ 14 ] His definition covers a wide range of deaths, including forced labor and concentration camp victims, killings by "unofficial" private groups, extrajudicial summary killings , and mass deaths due to the governmental acts of criminal omission and neglect, such as in deliberate famines as well as killings by de facto governments, such as warlords or rebels in a civil war.

[ 15 ] This definition covers any murder of any number of persons by any government, [ 16 ] and it has been applied to killings that were perpetrated by communist regimes.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Genocide – under the Genocide Convention , the crime of genocide generally applies to the mass murder of ethnic rather than political or social groups. The clause which granted protection to political groups was eliminated from the United Nations resolution after a second vote because many states, including the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] feared that it could be used to impose limitations on their right to suppress internal disturbances.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Scholarly studies of genocide usually acknowledge the UN's omission of economic and political groups and use mass political killing datasets of democide and genocide and politicide or geno-politicide .

[ 23 ] The killings that were committed by the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia has been labeled a genocide or an autogenocide , and the deaths that occurred under Leninism and Stalinism in the Soviet Union, as well as those that occurred under Maoism in China , have been controversially investigated as possible cases. In particular, the Soviet famine of 1930–1933 and the Great Chinese Famine , which occurred during the Great Leap Forward , have both been "depicted as instances of mass killing underpinned by genocidal intent." [ 24 ] Red holocaust – the term, which was coined by the Munich Institut für Zeitgeschichte , [ 25 ] [ 26 ] has been used by professor of comparative economic systems Steven Rosefielde for communist "peacetime state killings", while stating that it "could be defined to include all murders (judicially sanctioned terror-executions), criminal manslaughter (lethal forced labor and ethnic cleansing ), and felonious negligent homicide (terror-starvation) incurred from insurrectionary actions and civil wars prior to state seizure, and all subsequent felonious state killings." [ 27 ] According to historian Jörg Hackmann, this term is not popular among scholars in Germany or internationally.

[ 26 ] Historian Alexandra Laignel-Lavastine writes that usage of this term "allows the reality it describes to immediately attain, in the Western mind, a status equal to that of the extermination of the Jews by the Nazi regime ." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Political scientist Michael Shafir writes that the use of the term supports the "competitive martyrdom component of Double Genocide ", a theory whose worst version is Holocaust obfuscation.

[ 30 ] Professor of political science George Voicu wrote that Leon Volovici, a literary historian of Jewish culture, has "rightfully condemned the abusive use of this concept as an attempt to 'usurp' and undermine a symbol specific to the history of European Jews ." [ 31 ] Mass killing – professor of psychology Ervin Staub defined mass killing as "killing members of a group without the intention to eliminate the whole group or killing large numbers of people without a precise definition of group membership. In a mass killing the number of people killed is usually smaller than in genocide." [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Referencing earlier definitions, [ 34 ] Professors of economics Joan Esteban, Massimo Morelli, and Dominic Rohner have defined mass killings as "the killings of substantial numbers of human beings, when not in the course of military action against the military forces of an avowed enemy, under the conditions of the essential defenselessness and helplessness of the victims." [ 35 ] The term has been defined by political scientist Benjamin Valentino as "the intentional killing of a massive number of noncombatants", where a "massive number" is defined as at least 50,000 intentional deaths over the course of five years or less.

[ 36 ] This is the most accepted quantitative minimum threshold for the term.

[ 35 ] He applied this definition to the cases of Stalin's Soviet Union , China under Mao Zedong and Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge while admitting that "mass killings on a smaller scale" also appear to have been carried out by regimes in North Korea , Vietnam , Eastern Europe (in specific nations of the Warsaw Pact, like Poland) and various nations in Africa .

[ 37 ] Alongside Valentino, political scientist Jay Ulfelder has used a threshold of 1,000 killed.

[ 38 ] Professor of peace and conflict studies Alex J. Bellamy states that 14 of the 38 instances of "mass killing since 1945 perpetrated by non-democratic states outside the context of war" were by communist governments.

[ 39 ] Professor of political science Atsushi Tago and professor of international relations Frank W. Wayman used mass killing from Valentino and concluded that even with a lower threshold (10,000 killed per year, 1,000 killed per year, or even 1 killed per year) " autocratic regimes, especially communist, are prone to mass killing generically, but not so strongly inclined (i.e. not statistically significantly inclined) toward geno-politicide." [ 40 ] According to professor of economics Attiat F. Ott and associate professor of economics Sang Hoo Bae, there is a general consensus that mass killing constitutes the act of intentionally killing a number of non-combatants, but that number can range from as few as four to more than 50,000 people.

[ 41 ] Sociologist Yang Su used a definition of mass killing from Valentino but allows as a "significant number" more than 10 killed in one day in one town.

[ 42 ] He used collective killing for analysis of mass killing in areas smaller than a whole country that may not meet Valentino's threshold.

[ 43 ] Politicide – genocide scholar Barbara Harff defines genocide and politicide , sometimes shortened as geno-politicide , to include the killing of political, economic, ethnic, and cultural groups, some of whom would not otherwise be covered by the Genocide Convention.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Political science Manus I. Midlarsky uses politicide to describe an arc of large-scale killing from the western parts of the Soviet Union to China and Cambodia.

[ 47 ] In his book The Killing Trap: Genocide in the Twentieth Century , Midlarsky raises similarities between the killings of Stalin and Pol Pot .

[ 48 ] Estimates [ edit ] Cover of the first edition of The Black Book of Communism According to historian Klas-Göran Karlsson , discussions of the number of victims of communist regimes have been "extremely extensive and ideologically biased." [ 49 ] Any attempt to estimate a total number of killings under communist regimes depends greatly on definitions, [ 50 ] ranging from a low of 10–20 million to as high as 148 million.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Political scientist Rudolph Rummel and historian Mark Bradley have written that, while the exact numbers have been in dispute, the order of magnitude is not.

[ 18 ] [ 53 ] Professor Barbara Harff says that Rummel and other genocide scholars are focused primarily on establishing patterns and testing various theoretical explanations of genocides and mass killings . They work with large data sets that describe mass mortality events globally and have to rely on selective data provided by country experts; researchers cannot expect absolute precision, and it is not required as a result of their work.

[ 54 ] Any attempt to estimate a total number of killings under communist regimes depends greatly on definitions. Historian Alexander Dallin argued that the idea to group together different countries such as Afghanistan and Hungary has no adequate explanation.

[ 55 ] During the Cold War era, some authors (Todd Culberston), dissidents ( Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ), and anti-communists in general have attempted to make both country-specific and global estimates.

Scholars of communism have mainly focused on individual countries, and genocide scholars have attempted to provide a more global perspective, while maintaining that their goal is not reliability but establishing patterns.

[ 54 ] Scholars of communism have debated on estimates for the Soviet Union, not for all communist regimes, an attempt which was popularized by the introduction to The Black Book of Communism which was controversial.

[ 55 ] Among them, Soviet specialists Michael Ellman and J. Arch Getty have criticized the estimates for relying on émigré sources, hearsay, and rumor as evidence, [ 56 ] and cautioned that historians should instead utilize archive material.

[ 57 ] Such scholars distinguish between historians who base their research on archive materials, and those whose estimates are based on witnesses evidence and other data that they consider unreliable.

[ 58 ] Soviet specialist Stephen G. Wheatcroft says that historians relied on Solzhenitsyn to support their higher estimates but research in the state archives supported the lower estimates, and that the popular press has continued to include serious errors that should not be cited, or relied on, in academia.

[ 59 ] Rummel was also another widely used and cited source.

[ 60 ] [ 54 ] Notable estimate attempts include the following: [ 60 ] In 1993, Zbigniew Brzezinski , former National Security Advisor to Jimmy Carter , wrote that "the failed effort to build communism in the twentieth century consumed the lives of almost 60,000,000." [ 61 ] In 1994, Rummel's book Death by Government included about 110 million people, foreign and domestic, killed by communist democide from 1900 to 1987.

[ 62 ] This total excluded deaths from the Great Chinese Famine of 1958–1961 due to Rummel's then belief that "although Mao's policies were responsible for the famine, he was misled about it, and finally when he found out, he stopped it and changed his policies." [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Rummel would later revise his estimate from 110 million to about 148 million due to additional information about Mao's culpability in the Great Chinese Famine from Mao: The Unknown Story , including Jon Halliday and Jung Chang 's estimated 38 million famine deaths.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] In 2004, historian Tomislav Dulić criticized Rummel's estimate of the number killed in Tito's Yugoslavia as an overestimation based on the inclusion of low-quality sources, and stated that Rummel's other estimates may suffer from the same problem if he used similar sources for them.

[ 65 ] Rummel responded with a critique of Dulić's analysis.

[ 66 ] Karlsson says that Rummel's thesis of "extreme intentionality in Mao" for the famine is "hardly an example of a serious and empirically-based writing of history", [ 67 ] and describes Rummel's 61,911,000 estimate for the Soviet Union as being based on "an ideological preunderstanding and speculative and sweeping calculations".

[ 68 ] In 1997, historian Stéphane Courtois 's introduction to The Black Book of Communism , an impactful yet controversial [ 55 ] work written about the history of communism in the 20th century, [ 69 ] gave a "rough approximation, based on unofficial estimates". The subtotals listed by Courtois added up to 94.36 million killed.

[ 70 ] Nicolas Werth and Jean-Louis Margolin , contributing authors to the book, criticized Courtois as obsessed with reaching a 100 million overall total.

[ 71 ] In his foreword to the 1999 English edition, Martin Malia wrote that "a grand total of victims variously estimated by contributors to the volume at between 85 million and 100 million." [ 72 ] Historian Michael David-Fox states that Malia is able to link disparate regimes, from radical Soviet industrialists to the anti-urbanists of the Khmer Rouge , under the guise of a "generic communism" category "defined everywhere down to the common denominator of party movements founded by intellectuals." [ 73 ] Courtois's attempt to equate Nazism and communist regimes was controversial.

[ 74 ] In 2005, professor Benjamin Valentino stated that the number of non-combatants killed by communist regimes in the Soviet Union, China, and Cambodia alone ranged from a low of 21 million to a high of 70 million.

[ 75 ] In 2010, professor of economics Steven Rosefielde wrote in Red Holocaust that the internal contradictions of communist regimes caused the killing of approximately 60 million people and perhaps tens of millions more.

[ 76 ] In 2012, academic Alex J. Bellamy wrote that a "conservative estimate puts the total number of civilians deliberately killed by communists after the Second World War between 6.7 million and 15.5 million people, with the true figure probably much higher." [ 77 ] In 2014, professor of Chinese politics Julia Strauss wrote that while there was the beginning of a scholarly consensus on figures of around 20 million killed in the Soviet Union and 2–3 million in Cambodia, there was no such consensus on numbers for China.

[ 78 ] In 2017, historian Stephen Kotkin wrote in The Wall Street Journal that 65 million people died prematurely under communist regimes according to demographers, and those deaths were a result of "mass deportations, forced labor camps and police-state terror" but mostly "from starvation as a result of its cruel projects of social engineering." [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Criticism of estimates [ edit ] Criticism of the estimates is mostly focused on three aspects, namely that the estimates are based on sparse and incomplete data, making significant errors inevitable; [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] the figures are skewed to higher possible values; [ 81 ] [ 84 ] [ 69 ] and victims of civil wars, Holodomor and other famines, and wars involving communist governments should not be counted.

[ 81 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Criticism also includes arguments that these estimates ignore lives saved by communist modernization [ 87 ] and that they engage in comparisons and equations with Nazism, [ 88 ] which are described by scholars as Holocaust obfuscation , [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Holocaust trivialization , and anti-communist oversimplifications.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] In addition, the communist grouping as applied by Courtois and Malia in The Black Book of Communism has been claimed to have no adequate explanation by historian Alexander Dallin , [ 93 ] and Malia is able to link disparate regimes, from radical Soviet industrialists to the anti-urbanists of the Khmer Rouge, under the guise of a "generic communism" category "defined everywhere down to the common denominator of party movements founded by intellectuals." [ 73 ] Criticism of Rummel's estimates have focused on two aspects, namely his choice of data sources and his statistical approach. According to Barbara Harff , the historical sources Rummel based his estimates upon can rarely serve as sources of reliable figures.

[ 94 ] The statistical approach Rummel used to analyze big sets of diverse estimates may lead to dilution of useful data with noisy ones.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Another criticism, as articulated by ethnographer and postsocialist gender studies scholar Kristen Ghodsee and political scientist Laure Neumayer , is that the body-counting reflects an anti-communist point of view, [ 96 ] is mainly approached by anti-communist scholars, and is part of the popular " victims of communism " narrative, [ 87 ] [ 91 ] who have frequently used the 100 million figure from the introduction to The Black Book of Communism , [ 97 ] which is used not only to discredit the communist movement , but the whole political left .

[ 98 ] [ failed verification ] They say the same body-counting can be easily applied to other ideologies or systems, such as capitalism and colonialism . However, alongside philosopher Scott Sehon , Ghodsee wrote that "quibbling about numbers is unseemly. What matters is that many, many people were killed by communist regimes." [ 96 ] [ 99 ] Proposed causes and enabling factors [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of communist party rule Communist party mass killings have been criticized by members of the political right, who state that the mass killings are an indictment of communism as an ideology, and has also been criticized by other socialists such as anarchists , communists , democratic socialists , libertarian socialists , and Marxists .

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Opponents of this hypothesis, including those on the political left and communist party members, state that these killings were aberrations caused by specific authoritarian regimes, and not caused by communism itself, and point to mass deaths that they say were caused by anti-communism and capitalism [ 96 ] [ 97 ] as a counterpoint to those killings.

[ 100 ] Ideology [ edit ] Historian Klas-Göran Karlsson writes: " Ideologies are systems of ideas, which cannot commit crimes independently. However, individuals, collectives and states that have defined themselves as communist have committed crimes in the name of communist ideology, or without [ sic ] naming communism as the direct source of motivation for their crimes." [ 101 ] John Gray , [ 102 ] Daniel Goldhagen , [ 103 ] and Richard Pipes [ 104 ] consider the ideology of communism to be a significant causative factor in mass killings. In the introduction to The Black Book of Communism , Stéphane Courtois claims an association between communism and criminality , stating that "Communist regimes ... turned mass crime into a full-blown system of government", [ 70 ] while adding that this criminality lies at the level of ideology rather than state practice.

[ 105 ] The last issue , printed in red ink, of Karl Marx's journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung from 19 May 1849 Professor Mark Bradley writes that communist theory and practice has often been in tension with human rights and most communist states followed the lead of Karl Marx in rejecting "Enlightenment-era inalienable individual political and civil rights" in favor of "collective economic and social rights." [ 53 ] Christopher J. Finlay posits that Marxism legitimates violence without any clear limiting principle because it rejects moral and ethical norms as constructs of the dominant class, and states that "it would be conceivable for revolutionaries to commit atrocious crimes in bringing about a socialist system, with the belief that their crimes will be retroactively absolved by the new system of ethics put in place by the proletariat ." [ 106 ] Rustam Singh states that Marx had alluded to the possibility of peaceful revolution; after the failed Revolutions of 1848 , Singh states that Marx emphasized the need for violent revolution and revolutionary terror .

[ 107 ] Literary historian George Watson cited an 1849 article written by Friedrich Engels called "The Hungarian Struggle" and published in Marx's journal Neue Rheinische Zeitung , and commented that "entire nations would be left behind after a workers' revolution against the bourgeoisie, feudal remnants in a socialist age, and since they could not advance two steps at a time, they would have to be killed. They were racial trash, as Engels called them, and fit only for the dung-heap of history." [ 108 ] One book review criticized this interpretation, maintaining that "what Marx and Engels are calling for is ... at the very least a kind of cultural genocide ; but it is not obvious, at least from Watson's citations, that actual mass killing, rather than (to use their phraseology) mere 'absorption' or 'assimilation', is in question." [ 109 ] Talking about Engels's 1849 article, historian Andrzej Walicki states: "It is difficult to deny that this was an outright call for genocide." [ 110 ] Jean-François Revel writes that Joseph Stalin recommended study of the 1849 Engels article in his 1924 book On Lenin and Leninism .

[ 111 ] According to Rummel, the killings committed by communist regimes can best be explained as the result of the marriage between absolute power and the absolutist ideology of Marxism.

[ 112 ] Rummel states that "communism was like a fanatical religion. It had its revealed text and its chief interpreters. It had its priests and their ritualistic prose with all the answers. It had a heaven, and the proper behavior to reach it. It had its appeal to faith. And it had its crusades against nonbelievers. What made this secular religion so utterly lethal was its seizure of all the state's instruments of force and coercion and their immediate use to destroy or control all independent sources of power, such as the church, the professions, private businesses, schools, and the family." [ 113 ] Rummels writes that Marxist communists saw the construction of their utopia as "though a war on poverty, exploitation, imperialism and inequality. And for the greater good, as in a real war, people are killed. And, thus, this war for the communist utopia had its necessary enemy casualties, the clergy, bourgeoisie, capitalists, wreckers, counterrevolutionaries, rightists, tyrants, rich, landlords, and noncombatants that unfortunately got caught in the battle. In war millions may die, but the cause may be well justified, as in the defeat of Hitler and an utterly racist Nazism. And to many communists, the cause of a communist utopia was such as to justify all the deaths." [ 112 ] Benjamin Valentino writes that "apparently high levels of political support for murderous regimes and leaders should not automatically be equated with support for mass killing itself. Individuals are capable of supporting violent regimes or leaders while remaining indifferent or even opposed to specific policies that these regimes and carried out." Valentino quotes Vladimir Brovkin as saying that "a vote for the Bolsheviks in 1917 was not a vote for Red Terror or even a vote for a dictatorship of the proletariat." [ 114 ] According to Valentino, such strategies were so violent because they economically dispossess large numbers of people, [ 115 ] [ 39 ] commenting: "Social transformations of this speed and magnitude have been associated with mass killing for two primary reasons. First, the massive social dislocations produced by such changes have often led to economic collapse , epidemics , and, most important, widespread famines. ... The second reason that communist regimes bent on the radical transformation of society have been linked to mass killing is that the revolutionary changes they have pursued have clashed inexorably with the fundamental interests of large segments of their populations. Few people have proved willing to accept such far-reaching sacrifices without intense levels of coercion." [ 116 ] According to Jacques Sémelin , "communist systems emerging in the twentieth century ended up destroying their own populations, not because they planned to annihilate them as such, but because they aimed to restructure the 'social body' from top to bottom, even if that meant purging it and recarving it to suit their new Promethean political imaginaire.

" [ 117 ] Daniel Chirot and Clark McCauley write that, especially in Joseph Stalin 's Soviet Union, Mao Zedong 's China, and Pol Pot 's Cambodia, a fanatical certainty that socialism could be made to work motivated communist leaders in "the ruthless dehumanization of their enemies, who could be suppressed because they were 'objectively' and 'historically' wrong. Furthermore, if events did not work out as they were supposed to, then that was because class enemies , foreign spies and saboteurs , or worst of all, internal traitors were wrecking the plan. Under no circumstances could it be admitted that the vision itself might be unworkable, because that meant capitulation to the forces of reaction." [ 118 ] Michael Mann writes that communist party members were "ideologically driven, believing that in order to create a new socialist society, they must lead in socialist zeal. Killings were often popular, the rank-and-file as keen to exceed killing quotas as production quotas." [ 119 ] According to Vladimir Tismăneanu , "the Communist project, in such countries as the USSR, China, Cuba, Romania, or Albania, was based precisely on the conviction that certain social groups were irretrievably alien and deservedly murdered." [ 120 ] Alex Bellamy writes that "communism's ideology of selective extermination" of target groups was first developed and applied by Joseph Stalin but that "each of the communist regimes that massacred large numbers of civilians during the Cold War developed their own distinctive account", [ 121 ] while Steven T. Katz states that distinctions based on class and nationality, stigmatized and stereotyped in various ways, created an "otherness" for victims of communist rule that was important for legitimating oppression and death.

[ 122 ] Martin Shaw writes that "nationalist ideas were at the heart of many mass killings by Communist states", beginning with Stalin's "new nationalist doctrine of 'socialism in one country'", and killing by revolutionary movements in the Third World was done in the name of national liberation.

[ 123 ] Political system [ edit ] Further information: Communist state Prosecutor General Andrey Vyshinsky (centre) reading the 1937 indictment against Karl Radek during the second Moscow Trial Anne Applebaum writes that "without exception, the Leninist belief in the one-party state was and is characteristic of every communist regime" and "the Bolshevik use of violence was repeated in every communist revolution." Phrases which were first uttered by Vladimir Lenin and Cheka founder Felix Dzerzhinsky were uttered all over the world. Applebaum states that as late as 1976, Mengistu Haile Mariam unleashed a Red Terror in Ethiopia .

[ 124 ] To his colleagues in the Bolshevik government, Lenin was quoted as saying: "If we are not ready to shoot a saboteur and White Guardist , what sort of revolution is that?".

[ 125 ] Robert Conquest stated that Stalin's purges were not contrary to the principles of Leninism , rather, they were a natural consequence of the system which was established by Lenin, who personally ordered the killing of local groups of class enemy hostages.

[ 126 ] Alexander Nikolaevich Yakovlev , architect of perestroika and glasnost and later head of the Presidential Commission for the Victims of Political Repression, elaborates on this point, stating: "The truth is that in punitive operations Stalin did not think up anything that was not there under Lenin: executions, hostage taking, concentration camps, and all the rest." [ 127 ] Historian Robert Gellately concurs, commenting: "To put it another way, Stalin initiated very little that Lenin had not already introduced or previewed." [ 128 ] Stephen Hicks of Rockford College ascribes the violence characteristic of 20th-century socialist rule to these collectivist regimes' abandonment of protections of civil rights and rejection of the values of civil society . Hicks writes that whereas "in practice every liberal capitalist country has a solid record for being humane, for by and large respecting rights and freedoms, and for making it possible for people to put together fruitful and meaningful lives", in socialism "practice has time and again proved itself more brutal than the worst dictatorships prior to the twentieth century. Each socialist regime has collapsed into dictatorship and begun killing people on a huge scale." [ 129 ] Eric D. Weitz states that the mass killing in communist states is a natural consequence of the failure of the rule of law, commonly seen during periods of social upheaval in the 20th century. For both communist and non-communist mass killings, "genocides occurred at moments of extreme social crisis, often generated by the very policies of the regimes", [ 130 ] and are not inevitable but are political decisions.

[ 130 ] Steven Rosefielde writes that communist rulers had to choose between changing course and "terror-command" and more often than not, they chose the latter.

[ 131 ] Michael Mann posits that a lack of institutionalized authority structures meant that a chaotic mix of both centralized control and party factionalism were factors which contributed to the killings.

[ 119 ] Leaders [ edit ] Professor Matthew Krain states that many scholars have pointed to revolutions and civil wars as providing the opportunity for radical leaders and ideologies to gain power and the preconditions for mass killing by the state.

[ 132 ] Professor Nam Kyu Kim writes that exclusionary ideologies are critical to explaining mass killing, but the organizational capabilities and individual characteristics of revolutionary leaders, including their attitudes towards risk and violence, are also important. Besides opening up political opportunities for new leaders to eliminate their political opponents, revolutions bring to power leaders who are more apt to commit large-scale acts of violence against civilians in order to legitimize and strengthen their own power.

[ 133 ] Genocide scholar Adam Jones states that the Russian Civil War was very influential on the emergence of leaders like Stalin and it also accustomed people to "harshness, cruelty, terror." [ 134 ] Martin Malia called the "brutal conditioning" of the two World Wars important to understanding communist violence, although not its source.

[ 135 ] Historian Helen Rappaport describes Nikolay Yezhov , the bureaucrat who was in charge of the NKVD during the Great Purge , as a physically diminutive figure of "limited intelligence" and "narrow political understanding. ... Like other instigators of mass murder throughout history, [he] compensated for his lack of physical stature with a pathological cruelty and the use of brute terror." [ 136 ] Russian and world history scholar John M. Thompson places personal responsibility directly on Joseph Stalin . According to him, "much of what occurred only makes sense if it stemmed in part from the disturbed mentality, pathological cruelty, and extreme paranoia of Stalin himself. Insecure, despite having established a dictatorship over the party and country, hostile and defensive when confronted with criticism of the excesses of collectivization and the sacrifices required by high-tempo industrialization, and deeply suspicious that past, present, and even yet unknown future opponents were plotting against him, Stalin began to act as a person beleaguered. He soon struck back at enemies, real or imaginary." [ 137 ] Professors Pablo Montagnes and Stephane Wolton posit that the purges in the Soviet Union and China can be attributed to the personalist leadership of Stalin and Mao, who were incentivized by having both control of the security apparatus used to carry out the purges and control of the appointment of replacements for those purged.

[ 138 ] Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek attributes Mao allegedly viewing human life as disposable to his "cosmic perspective" on humanity.

[ 139 ] American historian and author William Rubinstein wrote that "Most of the millions who perished at the hands of Stalin, Mao Tse-tung , Pol Pot and the other communist dictators died because the party's leaders believed they belonged to a dangerous or subversive social class or political grouping." [ 140 ] Debate over famines [ edit ] This section may be unbalanced towards certain viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue on the talk page .

( December 2022 ) Further information: Soviet and communist studies The Soviet famine of 1932–1933 , with areas where the effects of famine were most severe shaded According to historian J. Arch Getty , over half of the 100 million deaths which are attributed to communism were due to famines.

[ 141 ] Stéphane Courtois posits that many communist regimes caused famines in their efforts to forcibly collectivize agriculture and systematically used it as a weapon by controlling the food supply and distributing food on a political basis. Courtois states that "in the period after 1918, only communist countries experienced such famines, which led to the deaths of hundreds of thousands, and in some cases millions, of people. And again in the 1980s, two African countries that claimed to be Marxist–Leninist , Ethiopia and Mozambique , were the only such countries to suffer these deadly famines." [ 142 ] Stephen G. Wheatcroft , R. W. Davies , and Mark Tauger reject the idea that the Ukrainian famine was an act of genocide that was intentionally inflicted by the Soviet government.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Wheatcroft says that the Soviet government's policies during the famine were criminal acts of fraud and manslaughter, though not outright murder or genocide.

[ 145 ] Joseph Stalin biographer Stephen Kotkin supports a similar view, stating that while "there is no question of Stalin's responsibility for the famine" and many deaths could have been prevented if not for the "insufficient" and counterproductive Soviet measures, there is no evidence for Stalin's intention to kill the Ukrainians deliberately.

[ 146 ] According to history professor Ronald Grigor Suny , most scholars view the famine in Ukraine not as a genocide but rather as the result of badly conceived and miscalculated Soviet economic policies.

[ 147 ] Getty posits that the "overwhelming weight of opinion among scholars working in the new archives is that the terrible famine of the 1930s was the result of Stalinist bungling and rigidity rather than some genocidal plan." [ 141 ] In contrast, according to Simon Payaslian , a scholarly consensus classifies the Holodomor in the former Soviet Ukraine as a genocide .

[ 148 ] Some historians conclude that the famine was planned and exacerbated by Joseph Stalin in order to eliminate a Ukrainian independence movement.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] Oleksandr Kramarenko argues that this conclusion is supported by Raphael Lemkin 's original definition of genocide, which included "the deliberate extermination of social groups." The Genocide Convention , which Lemkin campaigned to establish, did not include political killing in its definition of genocide under pressure from the USSR.

[ 151 ] Lemkin, James Mace , Norman Naimark , Timothy Snyder and Anne Applebaum have called the Holodomor a genocide and the intentional result of Stalinist policies.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] According to Lemkin, Holodomor "is a classic example of the Soviet genocide, the longest and most extensive experiment in Russification , namely the extermination of the Ukrainian nation". Lemkin said that in order for the Soviet Union to accomplish its aims of Russification and collectivization in Ukraine, it did not need to follow the pattern of the Holocaust . Because Ukraine was so populous, and its religious, intellectual and political leadership was comparatively small, Instead the "Soviet genocide" consisted of four steps: 1) extermination of the Ukrainian national elite 2) liquidation of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church 3) extermination of a significant part of the Ukrainian peasantry as "custodians of traditions, folklore and music, national language and literature 4) populating the territory with other nationalities with intent of mixing Ukrainians with them, which would eventually lead to the dissolvance of the Ukrainian nation.

[ 152 ] [ 151 ] [ 156 ] Benjamin Valentino writes: "Although not all the deaths due to famine in these cases were intentional, communist leaders directed the worst effects of famine against their suspected enemies and used hunger as a weapon to force millions of people to conform to the directives of the state." [ 116 ] Daniel Goldhagen says that in some cases deaths from famine should not be distinguished from mass murder, commenting: "Whenever governments have not alleviated famine conditions, political leaders decided not to say no to mass death – in other words, they said yes." Goldhagen says that instances of this occurred in the Mau Mau rebellion , the Great Leap Forward , the Nigerian Civil War , the Eritrean War of Independence , and the War in Darfur .

[ 157 ] Martin Shaw posits that if a leader knew the ultimate result of their policies would be mass death by famine, and they continue to enact them anyway, these deaths can be understood as intentional .

[ 158 ] Economics professor Michael Ellman is critical of the fixation on a "uniquely Stalinist evil" when it comes to excess deaths from famines. Ellman posits that mass deaths from famines are not a "uniquely Stalinist evil", commenting that throughout Russian history , famines, and droughts have been a common occurrence , including the Russian famine of 1921–1922 , which occurred before Stalin came to power. He also states that famines were widespread throughout the world in the 19th and 20th centuries in countries such as India, Ireland, Russia and China. According to Ellman, the G8 "are guilty of mass manslaughter or mass deaths from criminal negligence because of their not taking obvious measures to reduce mass deaths" and Stalin's "behaviour was no worse than that of many rulers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries." [ 159 ] Comparisons to other mass killings [ edit ] See also: Anti-communist mass killings Several authors have compared the mass killings under communist regimes with other mass killings, reaching varying conclusions.

Daniel Goldhagen argues that 20th century communist regimes "have killed more people than any other regime type." [ 160 ] Other scholars in the fields of communist studies and genocide studies , such as Steven Rosefielde and Benjamin Valentino , have come to similar conclusions.

[ 37 ] [ 161 ] Rosefielde states that it is possible to conclude that the "Red Holocaust" killed more non-combatants than " Ha Shoah " and " Japan's Asian holocaust " combined, and it "was at least as heinous, given the singularity of Hitler 's genocide." Rosefielde also writes that "while it is fashionable to mitigate the Red Holocaust by observing that capitalism killed millions of colonials in the twentieth century, primarily through man-made famines, no inventory of such felonious negligent homicides comes close to the Red Holocaust total." [ 161 ] Seumas Milne has criticized the emphasis on communism when assigning blame for famines, saying there is "moral blindness displayed towards the record of colonialism ," which he calls a "third leg of 20th-century tyranny." Milne laments that while "there is a much-lauded Black Book of Communism , [there exists] no such comprehensive indictment of the colonial record." He writes that authors who over-emphasize the role of communism in 20th century atrocities "relativise the unique crimes of Nazism, bury those of colonialism and feed the idea that any attempt at radical social change will always lead to suffering, killing and failure." [ 162 ] Jon Wiener makes a similar assertion while comparing the Holodomor and the Bengal famine of 1943, stating that Winston Churchill 's role in the Bengal famine "seems similar to Stalin's role in the Ukrainian famine." [ 163 ] Historian Mike Davis , author of Late Victorian Holocausts , draws comparisons between the Great Chinese Famine and the Indian famines of the late 19th century , arguing that in both instances the governments which oversaw the response to the famines deliberately chose not to alleviate conditions and as such bear responsibility for the scale of deaths in said famines.

[ 164 ] Economic anthropologist Jason Hickel and Dylan Sullivan suggest that the number of excess deaths during the apex of British colonialism in India rises to around 100 million, which is greater than all the famine deaths that have been attributed to communist governments combined.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Anti- Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI) propaganda literature Mark Aarons states that right-wing authoritarian regimes and dictatorships which were backed by Western powers committed atrocities and mass killings that rivaled the atrocities and mass killings that were committed in the communist world, citing examples such as the Indonesian occupation of East Timor , the Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 , the " disappearances " in Guatemala during the civil war , and the assassinations and state terrorism that were associated with Operation Condor throughout South America .

[ 167 ] Vincent Bevins argues that the anti-communist mass killings that were perpetrated during the Cold War have been far more impactful on shaping the contemporary world than communist mass killings have been.

[ 168 ] Memorials and museums [ edit ] See also: Black Ribbon Day , Double genocide theory , and Prague Declaration The " Victims of Communism Memorial " in Washington, DC.

Monuments to the victims of communist states exist in almost all the capitals of Eastern Europe and there are several museums documenting communist rule such as the Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights in Lithuania, the Museum of the Occupation of Latvia in Riga, and the House of Terror in Budapest, all three of which also document Nazi rule.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] In Washington D.C., a bronze statue based upon the 1989 Tiananmen Square Goddess of Democracy sculpture was dedicated as the Victims of Communism Memorial in 2007, having been authorized by the United States Congress in 1993.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] The Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation plans to build an International Museum on Communism in Washington. As of 2008, Russia contained 627 memorials and memorial plaques dedicated to victims of the communist states, most of which were created by private citizens and did not have a national monument or a national museum.

[ 173 ] The Wall of Grief in Moscow, inaugurated in October 2017, is Russia's first monument for victims of political persecution by Stalin during the country's Soviet era.

[ 174 ] In 2017, Canada's National Capital Commission approved the design for a memorial to the victims of communism to be built at the Garden of the Provinces and Territories in Ottawa.

[ 175 ] On 23 August 2018, Estonia's Victims of Communism 1940–1991 Memorial was inaugurated in Tallinn by President Kersti Kaljulaid .

[ 176 ] The memorial construction was financed by the state and is managed by the Estonian Institute of Historical Memory .

[ 177 ] The opening ceremony was chosen to coincide with the official European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism .

[ 178 ] The Czech Republic enshrines in its 1992 constitution a prison sentence for anyone who "denies, doubts, approves or even tries to justify the communist genocide, as well as the Nazi genocide".

[ 179 ] According to anthropologist Kristen Ghodsee , efforts to institutionalize the victims of communism narrative, or the moral equivalence between the Nazi Holocaust (race murder) and the victims of communism (class murder), and in particular the push during the 2008 financial crisis for commemoration of the latter in Europe, can be seen as the response by economic and political elites to fears of a leftist resurgence in the face of devastated economies and extreme inequalities in both the East and West as the result of the excesses of neoliberal capitalism . Ghodsee argues that any discussion of the achievements under communist states, including literacy, education, women's rights, and social security is usually silenced, and any discourse on the subject of communism is focused almost exclusively on Stalin's crimes and the double genocide theory .

[ 180 ] According to Laure Neumayer, this is used as an anti-communist narrative "based on a series of categories and figures" to "denounce Communist state violence (qualified as 'Communist crimes', 'red genocide' or 'classicide') and to honour persecuted individuals (presented alternatively as 'victims of Communism' and 'heroes of anti totalitarian resistance')." [ 181 ] Related crimes [ edit ] During the mass killing events, in addition to the people who were killed, many others were victimized but did not die. The crimes against them have been described as crimes against humanity .

[ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] For instance, the 2008 Prague Declaration on European Conscience and Communism stated that crimes which were committed in the name of communism should be assessed as crimes against humanity. The government of Cambodia has prosecuted former members of the Khmer Rouge , [ 185 ] and the governments of Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania have passed laws that have led to the prosecution of several perpetrators for their crimes against the Baltic peoples. They were tried for crimes which they committed during the occupation of the Baltic states in 1940 and 1941 as well as for crimes which they committed during the Soviet reoccupation of those states which occurred after World War II.

[ 186 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Further information: Soviet war crimes , Political repression in the Soviet Union , Human rights in the Soviet Union , and Holodomor genocide question A demonstration in Minsk in 1990, commemorating the bloodiest purges in the history of the Soviet Union Some scholars (such as Robert Conquest , Norman Naimark , Timothy Snyder and Michael Ellman ) consider the Holodomor , a famine in Soviet Ukraine from 1932 to 1933 that killed millions of Ukrainians , as an act of genocide or a crime against humanity, although others, such as R. W. Davies and Stephen G. Wheatcroft , argue that the famine was man-made but unintentional. Stalin's " Great Purge " of 1937 is often considered a crime against humanity, with deaths of 700,000 [ 187 ] [ 188 ] to 1.2 million.

[ 189 ] The war crimes which were perpetrated by the Soviet Union 's armed forces from 1919 to 1991 include acts which were committed by the Red Army (later called the Soviet Army ) as well as acts which were committed by the country's secret police, NKVD , including its Internal Troops . In many cases, these acts were committed upon the orders of the Soviet leaders Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin in pursuance of the early Soviet government's policy of Red Terror . In other instances they were committed without orders by Soviet troops against prisoners of war or civilians of countries that had been in armed conflict with the USSR, or they were committed during partisan warfare .

[ 190 ] A significant number of these incidents occurred in Northern, Central, and Eastern Europe recently before, and during, the aftermath of World War II, involving summary executions and the mass murder of prisoners of war, such as in the Katyn massacre and mass rape by troops of the Red Army in territories they occupied .

When the Allies of World War II founded the post-war International Military Tribunal to examine war crimes committed during the conflict by Nazi Germany , with officials from the Soviet Union taking an active part in the judicial processes, there was no examination of the Allied forces' actions and no charges were ever brought against their troops, because they were undefeated powers which then held Europe under military occupation, marring the historical authority of the Tribunal's activity as being, in part, victor's justice .

[ 191 ] In the 1990s and 2000s, war crimes trials held in the Baltic states led to the prosecution of some Russians and Ukrainians, mostly in absentia , and some Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians, for crimes against humanity committed during or shortly after World War II, including killings or deportations of civilians.

[ 186 ] China [ edit ] Under Mao Zedong [ edit ] Mao Zedong was the chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) which took control of China in 1949 until his death in September 1976. During this time, he instituted several reform efforts, the most notable of which were the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution . In January 1958, Mao launched the second five-year plan, which was known as the Great Leap Forward. The plan was intended to expedite production and heavy industry as a supplement to economic growth similar to the Soviet model and the defining factor behind Mao's Chinese Marxist policies. Mao spent ten months touring the country in 1958 to gain support for the Great Leap Forward and inspect the progress that had already been made. What this entailed was the humiliation, public castigation and torture of all who questioned the leap. The five-year-plan first instituted the division of farming communities into communes. The Chinese National Program for Agricultural Development (NPAD) began to accelerate its drafting plans for the countries industrial and agricultural outputs. The drafting plans were initially successful as the Great Leap Forward divided the Chinese workforce and production briefly soared.

[ 192 ] Eventually CCP planners developed even more ambitious goals such as replacing the draft plans for 1962 with those for 1967 and the industries developed supply bottlenecks, but they could not meet the growth demands. Rapid industrial development came in turn with a swelling of urban populations. Due to the furthering of collectivization, heavy industry production and the stagnation of the farming industry that did not keep up with the demands of population growth in combination with a year (1959) of unfortunate weather in farming areas, only 170 million tons of grain were produced, far below the actual amount of grain which the population needed. Mass starvation ensued and it was made even worse in 1960, when only 144 million tons of grain were produced, a total amount which was 26 million tons lower than the total amount of grain that was produced in 1959.

[ 193 ] The government instituted rationing, but between 1958 and 1962 it is estimated that at least 10 million people died of starvation. The famine did not go unnoticed and Mao was fully aware of the major famine that was sweeping the countryside, but rather than try to fix the problem he blamed it on counterrevolutionaries who were "hiding and dividing grain".

[ 194 ] Mao even symbolically decided to abstain from eating meat in honor of those who were suffering.

[ 194 ] An original estimate of the final death toll ranged from 15 to 40 million. According to Frank Dikötter , a chair professor of humanities at the University of Hong Kong and the author of Mao's Great Famine , a book which details the Great Leap Forward and the consequences of the strong armed implementation of the economic reform, the total number of people who were killed in the famine which lasted from 1958 to 1962 ran upwards of 45 million. Of those who were killed in the famine, 6–8% of them were often tortured first and then prematurely killed by the government, 2% of them committed suicide and 5% of them died in Mao's labor camps which were built to hold those who were labelled " enemies of the people ".

[ 195 ] In an article for The New York Times , Dikötter also references severe punishments for slight infractions such as being buried alive for stealing a handful of grain or losing an ear and being branded for digging up a potato.

[ 196 ] Dikotter claims that a chairman in an executive meeting in 1959 expressed apathy with regard to the widespread suffering, stating: "When there is not enough to eat, people starve to death. It is better to let half of the people die so that the other half can eat their fill".

[ 196 ] Anthony Garnaut clarifies that Dikötter's interpretation of Mao's quotation, "It is better to let half of the people die so that the other half can eat their fill." not only ignores the substantial commentary on the conference by other scholars and several of its key participants, but defies the very plain wording of the archival document in his possession on which he hangs his case.

[ 197 ] Under Xi Jinping [ edit ] See also: Persecution of Uyghurs in China and UN Human Rights Office report on Xinjiang Since 2014, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), under the administration of CCP General Secretary Xi Jinping , has pursued policies in its Xinjiang region that have resulted in the incarceration of more than an estimated one million Uyghur Muslims in internment camps without any legal process .

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] This is the largest-scale detention of ethnic and religious minorities since World War II .

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] Experts estimate that, since 2017, some sixteen thousand mosques have been razed or damaged, [ 203 ] and hundreds of thousands of children have been forcibly separated from their parents and sent to boarding schools .

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] On 31 August 2022 the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) published a report which concluded that "the extent of arbitrary and discriminatory detention of members of Uyghur and other predominantly Muslim groups, pursuant to law and policy, in context of restrictions and deprivation more generally of fundamental rights enjoyed individually and collectively, may constitute international crimes, in particular crimes against humanity ." [ 206 ] [ 207 ] [ 208 ] Cambodia [ edit ] There is a scholarly consensus that the Cambodian genocide which was carried out by the Khmer Rouge under the leadership of Pol Pot in what became known as the Killing Fields was a crime against humanity.

[ 209 ] Over the course of 4 years, the Pol Pot regime was responsible for the deaths of approximately 2 million people through starvation, exhaustion, execution, lack of medical care as a result of the communist utopia experiment.

[ 210 ] Legal scholars Antoine Garapon and David Boyle, sociologist Michael Mann and professor of political science Jacques Sémelin all believe that the actions of the Communist Party of Kampuchea can best be described as a crime against humanity rather than a genocide .

[ 211 ] In 2018, the Khmer Rouge Tribunal found the Khmer Rouge guilty of committing genocide against the minority Muslim Cham and Vietnamese.

[ 212 ] Conviction appeal against court decision was rejected in 2022.

[ 213 ] It reaffirms the ECCC's recognition of the Khmer Rouge's racial discrimination and ethnic cleansing against non-Cambodian (Khmer) minorities. The naming of the Cambodian genocide is an overlooked problem because it downplays the overwhelming sufferings among targeted minority groups and the important roles of racism in understanding how the genocide was perpetrated.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] [ 216 ] Historian Eric D. Weitz calls the Khmer Rouge's ethnic policy "racial communism." [ 217 ] In 1997 the co-prime ministers of Cambodia sought help from the United Nations in seeking justice for the crimes which were perpetrated by the communists during the years from 1975 to 1979. In June 1997, Pol Pot was taken prisoner during an internal power struggle within the Khmer Rouge and offered up to the international community. However, no country was willing to seek his extradition .

[ 218 ] The policies enacted by the Khmer Rouge led to the deaths of one quarter of the population in just four years.

[ 219 ] Ethiopia [ edit ] Main article: Red Terror (Ethiopia) Following the overthrow of Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie in 1974, the Derg gained control over Ethiopia and established a Marxist–Leninist state. They enacted the Red Terror against political opponents, killing an estimated 10,000 to 750,000 people.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] Derg chairman Mengistu Haile Mariam said "We are doing what Lenin did. You cannot build socialism without Red Terror ." [ 224 ] [ 225 ] The Save the Children Fund reported that the victims of the Red Terror included not only adults but 1,000 or more children, mostly aged between eleven and thirteen, whose corpses were left in the streets of Addis Ababa.

[ 225 ] On 13 August 2004, 33 top former Derg officials were presented in trial for genocide and other human rights violations during the Red Terror. The officials appealed for a pardon to the Prime Minister Meles Zenawi in a forum to "beg the Ethiopian public for their pardon for the mistakes done knowingly or unknowingly" during the Derg regime.

[ 226 ] No official response made by the government to the date. The Red Terror trial included grave human rights violations, comprising genocide , crime against humanity , torture , rape and forced disappearances which be would punishable under Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, article 26 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as well as article 3 of the African Charter on Human and People's Rights, all of which made part of the Ethiopian law .

[ 227 ] North Korea [ edit ] Further information: Human experimentation in North Korea , Human rights in North Korea , and Prisons in North Korea Three victims of the prison camp system in North Korea unsuccessfully attempted to bring Kim Jong-il to justice with the aid of the Citizens Coalition for Human Rights of abductees and North Korean Refugees. In December 2010, they filed charges in The Hague .

[ 228 ] The NGO group Christian Solidarity Worldwide has stated that the gulag system appears to be specifically designed to kill a large number of people who are labelled enemies or have a differing political belief.

[ 229 ] Romania [ edit ] In a speech before the Parliament of Romania , President Traian Băsescu stated that "the criminal and illegitimate former communist regime committed massive human rights violations and crimes against humanity, killing and persecuting as many as two million people between 1945 and 1989".

[ 230 ] [ 231 ] The speech was based on the 660-page report of a Presidential Commission headed by Vladimir Tismăneanu , a professor at the University of Maryland . The report also stated that "the regime exterminated people by assassination and deportation of hundreds of thousands of people" and it also highlighted the Pitești Experiment .

[ 232 ] Engineer and former political prisoner Gheorghe Boldur-Lățescu has also stated that the Pitești Experiment was a crime against humanity, [ 233 ] while Dennis Deletant has described it as "[a]n experiment of a grotesque originality ... [which] employed techniques of psychiatric abuse which were not only designed to inculcate terror into opponents of the regime but also to destroy the personality of the individual. The nature and enormity of the experiment ... set Romania apart from the other Eastern European regimes." [ 234 ] Yugoslavia [ edit ] Dominic McGoldrick writes that as the head of a "highly centralized and oppressive" dictatorship, Josip Broz Tito wielded tremendous power in Yugoslavia, with his dictatorial rule administered through an elaborate bureaucracy which routinely suppressed human rights.

[ 235 ] First repressions included reprisal killings against World War II POWs , most prominent being Bleiburg repatriations and Foibe massacres .

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] [ 238 ] [ 239 ] Near the end of the Second World War , Banat Swabians who were suspected to have been involved with the Nazi administration were placed into internment camps. Many were tortured, and at least 5,800 were killed. Others were subject to forced labor.

[ 240 ] In March 1945, the surviving Swabians were ghettoized in "village camps", later described as "extermination camps" by the survivors, where the death rate ranged as high as 50%.

[ 240 ] The most notorious camp was at Knićanin (formerly Rudolfsgnad), where an estimated 11,000 to 12,500 Swabians died.

[ 241 ] Some 120,000 Macedonian Serbs were forced to emigrate to Serbia by the Yugoslav Communists after they had opted for Serbian citizenship in 1944.

[ 242 ] [ page needed ] Those who stayed were subject to increasing Macedonian efforts, such as forcibly changing their surnames, substituting " ić " with "ski " ( Jovanović - Jovanovski ). In the whole period after the Second World War the Serbs in the Socialist Republic of Macedonia were kept from freely developing their national and cultural identity. The Serbs were treated like second-class citizens .

[ 243 ] [ better source needed ] The Tito–Stalin split initiated a repression against known and alleged Stalinists , which included even some of the most prominent among Tito's collaborators, most of which were taken to a labor camp on Goli otok . On 19 November 1956, Milovan Đilas , perhaps the closest of Tito's collaborators and widely regarded as Tito's possible successor, was arrested and jailed for four years because of his criticism against certain actions of the Yugoslav regime. The repression did not exclude intellectuals and writers such as Venko Markovski , who was arrested and sent to jail in January 1956 for writing poems considered anti-Titoist.

[ citation needed ] Tito's Yugoslavia had been described as a tightly controlled police state .

[ 244 ] According to David Matas , outside the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia had more political prisoners than all of the rest of Eastern Europe combined.

[ 245 ] Tito's secret police was modeled on the Soviet KGB. Its members were ever-present and often acted extrajudicially , [ 246 ] with victims including middle-class intellectuals, liberals and democrats.

[ 247 ] Yugoslavia was a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , but scant regard was paid to some of its provisions.

[ 248 ] See also [ edit ] Communism portal Communist movements and violence Anti-communist mass killings Communist terrorism Criticism of communist party rule Left-wing terrorism Red Terror (disambiguation) Repressive psychiatry in the Soviet Union The Black Book of Communism Violence by governments in general and comparative studies Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Genocide studies Outline of genocide studies Holocaust studies Political violence Soviet and communist studies References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Wheatcroft 1996 , pp. 1320–1321.

^ Krain 1997 , pp. 331–332.

^ Valentino 2005 , p. 9.

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 6.

^ a b Sémelin 2009 , p. 318.

^ Su 2011 , pp. 7–8.

^ Weiss-Wendt 2008 , p. 42.

^ Ott 2011 , p. 53.

^ Mann 2005 , p. 17.

^ Sémelin 2009 , p. 37.

^ Sangar 2007 , p. 1, paragraph 3.

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 104.

^ Sémelin 2009 , p. 344.

^ Harff 2017 , p. 112.

^ Harff 2017 , pp. 112, 116.

^ Harff 2017 , p. 116.

^ Fein 1993a , p. 75.

^ a b Rummel 1993 .

^ Harff 2003 , p. 50.

^ Jones 2010 , p. 137.

^ van Schaack 1997 , p. 2267.

^ Staub 2000 , p. 368.

^ Wayman & Tago 2010 , pp. 3–4.

^ Williams 2008 , p. 190.

^ Möller 1999 .

^ a b Hackmann 2009 .

^ Rosefielde 2010 , p. 3.

^ Rousso & Goslan 2004 , p. 157.

^ Shafir 2016 , p. 64.

^ Shafir 2016 , pp. 64, 74.

^ Voicu 2018 , p. 46.

^ Staub 1989 , p. 8.

^ Staub 2011 , p. 1000.

^ Charny 1999 .

^ a b Esteban, Morelli & Rohner 2010 , p. 6.

^ Valentino, Huth & Bach-Lindsay 2004 , p. 387.

^ a b Valentino 2005 , p. 91.

^ Ulfelder & Valentino 2008 , p. 2.

^ a b Bellamy 2010 , p. 102.

^ Wayman & Tago 2010 , pp. 4, 11, 12–13.

^ Ott 2011 , p. 55.

^ Su 2003 , p. 4.

^ Su 2011 , p. 13.

^ Harff & Gurr 1988 , p. 360.

^ Harff 2003 , p. 58.

^ Wayman & Tago 2010 , p. 4.

^ Midlarsky 2005 , pp. 22, 309, 310.

^ Midlarsky 2005 , p. 321.

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 8.

^ Dallin, Alexander (2000). "Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Margolin, Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer".

Slavic Review .

59 (4): 882‒883.

doi : 10.2307/2697429 .

JSTOR 2697429 .

^ Valentino, Benjamin (2005).

Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century . Cornell University Press. pp. 75, 91, 275.

ISBN 9780801472732 .

^ "Reevaluating China's Democide to 73,000,000" . 24 November 2008.

^ a b Bradley 2017 , pp. 151–153.

^ a b c Harff 2017 .

^ a b c Dallin 2000 .

^ Getty 1985 , p. 5.

^ Ellman 2002 .

^ Ellman 2002 , p. 1151.

^ Wheatcroft 1999 , p. 341: "For decades, many historians counted Stalin' s victims in 'tens of millions', which was a figure supported by Solzhenitsyn. Since the collapse of the USSR, the lower estimates of the scale of the camps have been vindicated. The arguments about excess mortality are far more complex than normally believed. R. Conquest, The Great Terror: A Re-assessment (London, 1992) does not really get to grips with the new data and continues to present an exaggerated picture of the repression. The view of the 'revisionists' has been largely substantiated ( Getty & Manning 1993 ). The popular press, even TLS and The Independent , have contained erroneous journalistic articles that should not be cited in respectable academic articles." ^ a b Valentino 2005 , p. 275.

^ Brzezinski 1993 , p. 16.

^ Rummel 1994 , p. 15, Table 1.6.

^ a b Rummel 2005a .

^ a b Rummel 2005b .

^ Dulić 2004 , p. 85.

^ Rummel 2004 .

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 79.

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 35.

^ a b Aronson 2003 .

^ a b Courtois 1999 , p. 4.

^ Rutland 1999 , p. 123.

^ Malia 1999 , p. x.

^ a b David-Fox 2004 .

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , pp. 53–54.

^ Valentino 2005 , pp. 75, 91.

^ Rosefielde 2010 , pp. 1, 7.

^ Bellamy 2012 , p. 949.

^ Strauss 2014 , pp. 360–361.

^ Chicago Tribune 2017 .

^ Kotkin 2017 .

^ a b c Harff 1996 , p. 118.

^ Dulić 2004 , p. 98.

^ Harff 2017 , pp. 113–114.

^ Weiner 2002 , p. 450.

^ Paczkowski 2001 , p. 34.

^ Kuromiya 2001 , p. 195.

^ a b Ghodsee 2014 .

^ Doumanis, Nicholas, ed. (2016).

The Oxford Handbook of European History, 1914–1945 (E-book ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. pp.

377– 378.

ISBN 9780191017759 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 – via Google Books.

At first sight, accusations that Hitler and Stalin mirrored each other as they 'conducted wars of annihilation against internal and external enemeis ... of class, race, and nation,' seem plausible. But such a perspective, in reality a recapitulation of the long-discredited totalitarian perspective equating Stalin's Soviet Union with Hitler's National Socialist Germany, is not tenable. It betrays a profound misunderstanding of the distinct natures of the Stalinist and Nazi regimes, which made them mortal enemies. Stalin's primary objective was to forge an autarkic, industrialized, multinational state, under the rubric of 'socialism in one country'. Nationalism and nation-building were on Stalin's agenda, not genocide; nor was it inherent in the construction of a non-capitalist, non-expansionary state – however draconian.

^ Shafir 2016 .

^ Radonić, Ljiljana (2020).

The Holocaust/Genocide Template in Eastern Europe . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781000712124 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 – via Google Books.

^ a b Neumayer 2018 .

^ Dujisin 2020 .

^ Dallin 2000 : "Whether all these cases, from Hungary to Afghanistan, have a single essence and thus deserve to be lumped together – just because they are labeled Marxist or communist – is a question the authors scarcely discuss." ^ a b Harff 1996 .

^ Dulić 2004 .

^ a b c d Ghodsee & Sehon 2018 .

^ a b c Engel-Di Mauro 2021 .

^ Courtois 1999 , p. xvii.

^ Jones 2018 .

^ Bevins 2020 , pp. 238–240.

^ Karlsson & Schoenhals 2008 , p. 5.

^ Gray 1990 , p. 116.

^ Goldhagen 2009 , p. 206.

^ Pipes 2001 , p. 147.

^ Courtois 1999 , p. 2.

^ Jahanbegloo 2014 , pp. 117–118.

^ Jahanbegloo 2014 , pp. 120–121.

^ Watson 1998 , p. 77.

^ Grant 1999 , p. 558.

^ Walicki 1997 , p. 154.

^ Revel 2009 , pp. 94–95.

^ a b Totten & Jacobs 2002 , p. 168.

^ Totten & Jacobs 2002 , p. 169.

^ Valentino 2005 , pp. 33–34.

^ Valentino 2005 , pp. 91, 93.

^ a b Valentino 2005 , pp. 93–94.

^ Sémelin 2009 , p. 331.

^ Chirot & McCauley 2010 , p. 42.

^ a b Mann 2005 , pp. 318, 321.

^ Tismăneanu 2012 , p. 14.

^ Bellamy 2012 , p. 950.

^ Katz 2013 , p. 267.

^ Shaw 2015a , p. 115.

^ Hollander 2006 , p. xiv.

^ Fitzpatrick 2008 , p. 77.

^ Conquest 2007 , p. xxiii.

^ Yakovlev 2002 , p. 20.

^ Ray 2007 .

^ Hicks 2009 , pp. 87–88.

^ a b Weitz 2003 , pp. 251–252.

^ Rosefielde 2010 , p. xvi.

^ Krain 1997 , p. 334.

^ Kim 2016 , pp. 23–24.

^ Jones 2010 , p. 126.

^ Malia 1999 , p. xviii.

^ Rappaport 1999 , pp. 82–83.

^ Thompson 2008 , pp. 254–255.

^ Montagnes & Wolton 2019 , p. 27.

^ Žižek 2006 .

^ Rubinstein 2014 .

^ a b Ghodsee 2014 , p. 124.

^ Courtois 1999 , p. 9.

^ Davies & Wheatcroft 2009 , p. xiv.

^ Tauger 2001 , p. 46.

^ Wheatcroft 2020 .

^ Aldous & Kotkin 2017 .

^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (2017).

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians, and the Russian Revolution . Verso. pp.

94– 95.

ISBN 978-1784785642 .

Most scholars rejected this claim, seeing the famine as following from a badly conceived and miscalculated policy of excessive requisitioning of grain, but not as directed specifically against ethnic Ukrainians.

^ Payaslian 2021 .

^ Britannica Holodomor .

^ Engerman, David (2003).

Modernization from the Other Shore: American Intellectuals and the Romance of Russian Development .

Harvard University Press . p. 194.

ISBN 9780674036529 – via Google Books .

^ a b "Holodomor was a genocide, according to the author of the term" . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ a b Lemkin 2008 .

^ Mace 1986 , p. 12.

^ Naimark 2010 , pp. 134–135.

^ Snyder 2010 , p. vii.

^ Свобода, Радіо (28 November 2008).

"Soviet Genocide in Ukraine" .

Радіо Свобода . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ Goldhagen 2009 , pp. 29–30.

^ Shaw 2015b , "Structural contexts and unintended consequences".

^ Ellman 2002 , p. 1172.

^ Goldhagen 2009 , p. 54.

^ a b Rosefielde 2010 , pp. 225–226.

^ Milne 2002 .

^ Wiener 2012 , p. 38.

^ Day 2018 .

^ Sullivan, Dylan; Hickel, Jason (2023).

"Capitalism and extreme poverty: A global analysis of real wages, human height, and mortality since the long 16th century" .

World Development .

161 106026.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2022.106026 .

S2CID 252315733 .

^ Sullivan, Dylan; Hickel, Jason (2 December 2022).

"How British colonialism killed 100 million Indians in 40 years" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

While the precise number of deaths is sensitive to the assumptions we make about baseline mortality, it is clear that somewhere in the vicinity of 100 million people died prematurely at the height of British colonialism. This is among the largest policy-induced mortality crises in human history. It is larger than the combined number of deaths that occurred during all famines in the Soviet Union, Maoist China, North Korea, Pol Pot's Cambodia, and Mengistu's Ethiopia.

^ Aarons 2007 , pp.

71 & 80–81 .

^ Bevins 2020 , p. 240.

^ Gille, Zsuzsa; Todorova, Maria (2012).

Post-Communist Nostalgia . Berghahn Books. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-857-45643-4 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen (Fall 2014).

"A Tale of 'Two Totalitarianisms': The Crisis of Capitalism and the Historical Memory of Communism" .

History of the Present: A Journal of Critical History .

4 (2): 124.

doi : 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

JSTOR 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

^ Friendship Act (HR3000) (PDF) . United States Congress. 1993. p. 15 at §905a1 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 – via U.S. Government Publishing Office.

^ Fekeiki, Omar (13 June 2007).

"The Toll of Communism" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ Satter, David (2011).

It Was a Long Time Ago, and It Never Happened Anyway: Russia and the Communist Past .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-17842-5 .

^ "Wall of Grief: Putin opens first Soviet victims memorial" . BBC News. 30 October 2017. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Victims of communism monument could be unveiled next spring" . CBC News. 19 March 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Estonia's Victims of Communism 1940–1991" . Kommunismiohvrite memoriaal. 23 August 2018. 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Cornerstone laid for new memorial for victims of communist crimes" . ERR News. 4 May 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Victims of Communism Memorial opened in Tallinn" . ERR News. 24 August 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Expanding Holocaust Denial and Legislation Against It" .

Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs . Retrieved 15 June 2024 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen (Fall 2014).

"A Tale of 'Two Totalitarianisms': The Crisis of Capitalism and the Historical Memory of Communism" .

History of the Present: A Journal of Critical History .

4 (2): 115–142.

doi : 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

JSTOR 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

^ Neumayer, Laure (2018).

The Criminalisation of Communism in the European Political Space after the Cold War . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781351141741 .

^ Rosefielde, p. 6.

^ Karlsson, p. 5.

^ "Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide Approved and proposed for signature and ratification or accession by General Assembly resolution 260 A (III) of 9 December 1948 Entry into force: 12 January 1951, in accordance with article XIII" (PDF) .

United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect .

^ Mydans, Seth (10 April 2017).

"11 Years, $300 Million and 3 Convictions. Was the Khmer Rouge Tribunal Worth It?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ a b Naimark p. 25.

^ Kuhr, Corinna (1998).

"Children of 'Enemies of The People' as Victims of the Great Purges" .

Cahiers du Monde russe .

39 (1/2): 209– 220.

doi : 10.3406/cmr.1998.2520 .

ISSN 1252-6576 .

JSTOR 20171081 .

According to latest estimates 2,5 million people were arrested and 700,000 of them shot. These figures are based on reliable archival materials [...] ^ François-Xavier, Nérard (27 February 2009).

"The Levashovo cemetery and the Great Terror in the Leningrad region" .

Paris Institute of Political Studies .

The Yezhovshchina or Stalin's Great Terror [...] The precise end result of these operations is difficult to establish, but the total of the condemnations is estimated at roughly 1,300,000 of which 700,000 were sentenced to death, most of the others were sentenced to ten years in the camps (document translated in Werth, 2006: 143).

^ Ellman, Michael (2002).

"Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments" (PDF) .

Europe-Asia Studies .

54 (7): 1151– 1172.

doi : 10.1080/0966813022000017177 .

S2CID 43510161 .

The best estimate that can currently be made of the number of repression deaths in 1937–38 is the range 950,000–1.2 million, i.e. about a million. This is the estimate which should be used by historians, teachers and journalists concerned with twentieth century Russian – and world – history ^ Statiev, Alexander (2010).

The Soviet Counterinsurgency in the Western Borderlands . Cambridge University Press. p. 277.

ISBN 978-0-521-76833-7 .

^ Davies, Norman (2006).

Europe at War 1939–1945 : No Simple Victory . Macmillan. p. 198.

ISBN 978-0-333-69285-1 .

^ Chan, Alfred L. (2001).

Mao's Crusade: Politics and Policy Implementation in China's Great Leap Forward . OUP Oxford. p. 13.

ISBN 9780191554018 .

^ "The Great Leap Forward" .

History Learning Site . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

^ a b Valentino, Benjamin A. (2005).

Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century . Cornell University Press. pp.

127– 132.

ISBN 0801472733 .

^ "Synopsis" .

Frankdikotter.com . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

^ a b Dikötter, Frank (2010).

Mao's Great Famine: The History of China's Most Devastating Catastrophe, 1958–1962 . Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 88.

ISBN 9780802779281 .

^ Garnaut, Anthony (2013). "Hard facts and half-truths: The new archival history of China's Great Famine".

China Information .

27 (2): 223– 246.

doi : 10.1177/0920203X13485390 .

S2CID 143503403 .

^ "One million Muslim Uighurs held in secret China camps: UN panel" .

Al Jazeera . 10 August 2018.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ Welch, Dylan; Hui, Echo; Hutcheon, Stephen (24 November 2019).

"The China Cables: Leak reveals the scale of Beijing's repressive control over Xinjiang" .

ABC News (Australia) .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ "UN: Unprecedented Joint Call for China to End Xinjiang Abuses" .

Human Rights Watch . 10 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2019 . Retrieved 18 December 2020 .

^ Finley, Joanne (2020). "Why Scholars and Activists Increasingly Fear a Uyghur Genocide in Xinjiang".

Journal of Genocide Research .

23 (3): 348– 370.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2020.1848109 .

S2CID 236962241 .

^ Kirby, Jen (25 September 2020).

"Concentration camps and forced labor: China's repression of the Uighurs, explained" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2020 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

It is the largest mass internment of an ethnic-religious minority group since World War II.

^ Khatchadourian, Raffi (3 April 2021).

"Surviving the Crackdown in Xinjiang" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 10 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 March 2022 .

^ Feng, Emily (9 July 2018).

"Uighur children fall victim to China anti-terror drive" .

The Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ Adrian Zenz (July 2019).

"Break Their Roots: Evidence for China's Parent-Child Separation Campaign in Xinjiang" .

The Journal of Political Risk .

7 (7).

Archived from the original on 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ "China's treatment of Uyghurs may be crime against humanity, says UN human rights chief" .

The Guardian . 31 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ "Torture claims against China Uyghurs credible – UN" .

BBC News . 31 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ Cumming-Bruce, Nick; Ramzy, Austin (31 August 2022).

"U.N. Says China May Have Committed 'Crimes Against Humanity' in Xinjiang" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2022 . Retrieved 1 September 2022 .

^ Totten, p. 359.

^ "Khmer Rouge leaders guilty of crimes against humanity and jailed for life" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 25 November 2021 .

^ Semelin, p. 344.

^ "Khmer Rouge's Slaughter in Cambodia Is Ruled a Genocide" .

The New York Times . 5 November 2018 . Retrieved 25 November 2021 .

^ "Khmer Rouge head of state's genocide conviction appeal rejected by Cambodia's UN-backed tribunal" .

The Independent . 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Heder, Steve (1997). "Racism, Marxism, labelling, and genocide in Ben Kiernan's "The Pol Pot regime" ".

South East Asia Research .

5 (2): 101– 153.

doi : 10.1177/0967828X9700500202 .

JSTOR 23746851 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (2008).

The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia Under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–79 . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-030-0-14299-0 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (2008).

Wild Chickens, Farm Chickens, and Cormorants: Cambodia's Eastern Zone under Pol Pot (1st ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-20379-088-5 .

^ Weitz, Eric D. (2015).

A Century of Genocide: Utopias of Race and Nation (Updated ed.). Princeton University Press, NJ.

ISBN 978-0-69116-587-5 .

^ Lattimer, p. 214.

^ Jones, p. 188.

^ Metaferia, Getachew (2009).

Ethiopia and the United States: History, Diplomacy, and Analysis . Algora Publishing. p. 67.

ISBN 978-0-87586-647-5 .

^ Harff, Barbara & Gurr, Ted Robert: "Toward an Empirical Theory of Genocides and Politicides", International Studies Quarterly 32 (3), p. 364 (1988).

^ US admits helping Mengistu escape BBC , 22 December 1999 ^ "Genocides, Politicides, and Other Mass Murder Since 1945, With Stages in 2008" .

Genocide Prevention Advisory Network . Archived from the original on 19 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

^ As quoted by Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin , The Mitrokhin Archive II: The KGB and the World , Penguin, 2006, pp. 467–468.

^ a b Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin .

The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World.

Basic Books, 2005.

ISBN 0-465-00311-7 ch. 25.

^ The letter was first published by the Ethiopian Reporter on 26 June 2004. Among the Derg officials who signed the letter are former Vice-President Colonel Fiseha Desta, former Prime Minister Captain Fikreselasie Wogederes and the notorious henchmen of dictator Mengistu Hailemariam, Captain Legesse Asfaw and Major Melaku Tefera .

^ Art 9 Proclamation 1/1995 Proclamation of the Constitution of the FederalDemocratic Republic of Ethiopia . 1995.

^ "Gulag survivors demand trial of Kim Jong-il for crimes against humanity" .

Asia News . 2 January 2010 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Jones, p. 216.

^ Shawl, Jeannie.

"Romania president says Communist regime committed crimes against humanity" . Jurist. Archived from the original on 12 March 2011.

^ Clej, Petru (18 December 2006).

"Romania exposes communist crimes" . BBC . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Smith, Craig S. (19 December 2006).

"Romanian Leader Condemns Communist Rule" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Boldur-Lățescu p. 22 ^ Deletant, Dennis (1995).

Ceaușescu and the Securitate: coercion and dissent in Romania, 1965–1989 . M.E. Sharpe. pp.

29– 33.

ISBN 978-1-56324-633-3 .

^ McGoldrick 2000 , p. 17.

^ Cohen, Bertram D.; Ettin, Mark F.; Fidler, Jay W. (2002).

Group Psychotherapy and Political Reality: A Two-Way Mirror . International Universities Press. p. 193.

ISBN 0-8236-2228-2 .

^ Andjelic, Neven (2003).

Bosnia-Herzegovina: The End of a Legacy . Frank Cass. p. 36.

ISBN 0-7146-5485-X .

^ Tierney, Stephen (2000).

Accommodating National Identity: New Approaches in International and Domestic Law . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 17.

ISBN 90-411-1400-9 .

^ Jambrek, Peter, ed. (January–June 2008).

"Crimes Committed by Totalitarian Regimes" . Slovenian Presidency of the Council of the European Union. Retrieved 26 December 2019. p. 156. "Most of the mass killings were carried out from May to July 1945; among the victims were mostly the "returned" (or "home-captured") Home guards and prisoners from other Yugoslav provinces. In the following months, up to January 1946 when the Constitution of the Federative People's Republic of Yugoslavia was passed and OZNA had to hand the camps over to the organs of the Ministry of the Interior, those killings were followed by mass killing of Germans, Italians and Slovenes suspected of collaborationism and anti-communism. Individual secret killings were carried out at later dates as well. The decision to "annihilate" opponents must had been adopted in the closest circles of Yugoslav state leadership, and the order was certainly issued by the Supreme Commander of the Yugoslav Army Josip Broz – Tito, although it is not known when or in what form".

^ a b Sretenovic, Stanislav & Prauser, Steffen.

"The Expulsion of the German-Speaking Minority from Yugoslavia" (PDF) . European University Institute, Florence. p. 55. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2009.

^ "Vojvodian Germans" . 20 May 2009. Archived from the original on 20 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Gale Group (2007).

Worldmark encyclopedia of the nations . Internet Archive. Detroit : Thomson Gale.

ISBN 978-1-4144-1089-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "[Projekat Rastko] Slavenko Terzic: The Serbs and the Macedonian Question" .

www.rastko.rs . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Tell it to the world, Eliott Behar . Dundurn Press. 2014.

ISBN 978-1-4597-2380-1 .

^ Matas 1994 , p. 36.

^ Corbel 1951 , pp. 173–174.

^ Cook 2001 , p. 1391.

^ Matas 1994 , p. 37.

Bibliography [ edit ] Aarons, Mark (2007), "Justice Betrayed: Post-1945 Responses to Genocide" , in David A. Blumenthal; Timothy L. H. McCormack (eds.), The Legacy of Nuremberg: Civilising Influence or Institutionalised Vengeance? (International Humanitarian Law) , Martinus Nijhoff Publishers , ISBN 978-9004156913 , archived from the original on 5 January 2016 , retrieved 20 January 2022 Alexopoulos, Golfo (7 January 2013), The Gulag's Veiled Mortality , Hoover Institution , retrieved 21 September 2018 Alexopoulos, Golfo (2017), Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag , Yale University, ISBN 978-0-300-17941-5 , retrieved 3 September 2018 Allen, Paul (1996), Katyn: Stalin's Massacre and the Seeds of Polish Resurrection , Naval Institute Press, ISBN 978-1-55750-670-2 Amstutz, Mark R. (2005), International ethics: concepts, theories, and cases in global politics (2nd ed.), Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0-7425-3583-1 Andrew, Christopher ; Mitrokhin, Vasili (2006), The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World , Basic Books, ISBN 978-0-465-00313-6 [ permanent dead link ] Andjelic, Neven (2003), Bosnia-Herzegovina: The End of a Legacy , Frank Cass, p. 36, ISBN 0-7146-5485-X Applebaum, Anne (11 November 2010), "The Worst of the Madness" , The New York Review of Books , 57 (17) Aronson, Ronald (2003), "Review: Communism's Posthumous Trial. Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois; The Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twentieth Century by François Furet; The Burden of Responsibility: Blum, Camus, Aron, and the French Twentieth Century by Tony Judt; Le Siècle des communismes by Michel Dreyfus", History and Theory , 42 (2): 222‒245, doi : 10.1111/1468-2303.00240 , JSTOR 3590882 Barry, Ellen (26 November 2010), "Russia: Stalin Called Responsible for Katyn Killings" , The New York Times Baron, Udo (2011), Hertle, Hans-Hermann; Nooke, Maria (eds.), The Victims at the Berlin Wall 1961–1989: A Biographical Handbook , Ch. Links Verlag, ISBN 978-3-861-53632-1 Behar, Eliott (2014), Tell It to the World: International Justice and the Secret Campaign to Hide Mass Murder in Kosovo , Dundurn Press, ISBN 978-1-4597-2806-6 Bellamy, Alex J.

(2010), Global Politics and the Responsibility to Protect: From Words to Deeds (illustrated ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-1-136-86863-4 Bellamy, Alex J. (2012), "Massacres and Morality: Mass Killing in an Age of Civilian Immunity" (PDF) , Human Rights Quarterly , 34 (4), The Johns Hopkins University Press: 927‒958, doi : 10.1353/hrq.2012.0066 , JSTOR 23352235 , S2CID 86858244 Bellamy, Alex J. (2017), East Asia's Other Miracle: Explaining the Decline of Mass Atrocities , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-877793-9 Berger, Arthur Asa (1987), Television in society , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-0-88738-109-6 Bevins, Vincent (2020), The Jakarta Method: Washington's Anticommunist Crusade and the Mass Murder Program that Shaped Our World , PublicAffairs , ISBN 978-1541742406 Bilinsky, Yaroslav (1999), "Was the Ukrainian Famine of 1932–1933 Genocide?" , Journal of Genocide Research , 1 (2): 147– 156, doi : 10.1080/14623529908413948 , archived from the original on 15 June 2008 , retrieved 12 November 2009 Boobbyer, Phillip (2000), The Stalin Era , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-7679-0056-0 Bradley, Mark Philip (2017), "Human Rights and Communism", in Fürst, Juliane; Pons, Silvio; Selden, Mark (eds.), The Cambridge History of Communism: Volume 3, Endgames? Late Communism in Global Perspective, 1968 to the Present , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-108-50935-0 Brady, Brendan (27 July 2010), "Sentence reduced for former Khmer Rouge prison chief" , The Los Angeles Times Brent, Jonathan (2008), Inside the Stalin Archives: Discovering the New Russia , Atlas & Co., ISBN 978-0-9777433-3-9 Brzezinski, Zbigniew (1993), Stewart, Robert (ed.), Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the Twenty-first Century (illustrated ed.), Scribner, ISBN 978-0-684-19630-5 Brzezinski, Zbigniew (2010), Out of Control: Global Turmoil on the Eve of the 21st Century , Simon & Schuster, ISBN 978-1-439-14380-3 Chang, Jung ; Halliday, Jon (2005), Mao: The Unknown Story , London, ISBN 978-0-224-07126-0 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Chang, Jon K. (8 April 2019), "Ethnic Cleansing and Revisionist Russian and Soviet History", Academic Questions , 32 (2): 263– 270, doi : 10.1007/s12129-019-09791-8 (inactive 12 July 2025), S2CID 150711796 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) Charny, Israel (1999), Encyclopedia of Genocide , Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio, ISBN 978-0-87436-928-1 Chirot, Daniel ; McCauley, Clark (2010), Why Not Kill Them All?: The Logic and Prevention of Mass Political Murder , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-1-400-83485-3 Clayton, Jonathan (13 December 2006), "Guilty of genocide: the leader who unleashed a 'Red Terror' on Africa" , The Times Online , archived from the original on 11 June 2011 Clodfelter, Micheal (2002).

Warfare and Armed Conflicts: A Statistical Reference to Casualty and Other Figures, 1500–2000 . McFarland.

ISBN 9780786412044 .

Cohen, Bertram D.; Ettin, Mark F.; Fidler, Jay W. (2002), Group Psychotherapy and Political Reality: A Two-Way Mirror , International Universities Press, p. 193, ISBN 0-8236-2228-2 Collins, Joseph (1987), "Soviet Policy toward Afghanistan", Proceedings of the Academy of Political Science , 36 (4): 198– 210, doi : 10.2307/1173843 , JSTOR 1173843 Conquest, Robert (1970), The Nation Killers , New York: Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-333-10575-7 Conquest, Robert (2007) [1990], The Great Terror: A Reassessment, 40th Anniversary Edition , Oxford: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-195-31699-5 Cook, Bernard A. (2001), Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia, Volume 2 K–Z , New York: Garland Publishing Inc., ISBN 978-0-815-34058-4 Corbel, Josef (1951), Tito's Communism , Denver: The University of Denver Press Courtois, Stéphane , ed. (1999), The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression , translated by Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer; Mark Kramer (consulting ed.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2 Courtois, Stéphane (2010), "Raphael Lemkin and the Question of Genocide under Communist Regimes", in Bieńczyk-Missala, Agnieszka; Dębski, Sławomir (eds.), Rafał Lemkin: A Hero of Humankind , Warsaw: Polski Instytut Spraw Międzynarodowych (PISM), pp.

117– 152, ISBN 978-8-389-60785-0 Culbertson, Todd (19 August 1978), Human Cost of World Communism , Human Events Publishing, Inc.

Dallin, Alexander (2000), "Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Margolin, Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer", Slavic Review , 59 (4): 882‒883, doi : 10.2307/2697429 , JSTOR 2697429 Dangerfield, Katie (13 December 2017), North Korea defector says prisoners fed to dogs, women forced to have abortions , Global News , retrieved 8 August 2018 David-Fox, Michael (Winter 2004). "On the Primacy of Ideology. Soviet Revisionists and Holocaust Deniers (In Response to Martin Malia)".

Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History .

5 (1): 81– 105.

doi : 10.1353/kri.2004.0007 .

S2CID 159716738 .

Davies, R. W.; Wheatcroft, S. G. (2004), The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–1933 , The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia, vol. 5, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan Davies, Robert ; Wheatcroft, Stephen (2009), The Years of Hunger: Soviet Agriculture, 1931–1933 , The Industrialisation of Soviet Russia, vol. 5, Palgrave Macmillan UK, ISBN 978-0-230-27397-9 Day, Meagan (23 October 2018), "Mike Davis on the Crimes of Socialism and Capitalism" , Jacobin , retrieved 25 October 2018 Dikötter, Frank (2010), Mao's Great Famine: The History of China's Most Devastating Catastrophe, 1958–1962 , Walker & Company, ISBN 978-0-8027-7768-3 Dikötter, Frank, Mao's Great Famine, Key Arguments , archived from the original on 9 August 2011 Doyle, Kevin (26 July 2007), "Putting the Khmer Rouge on Trial" , Time , archived from the original on 30 September 2007 Dujisin, Zoltan (July 2020), "A History of Post-Communist Remembrance: From Memory Politics to the Emergence of a Field of Anticommunism", Theory and Society , 50 (January 2021): 65– 96, doi : 10.1007/s11186-020-09401-5 , hdl : 1765/128856 , S2CID 225580086 Dulić, Tomislav (2004), "Tito's Slaughterhouse: A Critical Analysis of Rummel's Work on Democide", Journal of Peace Research , 41 (1): 85– 102, doi : 10.1177/0022343304040051 , JSTOR 4149657 , S2CID 145120734 Easterly, William ; Gatti, Roberta ; Kurlat, Sergio (2006), "Development, democracy, and mass killings" (PDF) , Journal of Economic Growth , 11 (2): 129– 156, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.475.1626 , doi : 10.1007/s10887-006-9001-z , S2CID 195313778 Ellman, Michael (2002), "Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 54 (7): 1151– 1172, doi : 10.1080/0966813022000017177 , S2CID 43510161 , archived from the original (PDF) on 27 April 2018 Ellman, Michael (September 2005), "The Role of Leadership Perceptions and of Intent in the Soviet Famine of 1931–1934" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 57 (6): 823– 841, doi : 10.1080/09668130500199392 , S2CID 13880089 , archived from the original (PDF) on 27 February 2009 , retrieved 4 July 2008 Ellman, Michael (2007), "Stalin and the Soviet Famine of 1932–33 Revisited" , Europe-Asia Studies , 59 (4), archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2007 Engel-Di Mauro, Salvatore; et al. (4 May 2021).

"Anti-Communism and the Hundreds of Millions of Victims of Capitalism" .

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

32 (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.1080/10455752.2021.1875603 .

Esteban, Joan Maria; Morelli, Massimo; Rohner, Dominic (11 May 2010), "Strategic Mass Killings" , University of Zurich Working Paper No. 486 , Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1615375 Etcheson, Craig (2005), After the Killing Fields: Lessons from the Cambodian Genocide , Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-275-98513-4 Fein, Helen (1993a), "Soviet and Communist genocides and 'Democide' " , Genocide: a sociological perspective; Contextual and Comparative Studies I: Ideological Genocides , Sage Publications , ISBN 978-0-8039-8829-3 Fein, Helen (1993b), "Revolutionary and Antirevolutionary Genocides: A Comparison of State Murders in Democratic Kampuchea, 1975 to 1979, and in Indonesia, 1965 to 1966", Comparative Studies in Society and History , 35 (4): 796– 823, doi : 10.1017/S0010417500018715 , S2CID 145561816 Fekeiki, Omar (13 June 2007), "The Toll of Communism" , The Washington Post Fenby, Jonathan (2008), Modern China: The Fall and Rise of a Great Power, 1850 to the Present , Ecco, ISBN 978-0-06-166116-7 Figes, Orlando (1997), A People's Tragedy: The Russian Revolution 1891‒1924 , Viking, ISBN 978-0-19-822862-2 Figes, Orlando (2007), The Whisperers: Private Life in Stalin's Russia , Metropolitan Books, ISBN 978-0-8050-7461-1 Finkel, Evgeny ; Straus, Scott (2012), "Macro, Meso, and Micro Research on Genocide: Gains, Shortcomings, and Future Areas of Inquiry" , Genocide Studies and Prevention , 7 (1): 56– 67, doi : 10.3138/gsp.7.1.56 Finn, Peter (27 April 2008), "Aftermath of a Soviet Famine" , The Washington Post Fischer, Benjamin B.

(Winter 1999), "The Katyn Controversy: Stalin's Killing Field" , Studies in Intelligence , archived from the original on 24 March 2010 , retrieved 10 December 2005 Fischer, Ruth ; Leggett, John C. (2006), "Stalin and German Communism: A Study in the Origins of the State Party", Studies in Intelligence , Edison, New Jersey: Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-0-87855-822-3 Fish, Isaac Stone (26 September 2010), "Greeting Misery With Violence" , Newsweek Fitzpatrick, Sheila (2008), The Russian Revolution , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19-923767-8 Fontaine, Pascal (1999), "Communism in Latin America" , in Courtois, Stéphane; Kramer, Mark (eds.), The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression , Harvard University Press, pp.

647– 665, ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2 , retrieved 24 August 2015 French, Patrick (9 September 2009), Tibet, Tibet: A Personal History Of A Lost Land , Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-307-54806-1 French, Patrick (22 March 2008), "He May Be a God, but He's No Politician" , The New York Times , retrieved 1 June 2014 Gellately, Robert (2007), Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe , Knopf , ISBN 978-1-4000-4005-6 Gerlach, Christian ; Six, Clemens, eds. (2020), The Palgrave Handbook of Anti-Communist Persecutions , Palgrave Macmillan , ISBN 978-3030549657 Getty, J. Arch (1985).

Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party Reconsidered, 1933–1938 . Translated by Choate, Frederick S. (illustrated ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521335706 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 – via Google Books.

Getty, J. Arch; Manning, Roberta T., eds. (1993), Stalinist Terror: New Perspectives , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-44670-9 Getty, J. Arch; Rittersporn, Gábor; Zemskov, Viktor (1993), "Victims of the Soviet penal system in the pre-war years: a first approach on the basis of archival evidence" (PDF) , American Historical Review , 98 (4): 1017– 1049, doi : 10.2307/2166597 , JSTOR 2166597 , retrieved 2 September 2021 – via Soviet Studies Ghodsee, Kristen (Fall 2014), "A Tale of 'Two Totalitarianisms': The Crisis of Capitalism and the Historical Memory of Communism" (PDF) , History of the Present , 4 (2): 115– 142, doi : 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 , JSTOR 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 Ghodsee, Kristen; Sehon, Scott (22 March 2018). Dresser, Sam (ed.).

"The Merits of Taking an Anti-Anti-Communism Stance" .

Aeon . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

Goujon, Alexandra (27 March 2008), "Kurapaty (1937–1941): NKVD Mass Killings in Soviet Belarus" , Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence , ISSN 1961-9898 , retrieved 25 April 2020 [ permanent dead link ] Grant, Robert (November 1999), "Review: The Lost Literature of Socialism", The Review of English Studies , 50 (200) Gray, John (1990), "Totalitarianism, Civil Society and Reform" , in Ellen Frankel Paul (ed.), Totalitarianism at the Crossroads , Transaction Publisher, ISBN 978-0-88738-850-7 Goldhagen, Daniel (2009), Worse Than War: Genocide, Eliminationism, and the Ongoing Assault on Humanity , PublicAffairs, ISBN 978-1-58648-769-0 Gross, Jan T.

(2002), Revolution From Abroad: The Soviet Conquest of Poland's Western Ukraine and Western Belorussia , Princeton University Press , ISBN 978-0-691-09603-2 Hackmann, Jörg (March 2009), "From National Victims to Transnational Bystanders? The Changing Commemoration of World War II in Central and Eastern Europe", Constellations , 16 (1): 167– 181, doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8675.2009.00526.x Haggard, Stephan ; Noland, Marcus; Sen, Amartya (2009), Famine in North Korea , Columbia University Press Hardy, Jeffrey S. (Spring 2018), "Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag. By Golfo Alexopoulos. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007. xi, 308 pp. Notes. Index. Maps. $65.00, hard bound", Slavic Review , 77 (1): 269– 270, doi : 10.1017/slr.2018.57 Harff, Barbara; Gurr, Ted Robert (September 1988), "Toward Empirical Theory of Genocides and Politicides: Identification and Measurement of Cases since 1945", International Studies Quarterly , 32 (3), Wiley on behalf of The International Studies Association: 359– 371, doi : 10.2307/2600447 , JSTOR 2600447 Harff, Barbara (1992), "Recognizing Genocides and Politicides", in Fein, Helen (ed.), Genocide Watch , vol. 27 Harff, Barbara (1996), "Death by Government by R. J. Rummel", The Journal of Interdisciplinary History , 27 (1): 117– 119, doi : 10.2307/206491 , JSTOR 206491 Harff, Barbara (February 2003), "No Lessons Learned from the Holocaust? Assessing Risks of Genocide and Political Mass Murder since 1955" (PDF) , American Political Science Review , 97 (1): 57– 73, doi : 10.1017/S0003055403000522 , S2CID 54804182 , archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2010 Harff, Barbara (2017), "The Comparative Analysis of Mass Atrocities and Genocide" (PDF) , in Gleditsch, N. P. (ed.), R.J. Rummel: An Assessment of His Many Contributions , SpringerBriefs on Pioneers in Science and Practice, vol. 37, SpringerBriefs on Pioneers in Science and Practice, pp.

111– 129, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-54463-2_12 , ISBN 978-3-319-54463-2 Haynes, John Earl ; Klehr, Harvey (2003), In Denial: Historians, Communism, and Espionage , San Francisco: Encounter Books , ISBN 978-1-893554-72-6 Healey, Dan (1 June 2018), "Golfo Alexopoulos. Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag" , The American Historical Review , 123 (3): 1049– 1051, doi : 10.1093/ahr/123.3.1049 Heder, Steve (July 1997), "Racism, Marxism, labelling, and genocide in Ben Kiernan's 'The Pol Pot regime' ", South East Asia , 5 (2), Sage Publications, Ltd.: 101– 153, doi : 10.1177/0967828X9700500202 , JSTOR 23746851 Hertzke, Allen D. (2006), Freeing God's Children: The Unlikely Alliance for Global Human Rights , Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield , ISBN 978-0-7425-4732-2 Hicks, Stephen R. C.

(2009), Explaining Postmodernism: Skepticism and Socialism from Rousseau to Foucault , Scholarly Publishing, ISBN 978-1-59247-646-6 Hollander, Paul (2006), "Introduction" (PDF) , in Hollander, Paul (ed.), From the Gulag to the Killing Fields: Personal Accounts of Political Violence and Repression in Communist States , Applebaum, Anne (foreword), Intercollegiate Studies Institute, ISBN 978-1-932-23678-1 Holquist, Peter (January–June 1997), " "Conduct Merciless Mass Terror": Decossackization on the Don, 1919" (PDF) , Cahiers du Monde Russe: Russie, Empire Russe, Union Soviétique, États Indépendants , Guerre, guerres civiles et conflits nationaux dans l'Empire russe et en Russie soviétique, 1914–1922, 38 ( 1– 2): 127– 162, doi : 10.3406/cmr.1997.2486 [ permanent dead link ] Hossaini, Massoud (5 July 2007), "In pictures: Afghan mass grave" , BBC Jahanbegloo, Ramin (2014), Introduction to Nonviolence , Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-137-31426-0 [ permanent dead link ] Jambrek, Peter , ed. (2008), Crimes Committed by Totalitarian Regimes (PDF) (Draft Before Final Editing ed.), Slovenian Presidency of the Council of the European Union, p. 156, ISBN 978-961-238-977-2 , archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2011 Jones, Adam (2010), Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction (2nd ed.), New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-48619-4 Jones, Owen (26 July 2018), "Condemn communists' cruelties, but capitalism has its own terrible record" , The Guardian Salai, Sean (31 May 2022), "Victims of Communism Museum to open in nation's capital" , The Washington Times Kakar, M. Hassan (1995), Afghanistan: The Soviet Invasion and the Afghan Response, 1979–1982 , University of California Press Kaplan, Robert D.

(2001), Soldiers of God: With Islamic Warriors in Afghanistan and Pakistan , New York: Vintage Departures Kaplonski, Christopher (2002), "Thirty thousand bullets" (PDF) , Historical Injustice and Democratic Transition in Eastern Asia and Northern Europe , London {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Karlsson, Klas-Göran ; Schoenhals, Michael (2008), Crimes against humanity under communist regimes – Research review (PDF) , Forum for Living History, ISBN 978-91-977487-2-8 Katz, Steven T.

(2013), "Mass Death under Communist Rule and the Limits of 'Otherness' ", in Wistrich, Robert S. (ed.), Demonizing the Other: Antisemitism, Racism and Xenophobia , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-135-85251-1 Keep, John (1997), "Recent Writing on Stalin's Gulag: An Overview", Crime, Histoire & Sociétés / Crime, History & Societies , 1 (2): 91– 112, doi : 10.4000/chs.1014 Keller, Bill (4 February 1989), "Major Soviet Paper Says 20 Million Died As Victims of Stalin" , The New York Times , ISSN 0362-4331 , retrieved 1 July 2019 Khumalo, Naphtali (5 September 2019).

"Did Over 100 Million People Die under Communism during the 20th Century?" .

Africa Check . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

Kiernan, Ben (2003), "The Demography of Genocide in Southeast Asia: The Death Tolls in Cambodia, 1975–79, and East Timor, 1975–80" (PDF) , Critical Asian Studies , 35 (4): 585– 597, doi : 10.1080/1467271032000147041 , S2CID 143971159 , archived from the original (PDF) on 7 May 2021 , retrieved 22 September 2018 Kim, Nam Kyu (2016), "Revolutionary Leaders and Mass Killing" , Journal of Conflict Resolution , 62 (2): 289– 317, doi : 10.1177/0022002716653658 , S2CID 148212321 Kleveman, Lutz (2003), The New Great Game: Blood and Oil in Central Asia , Jackson, Tennessee: Atlantic Monthly Press, ISBN 978-0-87113-906-1 Kort, Michael (2001), The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath , Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, ISBN 978-0-7656-0396-8 Kotkin, Stephen (3 November 2017), "Communism's Bloody Century" , The Wall Street Journal , archived from the original on 3 November 2017 Aldous, Richard; Kotkin, Stephen (8 November 2017).

"Terrible Talent: Studying Stalin" .

The American Interest . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

Krain, Matthew (June 1997), "State-Sponsored Mass Murder: The Onset and Severity of Genocides and Politicides", The Journal of Conflict Resolution , 41 (3): 331– 360, doi : 10.1177/0022002797041003001 , JSTOR 174282 , S2CID 143852782 Kuisong, Yang (March 2008), "Reconsidering the Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries" , The China Quarterly , 193 : 102– 121, doi : 10.1017/S0305741008000064 , S2CID 154927374 Kulchytsky, Stanislav (17 February 2007), "Holodomor of 1932–1933 as genocide: the gaps in the proof" , Den Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2001), "Review Article: Communism and Terror. Reviewed Work(s): The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, and Repression by Stephane Courtois; Reflections on a Ravaged Century by Robert Conquest", Journal of Contemporary History , 36 (1): 191– 201, doi : 10.1177/002200940103600110 , JSTOR 261138 , S2CID 49573923 Kuromiya, Hiroaki (2007), The Voices of the Dead: Stalin's Great Terror in the 1930s , Yale University Press , ISBN 978-0-300-12389-0 Leggett, George (1987), The Cheka: Lenin's Political Police , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19-822862-2 Lenczowski, John (6 June 1985), International communism and Nicaragua – an administration view , The Christian Science Monitor Liivoja, Rain (2013), "Competing Histories: Soviet War Crimes in the Baltic States", in Heller, Kevin; Simpson, Gerry (eds.), The Hidden Histories of War Crimes Trials , Oxford University Press , doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199671144.003.0012 , ISBN 9780199671144 Lim, Louisa (2014), The People's Republic of Amnesia: Tiananmen Revisited , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-934771-1 Lincoln, W. Bruce (1999), Red Victory: A History of the Russian Civil War , Da Capo Press , ISBN 978-0-306-80909-5 [ permanent dead link ] Locard, Henri (March 2005), "State Violence in Democratic Kampuchea (1975–1979) and Retribution (1979–2004)", European Review of History , 12 (1): 121– 143, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.692.8388 , doi : 10.1080/13507480500047811 , S2CID 144712717 Lorenz, Andreas (15 May 2007), "The Chinese Cultural Revolution: Remembering Mao's Victims" , Der Spiegel Online MacFarquhar, Roderick ; Schoenhals, Michael (2006), Mao's Last Revolution , Harvard University Press MacKinnon, Ian (7 March 2007), "Crisis talks to save Khmer Rouge trial" , The Guardian Maksymiuk, Jan; Dratch, Marianna (29 November 2006), Ukraine: Parliament Recognizes Soviet-Era Famine As Genocide , RFE/RL Malia, Martin (1999), "Foreword: The Uses of Atrocity" , in Courtois, Stéphane; Kramer, Mark (eds.), The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression , Harvard University Press, pp.

ix– xx, ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2 , retrieved 24 August 2015 Mann, Michael (2005), The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-53854-1 Marples, David R. (2009), "Ethnic Issues in the Famine of 1932–1933 in Ukraine" , Europe-Asia Studies , 61 (3): 505– 518, doi : 10.1080/09668130902753325 , ISSN 0966-8136 , S2CID 67783643 Matas, David (1994), No More: The Battle Against Human Rights Violations , Toronto, Canada: Dundurn Press Limited, ISBN 978-1-550-02221-6 Materski, Wojciech; Szarota, Tomasz (2009), Polska 1939–1945. Straty osobowe i ofiary represji pod dwiema okupacjami , Warszawa: Institute of National Remembrance (IPN), ISBN 978-83-7629-067-6 Mawdsley, Evan (2003), The Stalin Years: The Soviet Union 1929–1953 , Manchester, England: Manchester University Press, ISBN 978-0-7190-6377-0 McGoldrick, Dominic (2000), "The Tale of Yugoslavia: Lessons for Accommodating National Identity in National and International Law", in Tierney, Stephen (ed.), Accommodating National Identity: New Approaches in International and Domestic Law , Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, pp.

13– 64, ISBN 90-411-1400-9 McKirdy, Euan (7 August 2014), "Top Khmer Rouge leaders found guilty of crimes against humanity, sentenced to life in prison" , CNN McLoughlin, Barry (2002), "Mass Operations of the NKVD, 1937–1938: a survey", in McLoughlin, Barry; McDermott, Kevin (eds.), Stalin's Terror: High Politics and Mass Repression in the Soviet Union , Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-1-4039-0119-4 Melgunov, Sergei Petrovich (1927), "The Record of the Red Terror" (PDF) , Current History , 27 (2): 198– 205, doi : 10.1525/curh.1927.27.2.198 , S2CID 207926889 , archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2018 , retrieved 3 October 2009 Melgunov, Sergei Petrovich (1975), The Red Terror in Russia , Hyperion Press, ISBN 978-0-883-55187-5 Merten, Ulrich (2018), The Gulag in East Germany: Soviet Special Camps 1945–1950 , Amherst, New York: Teneo Press, ISBN 978-1-93484-432-8 Midlarsky, Manus (2005), The Killing Trap: Genocide in the Twentieth Century , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-81545-1 Milne, Seumas (12 September 2002), "The battle for history" , The Guardian , London , retrieved 12 May 2010 Mishra, Pankaj (13 December 2010), "Staying Power" , The New Yorker , ISSN 0028-792X , retrieved 22 May 2018 Möller, Horst (1999), Der rote Holocaust und die Deutschen. Die Debatte um das 'Schwarzbuch des Kommunismus' [ The red Holocaust and the Germans. The debates on the 'Black Book of Communism' ], Piper Verlag , ISBN 978-3-492-04119-5 Montagnes, B. Pablo; Wolton, Stephane (2019), "Mass Purges: Top-Down Accountability in Autocracy" , American Political Science Review , 113 (4), Cambridge University Press: 1045– 1059, doi : 10.1017/S0003055419000455 , S2CID 229169697 Montefiore, Simon Sebag (2005), Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar , New York: Vintage Books , ISBN 978-1-4000-7678-9 , archived from the original on 4 June 2011 , retrieved 10 January 2010 Morré, Jörg (1997), "Einleitung – Sowjetische Internierungslager in der SBZ", in Morré, Jörg (ed.), Speziallager des NKWD. Sowjetische Internierungslager in Brandenburg 1945–1950 (PDF) , Potsdam: Brandenburgische Landeszentrale für politische Bildung, archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2017 , retrieved 13 June 2018 Mosher, Steven W.

(1992), China Misperceived: American Illusions and Chinese Reality , Basic Books , ISBN 978-0-465-09813-2 Naimark, Norman M.

(2001), Fires of Hatred: Ethnic Cleansing in Twentieth-Century Europe , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-00994-3 Naimark, Norman M.

(2010), Stalin's Genocides (Human Rights and Crimes against Humanity) , Princeton University Press , ISBN 978-0-691-14784-0 Neuman, Johanna (13 June 2007).

"Memorial honors communism's victims" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

Neumayer, Laure (2018), The Criminalisation of Communism in the European Political Space after the Cold War , Routledge , ISBN 978-1-351-14174-1 Nove, Alec. "Victims of Stalinism: How Many?". In Getty & Manning (1993) .

Okhotin, N.G.; Roginsky, A.B.

(2007), 'Great Terror': Brief Chronology , Memorial Omestad, Thomas (23 June 2003), "Gulag Nation" , U.S. News & World Report Orizio, Riccardo (2004), Talk of the Devil: Encounters with Seven Dictators , Walker, ISBN 978-0-802-71416-9 Ott, Attiat (2011), "Modeling mass killing" , in Hartley, Keith (ed.), Handbook on the Economics of Conflict , Edward Elgar Publishing, ISBN 978-0-857-93034-7 Paczkowski, Andrzej (2001), "The Storm over the Black Book", The Wilson Quarterly , 25 (2): 28– 34, JSTOR 40260182 Parenti, Michael (1997), Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of Communism , San Francisco: City Lights Books , ISBN 978-0-87286-330-9 Parrish, Michael (1996), The Lesser Terror: Soviet state security, 1939‒1953 , Westport, CT : Praeger Press, ISBN 978-0-275-95113-9 Payaslian, Simon (11 January 2021).

"20th Century Genocides" .

International Relations . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/OBO/9780199743292-0105 .

ISBN 978-0-19-974329-2 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 – via Oxford Bibliographies Online.

Pianciola, Niccolò (2001), "The Collectivization Famine in Kazakhstan, 1931–1933", Harvard Ukrainian Studies , 25 ( 3– 4): 237– 251, JSTOR 41036834 , PMID 20034146 Pipes, Richard (1994), Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime , Vintage Books , ISBN 978-0-679-76184-6 Pipes, Richard (2001), Communism: A History , Modern Library Chronicles , ISBN 978-0-8129-6864-4 Rappaport, Helen (1999), Joseph Stalin: A Biographical Companion , Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO , ISBN 978-1-57607-208-0 Rauch, Jonathan (December 2003), "The Forgotten Millions: Communism is the deadliest fantasy in human history (but does anyone care?)" , The Atlantic Monthly , retrieved 24 April 2010 Ray, Barry (2007), FSU professor's 'Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler' sheds new light on three of the 20th century's bloodiest rulers , Florida State University Rayfield, Donald (2004), Stalin and His Hangmen: The Tyrant and Those Who Killed for Him , Random House , ISBN 978-0-375-50632-1 Revel, Jean François (2009), Last Exit to Utopia: The Survival of Socialism in a Post-Soviet Era , Encounter Books, ISBN 978-1-594-03264-6 Rosefielde, Steven (2010), Red Holocaust , Routledge , ISBN 978-0-415-77757-5 Rousso, Henry ; Goslan, Richard Joseph, eds. (2004), Stalinism and Nazism: History and Memory Compared , University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 978-0-803-29000-6 Rubinstein, William (2014), Genocide , Taylor & Francis, ISBN 9781317869955 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1991), China's Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900 , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-0-88738-417-2 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (November 1993), How Many did Communist Regimes Murder?

, University of Hawaii Political Science Department, archived from the original on 27 August 2018 , retrieved 15 September 2018 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1994), Death by Government , New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-1-56000-927-6 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1997c), Statistics Of Yugoslavia's Democide: Estimates, Calculations, And Sources , University of Hawaii Political Science Department Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1997b), Statistics of North Korean Democide: Estimates, Calculations, and Sources , University of Hawaii Political Science Department Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (2004), "One-Thirteenth of a Data Point Does Not a Generalization Make: A Response to Dulić", Journal of Peace Research , 41 (1), Sage Publications: 103– 104, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.989.5581 , doi : 10.1177/0022343304040500 , S2CID 109403016 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (10 October 2005a), "Reevaluating China's Democide to 73,000,000" , Democratic Peace Blog , Wordpress.com , retrieved 1 December 2012 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1 December 2005b), "Stalin Exceeded Hitler in Monstrous Evil; Mao Beat Out Stalin" , Hawaii Reporter , archived from the original on 17 September 2009 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (2007), China's Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900 , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-1-4128-0670-1 Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (2017), Lethal Politics: Soviet Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1917 , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-351-50887-2 Rutland, Peter (1999), "The Arithmetic of Atrocity", The National Interest , 58 (58): 121– 126, JSTOR 42897230 Saiget, Robert J. (31 May 2009).

"China faces dark memory of Tiananmen" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 30 December 2021 .

Sangar, Eric (3 November 2007), Classicide , Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence , retrieved 6 June 2018 Sarwary, Bilal (27 February 2006), "Kabul's prison of death" , BBC Satter, David (2011), It Was a Long Time Ago, and It Never Happened Anyway: Russia and the Communist Past , Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-17842-5 Sémelin, Jacques (2009), Jaffrelot, Christopher (ed.), Purify and Destroy: The Political Uses of Massacre and Genocide , CERI Series in Comparative Politics and International Studies, translated by Cynthia Schoch, New York: Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-14283-0 Seybolt, Taylor B.; Aronson, Jay D.; Fischoff, Baruch (2013), Counting Civilian Casualties: An Introduction to Recording and Estimating Nonmilitary Deaths in Conflict , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19997-731-4 Shafir, Michael (Summer 2016), "Ideology, Memory and Religion in Post-Communist East Central Europe: A comparative study Focused on Post-Holocaust" , Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies , 15 (44): 52– 110 Шарланов, Диню (2009), История на комунизма в България: Комунизирането на България , Сиела, ISBN 978-954-28-0543-4 Sharlanov, Dinyu; Ganev, Venelin I. (2010), "Crimes Committed by the Communist Regime in Bulgaria" , 'Crimes of the Communist Regimes' Conference Country Report, February 24–26, 2010, Prague , Hanna Arendt Center in Sofia Sharp, Bruce (1 April 2005), Counting Hell: The Death Toll of the Khmer Rouge Regime in Cambodia , retrieved 5 July 2006 Shaw, Martin (2000), Theory of the Global State: Globality as Unfinished Revolution , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-59730-2 Shaw, Martin (2015a), War and Genocide: Organised Killing in Modern Society (reprint ed.), John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-745-69752-9 Shaw, Martin (2015b), What is Genocide , Polity Press, ISBN 978-0-7456-8706-3 Short, Philip (2001), Mao: A Life , Owl Books, ISBN 978-0-8050-6638-8 Short, Philip (2004), Pol Pot: The History of a Nightmare , London: John Murray, ISBN 978-0719565694 Škodová, Alena (23 May 2002), Memorial to the victims of Communism unveiled in Prague , Radio Prague , retrieved 5 December 2020 Snyder, Timothy (2010), Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin , Basic Books , ISBN 978-0-465-00239-9 Snyder, Timothy (27 January 2011), Hitler vs. Stalin: Who Was Worse?

, New York review of Books Solzhenitsyn, Alexander (2 April 2008), Поссорить родные народы??

, Izvestia (in Russian), archived from the original on 5 April 2008 Spoorenberg, Thomas; Schwekendiek, Daniel (2012), "Demographic Changes in North Korea: 1993–2008", Population and Development Review , 38 (1): 133– 158, doi : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2012.00475.x , hdl : 10.1111/j.1728-4457.2012.00475.x Stan, Lavinia ; Nedelsky, Nadya (2015), Post-Communist Transitional Justice , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-107-06556-7 Staub, Ervin (1989), The Roots of Evil: The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-42214-7 Staub, Ervin (June 2000), "Genocide and Mass Killing: Origins, Prevention, Healing and Reconciliation", Political Psychology , 21 (2): 367– 382, doi : 10.1111/0162-895X.00193 , JSTOR 3791796 Staub, Ervin (2011), Overcoming Evil: Genocide, Violent Conflict, and Terrorism , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-195-38204-4 Straus, Scott (April 2007). "Review: Second-Generation Comparative Research on Genocide".

World Politics .

59 (3). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press: 476– 501.

doi : 10.1017/S004388710002089X .

JSTOR 40060166 .

S2CID 144879341 .

Strauss, Julia C. (2014), "Communist Revolution and Political Terror", in Smith, S. A. (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of the History of Communism , Oxford: Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-191-66752-7 Strzembosz, Tomasz (23 December 2001), Interview with Tomasz Strzembosz: Die verschwiegene Kollaboration (PDF) (in German), Transodra, archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2009 , retrieved 10 January 2010 Su, Yang (2003), State Sponsorship or State Failure? Mass Killings in Rural China, 1967–68 , UC Irvine: Center for the Study of Democracy {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Su, Yang (2011), Collective Killings in Rural China during the Cultural Revolution , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-139-49246-1 Szalontai, Balazs (November 2005), "Political and Economic Crisis in North Vietnam, 1955–56", Cold War History , 5 (4): 395– 426, doi : 10.1080/14682740500284630 , S2CID 153956945 Tadesse, Tsegaye (2006), "Verdict due for Ethiopia's ex-dictator Mengistu" , Reuters Tauger, Mark B. (2001), "Natural Disaster and Human Actions in the Soviet Famine of 1931–1933" , The Carl Beck Papers in Russian and East European Studies (1506): 67, doi : 10.5195/CBP.2001.89 , ISSN 2163-839X , archived from the original on 12 June 2017 , retrieved 2 June 2018 Taylor, Frederick (2012), The Berlin Wall: 13 August 1961 - 9 November 1989 , A&C Black, ISBN 978-1-408-83582-1 Thompson, John H. (2008), Russia and the Soviet Union: An Historical Introduction from the Kievan State to the Present (6th ed.), New Haven, Connecticut: Westview Press, ISBN 978-0-8133-4395-2 [ permanent dead link ] Tismăneanu, Vladimir (2012), The Devil in History: Communism, Fascism, and Some Lessons of the Twentieth Century , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-23972-2 Todorova, Maria ; Gille, Zsuzsa (2012), Post-Communist Nostalgia , Berghahn Books, ISBN 978-0-857-45643-4 Totten, Samuel ; Parsons, William S.; Charny, Israel W.

(1997), Century of Genocide: Eyewitness Accounts and Critical Views , Garland, ISBN 978-0-8153-2353-2 Totten, Samuel; Jacobs, Steven L.

(2002), Pioneers of genocide studies , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-0-7658-0151-7 US Congress (1993), Friendship Act (HR3000) (PDF) Ulfelder, Jay; Valentino, Benjamin (2008), Assessing Risks of State-Sponsored Mass Killing , Social Science Research Network , doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1703426 Valentino, Benjamin ; Huth, Paul; Bach-Lindsay, Dylan (2004), "Draining the Sea: mass killing and guerrilla warfare", International Organization , 58 (2), doi : 10.1017/S0020818304582061 , S2CID 154296897 Valentino, Benjamin A. (2005), Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century , Cornell University Press , ISBN 978-0-801-47273-2 van Schaack, Beth (1997), "The Crime of Political Genocide: Repairing the Genocide Convention's Blind Spot", The Yale Law Journal , 106 (7) Verdeja, Ernesto (June 2012). "The Political Science of Genocide: Outlines of an Emerging Research Agenda".

Perspectives on Politics .

10 (2). Washington, D.C.: American Political Science Association: 307– 321.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592712000680 .

JSTOR 41479553 .

S2CID 145170749 .

Vo, Alex-Thai D. (Winter 2015), "Nguyễn Thị Năm and the Land Reform in North Vietnam, 1953" , Journal of Vietnamese Studies , 10 (1): 1– 62, doi : 10.1525/vs.2015.10.1.1 Voicu, George (2018), "Postcommunist Romania's Leading Public Intellectuals and the Holocaust" , in Florian, Alexandru (ed.), Holocaust Public Memory in Postcommunist Romania , Studies in Antisemitism, Indiana University Press, ISBN 978-0-253-03274-4 Volkava, Elena (26 March 2012), The Kazakh Famine of 1930–33 and the Politics of History in the Post-Soviet Space , Wilson Center , retrieved 9 July 2015 Volkogonov, Dmitri (1999), Autopsy for an Empire: The Seven Leaders Who Built the Soviet Regime , Touchstone, ISBN 978-0-684-87112-7 von Plato, Alexander (1999), "Sowjetische Speziallager in Deutschland 1945 bis 1950: Ergebnisse eines deutsch-russischen Kooperationsprojektes", in Reif-Spirek, Peter; Ritscher, Bodo (eds.), Speziallager in der SBZ. Gedenkstätten mit 'doppelter Vergangenheit' , Berlin: Ch. Links Verlag, ISBN 978-3-86153-193-7 Vu, Tuong (2010a), Paths to Development in Asia: South Korea, Vietnam, China, and Indonesia , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-139-48901-0 Vu, Tuong (2010b), "Politburo's Directive Issued on May 4, 1953, on some Special Issues regarding Mass Mobilization", Journal of Vietnamese Studies , 5 (2): 243– 247, doi : 10.1525/vs.2010.5.2.243 Walicki, Andrzej (1997), Marxism and the Leap to the Kingdom of Freedom: The Rise and Fall of the Communist Utopia , Stanford University Press, ISBN 978-0-804-73164-5 Watson, George (1998), The Lost Literature of Socialism , Lutterworth Press, ISBN 978-0-7188-2986-5 Wayman, Frank W.; Tago, Atsushi (January 2010), "Explaining the onset of mass killing, 1949–87", Journal of Peace Research Online , 47 (1), Sage Publications, Ltd.: 3– 13, doi : 10.1177/0022343309342944 , JSTOR 25654524 , S2CID 145155872 Weiner, Amir (2002), "Review. Reviewed Work: The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartošek, Jean-Louis Margolin, Jonathan Murphy, Mark Kramer", The Journal of Interdisciplinary History , 32 (3): 450– 452, doi : 10.1162/002219502753364263 , JSTOR 3656222 , S2CID 142217169 Weiss-Wendt, Anton (2008), "Problems in Comparative Genocide Scholarship", in Stone, Dan (ed.), The Historiography of Genocide , London: Palgrave Macmillan, doi : 10.1057/9780230297784 , ISBN 978-0-230-29778-4 Weitz, Eric D.

(2003), A century of genocide: utopias of race and nation , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-00913-1 Wemheuer, Felix (2014), Famine Politics in Maoist China and the Soviet Union , Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-19581-1 Wheatcroft, Stephen (1996), "The Scale and Nature of German and Soviet Repression and Mass Killings, 1930–45" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 48 (8): 1319– 1353, doi : 10.1080/09668139608412415 Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (1999), "Victims of Stalinism and the Soviet Secret Police: The Comparability and Reliability of the Archival Data. Not the Last Word" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 51 (2): 315– 345, doi : 10.1080/09668139999056 Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (2000), "The Scale and Nature of Stalinist Repression and its Demographic Significance: On Comments by Keep and Conquest" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 52 (6): 1143– 1159, doi : 10.1080/09668130050143860 , PMID 19326595 , S2CID 205667754 Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (2001), О демографических свидетельствах трагедии советской деревни в 1931–1933 гг. (On demographic evidence of the tragedy of the Soviet village in 1931–1933) , Трагедия советской деревни: Коллективизация и раскулачивание 1927–1939 гг.: Документы и материалы. Том 3. Конец 1930–1933 гг., vol. 3, Российская политическая энциклопедия, ISBN 978-5-8243-0225-7 , archived from the original on 20 March 2008 Wheatcroft, Stephen G. (August 2020). "The Complexity of the Kazakh Famine: Food Problems and Faulty Perceptions".

Journal of Genocide Research .

23 (4): 593– 597.

doi : 10.1080/14623528.2020.1807143 .

S2CID 225333205 .

Whine, Michael (27 April 2008), Expanding Holocaust Denial and Legislation , Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, archived from the original on 31 March 2012 , retrieved 24 January 2010 White, Matthew (2011), Atrocities: The 100 Deadliest Episodes in Human History , W. W. Norton & Company, ISBN 978-0-393-08192-3 Wiener, Jon (15 October 2012), How We Forgot the Cold War: A Historical Journey Across America , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-27141-8 Williams, Paul D. (2008), Security Studies: An Introduction , Taylor & Francis , ISBN 978-0-415-42561-2 Wrzesnewskyj, Borys (Office of) (21 June 2019), Foreign Affairs Committee passes motion by Wrzesnewskyj on Crimean Tatar genocide , The Ukrainian Weekly, archived from the original on 19 April 2020 , retrieved 26 December 2019 Yakovlev, Alexander Nikolaevich (2002), A Century of Violence in Soviet Russia , Yale University Press , ISBN 978-0-300-08760-4 Žižek, Slavoj (2006), Mao Zedong: the Marxist Lord of Misrule , EBSCO Publishing, Inc., archived from the original on 17 November 2019 , retrieved 1 December 2019 После продолжительных дебатов Сейм Латвии признал Голодомор геноцидом украинцев [ After a lengthy debate, the Latvian Diet recognized the Holodomor as a genocide of Ukrainians ] (in Russian), Korrespondent.net, 13 March 2008 A Moral Blind Spot , Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation, archived from the original on 31 January 2010 Chechnya: European Parliament recognises the genocide of the Chechen People in 1944 , Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, 27 February 2004, archived from the original on 4 June 2012 , retrieved 23 May 2012 Cornerstone laid for new memorial for victims of communist crimes , ERR News, 4 May 2018 "Court Sentences Mengistu to Death" , BBC , 26 May 2008 Ethiopian Dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam , Human Rights Watch , 24 November 1999 Estonia's Victims of Communism 1940–1991 – The Memorial , retrieved 6 November 2018 "Khmer Rouge: Cambodia's years of brutality" , BBC News , 16 November 2018 The Khmer Rouge Trial Task Force , Royal Government of Cambodia, archived from the original on 17 March 2009 Латвія визнала Голодомор ґеноцидом [ Latvia recognized the Holodomor as a genocide ] (in Ukrainian), BBCUkrainian, 13 March 2008 Латвія визнала Голодомор 1932–33 рр. геноцидом українців [ Latvia recognized the Holodomor of 1932–33 as a genocide of Ukrainians ] (in Ukrainian), Korrespondent.net, 14 March 2008 Latvian Lawmakers Label 1944 Deportation Of Crimean Tatars An Act Of Genocide , RFE/RL, Inc., 10 May 2019 , retrieved 10 May 2019 "The legacy of 100 years of communism: 65 million deaths" , Chicago Tribune , 6 November 2017, archived from the original on 7 November 2017 Lithuanian parliament recognizes Soviet crimes against Crimean Tatars as genocide , The Baltic Times, 6 June 2019 , retrieved 6 June 2019 "Mengistu found guilty of genocide" , BBC , 12 December 2006 , retrieved 2 January 2010 Polish experts lower nation's WWII death toll , AFP/Expatica, 30 July 2009, archived from the original on 6 April 2012 , retrieved 4 November 2009 Saeima pieņem paziņojumu par Krimas tatāru deportāciju 75.gadadienu, atzīstot notikušo par genocīdu , Saeima of the Republic of Latvia, 9 May 2019 , retrieved 11 May 2019 "Senior Khmer Rouge leader charged" , BBC , 19 September 2007 " 'Stalinism' was a collective responsibility – Kremlin papers" , The News in Brief , vol. 7, no. 22, University of Melbourne , 19 June 1998, archived from the original on 29 April 2003 Texts adopted: Final edition EU-Russia relations , Brussels: European Parliament, 26 February 2004, archived from the original on 23 September 2017 , retrieved 22 September 2017 "The Lesser Multicides of the Twentieth Century" , Twentieth Century Atlas – Death Tolls , Matthew White, October 2010, archived from the original on 22 October 2019 , retrieved 21 June 2020 Ukraine's Parliament Recognizes 1944 'Genocide' Of Crimean Tatars , RFE/RL, 12 November 2015 "Ukraine – The famine of 1932–33" , Encyclopædia Britannica , retrieved 26 June 2008 "US admits helping Mengistu escape" , BBC , 22 December 1999 Victims of communism monument could be unveiled next spring , CBC News, 19 March 2018 Victims of Communism Memorial opened in Tallinn , ERR News, 24 August 2018 "Wall of Grief: Putin opens first Soviet victims memorial" , BBC News , 30 October 2017 When the State Kills: The Death Penalty v. Human Rights , Amnesty International, 1989 Makuch, Andrij.

"The famine of 1932–1933" .

Encyclopædia Britannica online .

Archived from the original on 23 November 2015 . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

The Great Famine (Holodomor) of 1932–1933 – a man-made demographic catastrophe unprecedented in peacetime. Of the estimated six to eight million people who died in the Soviet Union, about four to five million were Ukrainians ... Its deliberate nature is underscored by the fact that no physical basis for famine existed in Ukraine ... Soviet authorities set requisition quotas for Ukraine at an impossibly high level. Brigades of special agents were dispatched to Ukraine to assist in procurement, and homes were routinely searched and foodstuffs confiscated ... The rural population was left with insufficient food to feed itself.

Mace, James (1986).

"The man-made famine of 1933 in Soviet Ukraine" . In Serbyn, Roman; Krawchenko, Bohdan (eds.).

Famine in Ukraine in 1932–1933 . Canada: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies .

ISBN 9780092862434 .

Lemkin, Raphael (2008) [1953].

"Soviet Genocide in the Ukraine" (PDF) . In Luciuk, Lubomyr; Grekul, Lisa (eds.).

Holodomor: Reflections on the Great Famine of 1932–1933 in Soviet Ukraine . Kashtan Press.

ISBN 978-1896354330 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bibliographies Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War § Violence and terror Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War § Violence and terror Bibliography of the Soviet Union during World War II § Genocide, ethnic cleansing, and war crimes Bibliography of Ukrainian history § Gulag, ethnic cleansing and terror Bibliography of the history of Central Asia § Violence, terror, and famine Bibliography of the history of Belarus and Byelorussia § Violence and terror Bibliography of Poland during World War II § War crimes General Courtois, Stéphane , ed. (1999), The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression , translated by Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer; Mark Kramer (consulting ed.), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2 Fein, Helen (1993), Genocide: a sociological perspective; Contextual and Comparative Studies I: Ideological Genocides , Sage Publications , ISBN 978-0-8039-8829-3 Ghodsee, Kristen (2017), Red Hangover: Legacies of Twentieth-Century Communism , Duke University Press , ISBN 978-0-822-36949-3 Mann, Michael (2005), The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing , New York: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-53854-1 Semelin, Jacques (2009), "Destroying to Subjugate: Communist regimes: Reshaping the social body" , in Jaffrelot, Christophe (ed.), Purify and Destroy: The Political Uses of Massacre and Genocide , CERI Series in Comparative Politics and International Studies, translated by Cynthia Schoch, New York: Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-14283-0 Totten, Samuel ; Paul Robert Bartrop; Steven L. Jacobs (2008), "Communism" , Dictionary of genocide , vol. 1, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-313-34642-2 Valentino, Benjamin (2005), Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the Twentieth Century , Cornell University Press , ISBN 978-0-801-47273-2 Watson, George (1998), The Lost Literature of Socialism , Lutterworth Press, ISBN 978-0-7188-2986-5 White, Matthew (2011), "The Black Chapter of Communism" , Atrocities: The 100 Deadliest Episodes in Human History , W.W. Norton & Company, ISBN 978-0-393-08192-3 Soviet Union Deker, Nikolai; Institute for the study of the U.S.S.R. Munich (1958), Genocide in the USSR: studies in group destruction , Scarecrow Press Weiss-Wendt, Anton (December 2005), "Hostage of Politics Raphael Lemkin on 'Soviet Genocide' " (PDF) , Journal of Genocide Research , 7 (4): 551– 559, doi : 10.1080/14623520500350017 , S2CID 144612446 , archived from the original (PDF) on June 10, 2007 Wheatcroft, Stephen (1996), "The Scale and Nature of German and Soviet Repression and Mass Killings, 1930–45" (PDF) , Europe-Asia Studies , 48 (8): 1319– 1353, doi : 10.1080/09668139608412415 China Lorenz, Andreas (15 May 2007), "The Chinese Cultural Revolution: Remembering Mao's Victims" , Der Spiegel Online Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (2011), China's Bloody Century: Genocide and Mass Murder Since 1900 , Transaction Publishers, ISBN 978-1-412-81400-3 Song, Yongyi (25 August 2011), "Chronology of Mass Killings during the Chinese Cultural Revolution (1966–1976)" , Online Encyclopedia of Mass Violence , ISSN 1961-9898 [ permanent dead link ] Cambodia Barron, John; Paul, Anthony (1977), Murder of A Gentle Land, The Untold Story of Communist Genocide in Cambodia , Reader's Digest Press, ISBN 978-0-88349-129-4 Sarup, Kamala (5 September 2005), Communist Genocide In Cambodia (PDF) , Genocide Watch, archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2010 , retrieved 30 September 2009 Others Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1997), Statistics Of Yugoslavia's Democide: Estimates, Calculations, And Sources , University of Hawaii Political Science Department —— (1997), Statistics of North Korean Democide: Estimates, Calculations, and Sources , University of Hawaii Political Science Department Sharlanov, Dinyu; Ganev, Venelin I. (2010), "Crimes Committed by the Communist Regime in Bulgaria" , 'Crimes of the Communist Regimes' Conference Country Report, February 24–26, 2010, Prague , Hanna Arendt Center in Sofia External links [ edit ] Media related to Communist repression at Wikimedia Commons v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Genocide Genocides ( chronological list ) Before 1490 Destruction of Carthage (146 BCE) Asiatic Vespers (88 BCE) Gauls (50s BCE) Eburones Bar Kokhba (132–136) Ancestral Puebloans (800s) Harrying of the North (1069–1070) Mongol conquests (1200s–1360s) Cathars (1209–1229) Mongols in the Delhi Sultanate (1311) Timurid conquests (1393–1394) Guanches (1402–1496) 1490 to 1912 Taíno (1493–1550) Jaragua massacre (1503) Ainu (1500s–) Indigenous peoples in Brazil 11th Parallel massacre (1963) Tanaru (1970s–2009) Helmet massacre (1988) Akuntsu (1990) Haximu (1993) Yanomami (2019–2023) Aztecs (1521) Kashmiri Shias (1548–1872) Huguenots (1572) Kalinago (1626) Indigenous peoples in the United States Pequots (1636–1638) Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Huron Sullivan Expedition (1779) Indian removal (1830–1847) Trail of Tears (1830–1850) California (1846–1873) Dakota (1862) Osage Indian murders (1918–1931) Cultural genocide Indigenous peoples in Canada Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Beothuk (1700s–1800s) Residential school system (1874–1996) Sixties Scoop (1951–1985) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Jews in the Cossack Hetmanate (1648–1657) 1740 Batavia massacre (1740) Great Gypsy Round-up (1749) Dzungars (1750s) Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II (1780–1783) Chechens (1785–2017) French Hatians (1804) Meiteis (1819–1826) Indigenous peoples in Australia Black War (1825–1832) Stolen Generations (1869–1977) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Pacification of Algeria (1830–1875) El Ouffia Charrúa (1831) Moriori (1835) Assyrians in Hakkari (1843–1846) Manchus (1850–1864) Circassians (1860s) Mapuche (1870s–1884) Indigenous peoples in Putumayo (1879–1913) Congolese (1885–1908) Hazaras (1888–1893) Selknam (1890s–1900s) Hamidian massacres (1894–1896) Herero and Nama (1904–1907) Ukame (1905–1907) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) 1913 to 1945 Late Ottoman genocides Greeks (1913–1923) Pontic Greeks Thracian Bulgarians (1913) Assyrians (1915–1919) Armenians (1915–1917) Christians in Diyarbekir (1915) Kurds (1916–1934) Indigenous peoples in Venezuela Pemon Kyrgyz (1916–1917) Jews during the Russian Civil War (1917–1920) Russian White Terror Cossacks (1919–1933) Ingrian Finns (1920s–1930s) Volga Tatars and Germans (1921–1922) Kantō Massacre (1923) Napalpí massacre (1924) Swiss Yenish, Sinti, and Manouche (1926–1973) Japanese war crimes in the Pacific War Manchukuo (1931–1945) Nanjing Massacre (1937–1938) Three Alls policy (1940–1942) Sook Ching (1942) Nanshitou massacre (1942–1945) Libyan Arabs (1929–1934) Kazakhs (1930–1933) La Matanza (1932) Holodomor (1932–1933) Simele massacre (1933) Romani Holocaust (1935–1945) Spanish White Terror (1936–1947) Yekatit 12 (1937) Polish Operation (1937–1938) Alevi Kurds (1937–1938) Parsley massacre (1937) Generalplan Ost (1939–1945) Poland Baltic lands Croatia Czech lands Ukraine Hunger Plan The Holocaust (1941–1945) German atrocities committed against Soviet POWs (1941–1945) Serbs in Croatia (1941–1945) Muslims and Croats in Serbia (1941–1945) Volhynian and Eastern Galician Poles (1943–1945) Chechens and Ingush (1944–1948) Crimean Tatars (1944–1948) 1946 to 1999 Hyderabadi Muslims (1948) Indigenous peoples in Paraguay (1956–1989) Maya (1962–1996) Papua (1962–) Arab and Indian Zanzibaris (1964) 1966 anti-Igbo pogrom (1966) Biafra (1966–1970) Equatoguinean (1969–1979) Feyli Kurds (1970–2003) Bangladesh (1971) Acholi and Lango (1972–1979) Burundi 1972 1993 East Timor (1974–1999) Cambodian (1975–1979) Jummas (1977–1997) Afghans (1979–1989) Baganda (1981–1985) 1982 Hama massacre (1982) Sabra and Shatila massacre (1982) Sri Lankan Tamils (1983–2009) Gukurahundi (1983–1987) Anfal (1986–1989) Isaaq (1987–1989) National Population Program (1987–2002) Amhara (1990–) Ahwaris (1991–2003) Bosnian (1992–1995) Srebrenica massacre Rwandan (1994) Hutus during the First Congo War (1996–1997) 21st century Effacer le tableau (2002–2003) Darfur (2003–) Masalit massacres Iraqi Sunni Arabs (2003–) Southern Kaduna (2011–2023) Iraqi Turkmen (2014–2017) Yazidis (2014–2017) Shias under ISIS (2014–) Christians under ISIS (2014–) Rohingyas, Kachins, and Burmese Muslims (2017–) Tigrayans, Kunamas, and Irobs (2020–2022) Bucha massacre (2022) Gazans (2023–) Terms Cultural genocide Democide Autogenocide Domicide Ecocide Ethnocide Eugenics Gendercide Androcide Transgender genocide Genocide of indigenous peoples Memoricide Policide Politicide Classicide Eliticide Utilitarian genocide War of annihilation Methods Cultural genocide Death marches Death squades Ethnic cleansing Extermination camp Forced adoption Forced assimilation Forced conversion Incitement Massacres Killing Fields Pogroms Mass killing Rape Settler colonialism Urbicide Denial The Holocaust Trivialization Armenian Japanese history textbook controversies Nanjing Serbian Bosnian Rwandan Holodomor Cambodian Indigenous Issues Definitions Names of the Holocaust Terminology of the Armenian genocide Holocaust terminology Genocide law Prevention Effects on young survivors Politics of recognition Justification Mass killings under communist regimes Anti-communist mass killings Legal proceedings Holocaust trials (1943–2022) Krasnodar trial (1943) Kharkov trial (1943) Épuration légale (1944–1951) Majdanek trials (1944–1989) Chełmno trials (1945–2001) Dachau trials (1945–1947) Belsen trials (1945–1948) Euthanasia trials (1945–1949) Nuremberg trial (1945–1946) Minsk trial (1945–1946) Riga trial (1946) Stutthof trials (1946–1947) Post–World War II Romanian war crime trials (1946–1953) Supreme National Tribunal (1946–1948) Hamburg Ravensbrück trials (1946–1948) Nuremberg Military Tribunals (1946–1949) Erich von Manstein (1949) Ulm Einsatzkommando trial (1958) War crimes trials in Soviet Estonia (1961–1962) Eichmann trial (1961) Belzec trial (1963–1965) Frankfurt Auschwitz trials (1963–1989) Treblinka trials (1964–1970) Sobibor trial (1965–1966) Fedorenko trial (1986) Finta trial (1994) 20th century Budak trial (1945) International Military Tribunal for the Far East (1946–1948) Belgrade Process (1946) Nanjing War Crimes Tribunal (1946–1948) Bosnian genocide case (1993–2007) International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993–2017) Slobodan Milošević (2002–2006) Radovan Karadžić (2008–2016) Ratko Mladić (2011–2017) Trials of the Derg members (1994–2008) International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (1994–2015) Khmer Rouge Tribunal (1997–2022) Croatia–Serbia genocide case (1999–2015) 21st century International Criminal Court investigation in Darfur (2005–) Permanent Peoples' Tribunal on Sri Lanka (2010–2023) International Crimes Tribunal of Bangladesh (2012–) Mohammad Salimullah v. Union of India (2017) Rohingya genocide case (2019–) International Criminal Court investigation in Bangladesh/Myanmar (2019–) Uyghur Tribunal (2020–2021) International Criminal Court investigation in Ukraine (2022–) Ukraine v. Russian Federation (2022–) South Africa v. Israel (2023–) Defense for Children International – Palestine et al v. Biden et al (2023–2024) Nicaragua v. Germany (2024) v t e Extrajudicial killing by country Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Belarus Brazil Chile Egypt Ethiopia India Iran Iraq Israel Kenya Mexico Mozambique Nigeria Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Russia South Africa Spain Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States Venezuela NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4b2tr
Cached time: 20250815233222
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.995 seconds
Real time usage: 4.350 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 31147/1000000
Revision size: 201346/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 977475/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 31473/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 231/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1075027/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.805/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10856124/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3701.420      1 -total
 46.97% 1738.631    293 Template:Citation
 15.73%  582.200    195 Template:Sfn
 13.66%  505.545      1 Template:Reflist
  4.30%  159.319     26 Template:Cite_book
  3.55%  131.247      2 Template:Communism
  3.24%  120.104      1 Template:World_topic
  2.63%   97.398      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
  2.56%   94.878     10 Template:Navbox
  2.52%   93.163      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23849734:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815233222 and revision id 1305697194. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mass_killings_under_communist_regimes&oldid=1305697194 " Categories : Mass killings by communist regimes 20th-century controversies Communist states Communist repression Communist terrorism Genocides Mass murders Political and cultural purges Political repression Political violence Politicides Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from September 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from September 2021 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from September 2023 Articles needing more viewpoints from December 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with dead external links from October 2023 Articles with dead external links from February 2023 CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mass killings under communist regimes 16 languages Add topic

