Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Overview 3 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 3.1 Panel reports 3.2 Narratives 3.3 Trade imbalances and debt bubbles 3.4 Monetary policy 3.5 High private debt levels 3.6 Pre-recession warnings 3.7 Housing bubbles 3.8 Ineffective regulation 3.8.1 Derivatives 3.8.2 Shadow banking system 3.9 Regulations encouraging lax lending standards 3.10 Systemic crisis 4 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 4.1 Effects on the United States 4.2 Effects on Europe 4.3 Effects on democracy 4.4 Countries that avoided recession 5 Timeline of effects Toggle Timeline of effects subsection 5.1 Country specific details about recession timelines 6 Political instability related to the economic crisis 7 Policy responses Toggle Policy responses subsection 7.1 United States policy responses 7.2 Asia-Pacific policy responses 7.3 European policy responses 7.4 Global responses 8 Policy recommendations Toggle Policy recommendations subsection 8.1 IMF recommendation 8.2 Raising interest rates 9 Comparisons with the Great Depression 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Great Recession 51 languages Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 پښتو Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2007–2009 international economic decline For background on financial market events beginning in 2007, see 2008 financial crisis . For the 2020 recession, see COVID-19 recession .

Not to be confused with the Great Depression during the 1930s or the Great Resignation .

Great Recession World map showing real GDP growth rates for 2009; countries in brown were in a recession.

Date December 2007 – June 2009 (c. 1 year; 7 months) Location Worldwide Type Recession Cause (disputed) Real-estate bubbles bursting US housing policy Limited financial regulation Outcome Impact differed geographically Part of a series on the Great Recession Major aspects Subprime mortgage crisis 2000s energy crisis 2000s United States housing bubble 2000s United States housing market correction 2008 financial crisis 2008–2010 automotive industry crisis Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act Euro area crisis Causes Causes of the European debt crisis Causes of the 2000s United States housing bubble Credit rating agencies and the subprime crisis Government policies and the subprime mortgage crisis Summit meetings 34th G8 summit (July 2008) G-20 Washington summit (November 2008) APEC Peru (November 2008) China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit (December 2008) G-20 London Summit (April 2009) Government response and policy proposals 2008 European Union stimulus plan 2008–2009 Keynesian resurgence American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 Chinese economic stimulus program Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 Federal Reserve responses to the subprime crisis Government intervention during the subprime mortgage crisis Green New Deal Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 National fiscal policy response to the Great Recession Regulatory responses to the subprime crisis Subprime mortgage crisis solutions debate Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Troubled Asset Relief Program Business failures American International Group Chrysler Citigroup Fannie Mae Freddie Mac General Motors Lehman Brothers Royal Bank of Scotland Group UBS Regions Africa Americas South America United States Asia Europe Oceania Timeline v t e The Great Recession was a period of market decline in economies around the world that occurred from late 2007 to mid-2009, [ 1 ] overlapping with the closely related 2008 financial crisis . The scale and timing of the recession varied from country to country (see map).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] At the time, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded that it was the most severe economic and financial meltdown since the Great Depression .

The causes of the Great Recession include a combination of vulnerabilities that developed in the financial system, along with a series of triggering events that began with the bursting of the United States housing bubble in 2005–2012. When housing prices fell and homeowners began to abandon their mortgages, the value of mortgage-backed securities held by investment banks declined in 2007–2008, causing several to collapse or be bailed out in September 2008. This 2007–2008 phase was called the subprime mortgage crisis .

The combination of banks being unable to provide funds to businesses and homeowners paying down debt rather than borrowing and spending resulted in the Great Recession. The recession officially began in the U.S. in December 2007 and lasted until June 2009, thus extending over 19 months.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] As with most other recessions, it appears that no known formal theoretical or empirical model was able to accurately predict the advance of this recession, except for minor signals in the sudden rise of forecast probabilities, which were still well under 50%.

[ 6 ] The recession was not felt equally around the world; whereas most of the world's developed economies , particularly in North America, South America and Europe, fell into a severe, sustained recession, many more recently developing economies suffered far less impact, particularly China , India and Indonesia , whose economies grew substantially during this period. Similarly, Oceania suffered minimal impact , in part due to its proximity to Asian markets.

Terminology [ edit ] Two definitions of the term "economic recession" exist: one sense referring generally to "a period of reduced economic activity" [ 7 ] and ongoing hardship; and a technical definition used in economics , which is defined operationally , specifically the contraction phase of a business cycle with two or more consecutive quarters of GDP contraction (negative GDP growth rate). The latter is typically used to influence abrupt changes in monetary policy.

Under the technical definition, the recession ended in the United States in June or July 2009.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Journalist Robert Kuttner has argued that 'The Great Recession' is a misnomer. According to Kuttner, "recessions are mild dips in the business cycle that are either self-correcting or soon cured by modest fiscal or monetary stimulus. Because of the continuing deflationary trap, it would be more accurate to call this decade's stagnant economy The Lesser Depression or The Great Deflation." [ 12 ] Overview [ edit ] The Great Recession met the IMF criteria for being a global recession only in the single calendar year 2009.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] That IMF definition requires a decline in annual real world GDP per‑capita . Despite the fact that quarterly data are being used as recession definition criteria by all G20 members , representing 85% of the world GDP , [ 15 ] the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has decided – in the absence of a complete data set – not to declare/measure global recessions according to quarterly GDP data. The seasonally adjusted PPP ‑weighted real GDP for the G20‑zone, however, is a good indicator for the world GDP, and it was measured to have suffered a direct quarter on quarter decline during the three quarters from Q3‑2008 until Q1‑2009, which more accurately mark when the recession took place at the global level.

[ 16 ] According to the U.S.

National Bureau of Economic Research (the official arbiter of U.S. recessions), the recession began in December 2007 and ended in June 2009, and thus extended over eighteen months.

[ 5 ] [ 17 ] A bank run at a branch of the Northern Rock bank in Brighton , England, on September 14, 2007, amid speculation of problems, prior to its 2008 nationalisation The years leading up to the crisis were characterized by an exorbitant rise in asset prices and associated boom in economic demand.

[ 18 ] Further, the U.S.

shadow banking system (i.e., non-depository financial institutions such as investment banks) had grown to rival the depository system yet was not subject to the same regulatory oversight, making it vulnerable to a bank run .

[ 19 ] U.S.

mortgage-backed securities , which had risks that were hard to assess, were marketed around the world, as they offered higher yields than U.S. government bonds. Many of these securities were backed by subprime mortgages, which collapsed in value when the U.S. housing bubble burst during 2006 and homeowners began to default on their mortgage payments in large numbers starting in 2007.

[ 20 ] The emergence of subprime loan losses in 2007 began the crisis and exposed other risky loans and over-inflated asset prices. With loan losses mounting and the fall of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, a major panic broke out on the inter-bank loan market. There was the equivalent of a bank run on the shadow banking system , resulting in many large and well established investment banks and commercial banks in the United States and Europe suffering huge losses and even facing bankruptcy, resulting in massive public financial assistance (government bailouts).

[ 21 ] The global recession that followed resulted in a sharp drop in international trade , rising unemployment and slumping commodity prices.

[ 22 ] Several economists predicted that recovery might not appear until 2011 and that the recession would be the worst since the Great Depression of the 1930s.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Economist Paul Krugman once commented on this as seemingly the beginning of "a second Great Depression".

[ 25 ] Governments and central banks responded with fiscal policy and monetary policy initiatives to stimulate national economies and reduce financial system risks. The recession renewed interest in Keynesian economic ideas on how to combat recessionary conditions. Economists advise that the stimulus measures such as quantitative easing (pumping money into the system) and holding down central bank wholesale lending interest rates should be withdrawn as soon as economies recover enough to "chart a path to sustainable growth ".

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] The distribution of household incomes in the United States became more unequal during the post-2008 economic recovery .

[ 29 ] Income inequality in the United States grew from 2005 to 2012 in more than two thirds of metropolitan areas.

[ 30 ] Median household wealth fell 35% in the U.S., from $106,591 to $68,839 between 2005 and 2011.

[ 31 ] Causes [ edit ] Main article: Causes of the Great Recession Further information: 2008 financial crisis The inverted yield curve in 2008 caused an elevated level of unemployment relative to job openings to get the housing bubble prices down.

Total unemployed people Total job openings Total quits Panel reports [ edit ] The great asset bubble: [ 32 ] 1.

Central banks' gold reserves: $0.845 trillion 2.

M0 (paper money): $3.9 trillion 3.

Traditional (fractional reserve) banking assets: $39 trillion 4.

Shadow banking assets: $62 trillion 5.

Other assets: $290 trillion 6.

Bail-out money (early 2009): $1.9 trillion The U.S.

Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission , composed of six Democratic and four Republican appointees, reported its majority findings in January 2011. It concluded that "the crisis was avoidable and was caused by: Widespread failures in financial regulation, including the Federal Reserve's failure to stem the tide of toxic mortgages; Dramatic breakdowns in corporate governance including too many financial firms acting recklessly and taking on too much risk; An explosive mix of excessive borrowing and risk by households and Wall Street that put the financial system on a collision course with crisis; Key policy makers ill prepared for the crisis, lacking a full understanding of the financial system they oversaw; and systemic breaches in accountability and ethics at all levels." [ 33 ] There were two Republican dissenting FCIC reports. One of them, signed by three Republican appointees, concluded that there were multiple causes. In his separate dissent to the majority and minority opinions of the FCIC, Commissioner Peter J. Wallison of the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) primarily blamed U.S. housing policy, including the actions of Fannie and Freddie , for the crisis. He wrote: "When the bubble began to deflate in mid-2007, the low quality and high risk loans engendered by government policies failed in unprecedented numbers." [ 34 ] In its "Declaration of the Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy," dated November 15, 2008, leaders of the Group of 20 cited the following causes: During a period of strong global growth, growing capital flows, and prolonged stability earlier this decade, market participants sought higher yields without an adequate appreciation of the risks and failed to exercise proper due diligence. At the same time, weak underwriting standards, unsound risk management practices, increasingly complex and opaque financial products, and consequent excessive leverage combined to create vulnerabilities in the system. Policy-makers, regulators and supervisors, in some advanced countries, did not adequately appreciate and address the risks building up in financial markets, keep pace with financial innovation, or take into account the systemic ramifications of domestic regulatory actions.

[ 35 ] Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke testified in September 2010 before the FCIC regarding the causes of the crisis. He wrote that there were shocks or triggers (i.e., particular events that touched off the crisis) and vulnerabilities (i.e., structural weaknesses in the financial system, regulation and supervision) that amplified the shocks. Examples of triggers included: losses on subprime mortgage securities that began in 2007 and a run on the shadow banking system that began in the middle of 2007, which adversely affected the functioning of money markets. Examples of vulnerabilities in the private sector included: financial institution dependence on unstable sources of short-term funding such as repurchase agreements or Repos; deficiencies in corporate risk management; excessive use of leverage (borrowing to invest); and inappropriate usage of derivatives as a tool for taking excessive risks. Examples of vulnerabilities in the public sector included: statutory gaps and conflicts between regulators; ineffective use of regulatory authority; and ineffective crisis management capabilities. Bernanke also discussed " Too big to fail " institutions, monetary policy, and trade deficits.

[ 4 ] Narratives [ edit ] U.S. residential and non-residential investment fell relative to GDP during the crisis.

There are several "narratives" attempting to place the causes of the recession into context, with overlapping elements. Five such narratives include: There was the equivalent of a bank run on the shadow banking system , which includes investment banks and other non-depository financial entities. This system had grown to rival the depository system in scale yet was not subject to the same regulatory safeguards. Its failure disrupted the flow of credit to consumers and corporations.

[ 21 ] [ 36 ] The U.S. economy was being driven by a housing bubble. When it burst, private residential investment (i.e., housing construction) fell by over four percent of GDP.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Consumption enabled by bubble-generated housing wealth also slowed. This created a gap in annual demand (GDP) of nearly $1 trillion. The U.S. government was unwilling to make up for this private sector shortfall.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Record levels of household debt accumulated in the decades preceding the crisis resulted in a balance sheet recession (similar to debt deflation ) once housing prices began falling in 2006. Consumers began paying off debt, which reduces their consumption, slowing down the economy for an extended period while debt levels are reduced.

[ 21 ] [ 41 ] U.S. government policies encouraged home ownership even for those who could not afford it, contributing to lax lending standards, unsustainable housing price increases, and indebtedness.

[ 42 ] Wealthy and middle-class house flippers with mid-to-good credit scores created a speculative bubble in house prices, and then wrecked local housing markets and financial institutions after they defaulted on their debt en masse.

[ 43 ] Underlying narratives #1–3 is a hypothesis that growing income inequality and wage stagnation encouraged families to increase their household debt to maintain their desired living standard, fueling the bubble. Further, this greater share of income flowing to the top increased the political power of business interests, who used that power to deregulate or limit regulation of the shadow banking system.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Narrative #5 challenges the popular claim (narrative #4) that subprime borrowers with shoddy credit caused the crisis by buying homes they couldn't afford. This narrative is supported by new research showing that the biggest growth of mortgage debt during the U.S. housing boom came from those with good credit scores in the middle and top of the credit score distribution – and that these borrowers accounted for a disproportionate share of defaults.

[ 47 ] Trade imbalances and debt bubbles [ edit ] U.S. households and financial businesses significantly increased borrowing (leverage) in the years leading up to the crisis.

The Economist wrote in July 2012 that the inflow of investment dollars required to fund the U.S. trade deficit was a major cause of the housing bubble and financial crisis: "The trade deficit, less than 1% of GDP in the early 1990s, hit 6% in 2006. That deficit was financed by inflows of foreign savings, in particular from East Asia and the Middle East. Much of that money went into dodgy mortgages to buy overvalued houses, and the financial crisis was the result." [ 48 ] In May 2008, NPR explained in their Peabody Award winning program " The Giant Pool of Money " that a vast inflow of savings from developing nations flowed into the mortgage market, driving the U.S. housing bubble. This pool of fixed income savings increased from around $35 trillion in 2000 to about $70 trillion by 2008. NPR explained this money came from various sources, "[b]ut the main headline is that all sorts of poor countries became kind of rich, making things like TVs and selling us oil. China, India, Abu Dhabi, Saudi Arabia made a lot of money and banked it." [ 49 ] Describing the crisis in Europe, Paul Krugman wrote in February 2012 that: "What we're basically looking at, then, is a balance of payments problem, in which capital flooded south after the creation of the euro, leading to overvaluation in southern Europe." [ 50 ] Monetary policy [ edit ] Another narrative about the origin has been focused on the respective parts played by public monetary policy (notably in the US) and by the practices of private financial institutions. In the U.S., mortgage funding was unusually decentralised, opaque, and competitive, and it is believed that competition between lenders for revenue and market share contributed to declining underwriting standards and risky lending.

While Alan Greenspan's role as Chairman of the Federal Reserve has been widely discussed, the main point of controversy remains the lowering of the Federal funds rate to 1% for more than a year, which, according to Austrian theorists , injected huge amounts of "easy" credit-based money into the financial system and created an unsustainable economic boom.

[ 51 ] There is an argument that Greenspan's actions in the years 2002–2004 were actually motivated by the need to take the U.S. economy out of the early 2000s recession caused by the bursting of the dot-com bubble : although by doing so he did not avert the crisis, but only postponed it.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] High private debt levels [ edit ] US household debt relative to disposable income and GDP U.S. Changes in Household Debt as a percentage of GDP for 1989–2016. Homeowners paying down debt for 2009–2012 was a headwind to the recovery. Economist Carmen Reinhart explained that this behavior tends to slow recoveries from financial crises relative to typical recessions.

[ 54 ] Another narrative focuses on high levels of private debt in the US economy. USA household debt as a percentage of annual disposable personal income was 127% at the end of 2007, versus 77% in 1990.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Faced with increasing mortgage payments as their adjustable rate mortgage payments increased, households began to default in record numbers, rendering mortgage-backed securities worthless. High private debt levels also impact growth by making recessions deeper and the following recovery weaker.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Robert Reich claims the amount of debt in the US economy can be traced to economic inequality , assuming that middle-class wages remained stagnant while wealth concentrated at the top, and households "pull equity from their homes and overload on debt to maintain living standards".

[ 59 ] The IMF reported in April 2012: "Household debt soared in the years leading up to the downturn. In advanced economies, during the five years preceding 2007, the ratio of household debt to income rose by an average of 39 percentage points, to 138 percent. In Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Norway, debt peaked at more than 200 percent of household income. A surge in household debt to historic highs also occurred in emerging economies such as Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, and Lithuania. The concurrent boom in both house prices and the stock market meant that household debt relative to assets held broadly stable, which masked households' growing exposure to a sharp fall in asset prices. When house prices declined, leading to the 2008 financial crisis , many households saw their wealth shrink relative to their debt, and, with less income and more unemployment, found it harder to meet mortgage payments. By the end of 2011, real house prices had fallen from their peak by about 41% in Ireland, 29% in Iceland, 23% in Spain and the United States, and 21% in Denmark. Household defaults, underwater mortgages (where the loan balance exceeds the house value), foreclosures, and fire sales are now endemic to a number of economies. Household deleveraging by paying off debts or defaulting on them has begun in some countries. It has been most pronounced in the United States, where about two-thirds of the debt reduction reflects defaults." [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Pre-recession warnings [ edit ] The onset of the economic crisis took most people by surprise. A 2009 paper identifies twelve economists and commentators who, between 2000 and 2006, predicted a recession based on the collapse of the then-booming housing market in the United States: [ 62 ] Dean Baker , Wynne Godley , Fred Harrison , Michael Hudson , Eric Janszen , Med Jones [ 63 ] Steve Keen , Jakob Brøchner Madsen , Jens Kjaer Sørensen, Kurt Richebächer , Nouriel Roubini , Peter Schiff , and Robert Shiller .

[ 62 ] [ 64 ] Housing bubbles [ edit ] Further information: Real-estate bubble Housing price appreciation in selected countries, 2002–2008 By 2007, real estate bubbles were still under way in many parts of the world, [ 65 ] especially in the United States , France, the United Kingdom , Spain , the Netherlands, Australia, the United Arab Emirates, New Zealand , Ireland , Poland , [ 66 ] South Africa , Greece , Bulgaria , Croatia , [ 67 ] Norway , Singapore , South Korea , Sweden , Finland , Argentina , [ 68 ] the Baltic states , India , Romania , Ukraine and China .

[ 69 ] U.S. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said in mid-2005 that "at a minimum, there's a little 'froth' [in the U.S. housing market]...it's hard not to see that there are a lot of local bubbles".

[ 70 ] The Economist , writing at the same time, went further, saying, "[T]he worldwide rise in house prices is the biggest bubble in history".

[ 71 ] Real estate bubbles are (by definition of the word "bubble") followed by a price decrease (also known as a housing price crash ) that can result in many owners holding negative equity (a mortgage debt higher than the current value of the property).

Ineffective regulation [ edit ] Derivatives [ edit ] Several sources have noted the failure of the US government to supervise or even require transparency of the financial instruments known as derivatives .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Derivatives such as credit default swaps (CDSs) were unregulated or barely regulated.

Michael Lewis noted CDSs enabled speculators to stack bets on the same mortgage securities. This is analogous to allowing many persons to buy insurance on the same house. Speculators that bought CDS protection were betting significant mortgage security defaults would occur, while the sellers (such as AIG ) bet they would not. An unlimited amount could be wagered on the same housing-related securities, provided buyers and sellers of the CDS could be found.

[ 75 ] When massive defaults occurred on underlying mortgage securities, companies like AIG that were selling CDS were unable to perform their side of the obligation and defaulted; U.S. taxpayers paid over $100 billion to global financial institutions to honor AIG obligations, generating considerable outrage.

[ 76 ] A 2008 investigative article in The Washington Post found leading government officials at the time (Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan , Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin , and SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt ) vehemently opposed any regulation of derivatives. In 1998, Brooksley E. Born , head of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission , put forth a policy paper asking for feedback from regulators, lobbyists, and legislators on the question of whether derivatives should be reported, sold through a central facility, or whether capital requirements should be required of their buyers. Greenspan, Rubin, and Levitt pressured her to withdraw the paper and Greenspan persuaded Congress to pass a resolution preventing CFTC from regulating derivatives for another six months – when Born's term of office would expire.

[ 73 ] Ultimately, it was the collapse of a specific kind of derivative, the mortgage-backed security , that triggered the economic crisis of 2008.

[ 74 ] Shadow banking system [ edit ] Securitization markets were impaired during the crisis.

Paul Krugman wrote in 2009 that the run on the shadow banking system was the fundamental cause of the crisis. "As the shadow banking system expanded to rival or even surpass conventional banking in importance, politicians and government officials should have realised that they were re-creating the kind of financial vulnerability that made the Great Depression possible – and they should have responded by extending regulations and the financial safety net to cover these new institutions. Influential figures should have proclaimed a simple rule: anything that does what a bank does, anything that has to be rescued in crises the way banks are, should be regulated like a bank." He referred to this lack of controls as "malign neglect".

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] During 2008, three of the largest U.S. investment banks either went bankrupt ( Lehman Brothers ) or were sold at fire sale prices to other banks ( Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch ). The investment banks were not subject to the more stringent regulations applied to depository banks. These failures exacerbated the instability in the global financial system. The remaining two investment banks, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs , potentially facing failure, opted to become commercial banks, thereby subjecting themselves to more stringent regulation but receiving access to credit via the Federal Reserve.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Further, American International Group (AIG) had insured mortgage-backed and other securities but was not required to maintain sufficient reserves to pay its obligations when debtors defaulted on these securities. AIG was contractually required to post additional collateral with many creditors and counter-parties, touching off controversy when over $100 billion of U.S. taxpayer money was paid out to major global financial institutions on behalf of AIG. While this money was legally owed to the banks by AIG (under agreements made via credit default swaps purchased from AIG by the institutions), a number of Congressmen and media members expressed outrage that taxpayer money was used to bail out banks.

[ 76 ] Economist Gary Gorton wrote in May 2009 Unlike the historical banking panics of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the current banking panic is a wholesale panic, not a retail panic. In the earlier episodes, depositors ran to their banks and demanded cash in exchange for their checking accounts. Unable to meet those demands, the banking system became insolvent. The current panic involved financial firms "running" on other financial firms by not renewing sale and repurchase agreements (repo) or increasing the repo margin ("haircut"), forcing massive deleveraging, and resulting in the banking system being insolvent.

[ 81 ] The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission reported in January 2011: In the early part of the 20th century, we erected a series of protections – the Federal Reserve as a lender of last resort , federal deposit insurance, ample regulations – to provide a bulwark against the panics that had regularly plagued America's banking system in the 19th century. Yet, over the past 30-plus years, we permitted the growth of a shadow banking system – opaque and laden with short term debt – that rivaled the size of the traditional banking system. Key components of the market – for example, the multitrillion-dollar repo lending market, off-balance-sheet entities, and the use of over-the-counter derivatives – were hidden from view, without the protections we had constructed to prevent financial meltdowns. We had a 21st-century financial system with 19th-century safeguards.

[ 33 ] The Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act (1999), which reduced the regulation of banks by allowing commercial and investment banks to merge, has also been blamed for the crisis, by Nobel Prize –winning economist Joseph Stiglitz among others.

[ 82 ] Regulations encouraging lax lending standards [ edit ] Peter Wallison and Edward Pinto of the American Enterprise Institute , which advocates for private enterprise and limited government, have asserted that private lenders were encouraged to relax lending standards by government affordable housing policies.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] They cite The Housing and Community Development Act of 1992, which initially required that 30 percent or more of Fannie's and Freddie's loan purchases be related to affordable housing. The legislation gave HUD the power to set future requirements. These rose to 42 percent in 1995 and 50 percent in 2000, and by 2008 a 56 percent minimum was established.

[ 85 ] However, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC) Democratic majority report concluded that Fannie & Freddie "were not a primary cause" of the crisis and that CRA was not a factor in the crisis.

[ 33 ] Further, since housing bubbles appeared in multiple countries in Europe as well, the FCIC Republican minority dissenting report also concluded that U.S. housing policies were not a robust explanation for a wider global housing bubble.

[ 33 ] The hypothesis that a primary cause of the crisis was U.S. government housing policy requiring banks to make risky loans has been widely disputed, [ 86 ] with Paul Krugman referring to it as "imaginary history".

[ 87 ] One of the other challenges with blaming government regulations for essentially forcing banks to make risky loans is the timing. Subprime lending increased from around 10% of mortgage origination historically to about 20% only from 2004 to 2006, with housing prices peaking in 2006. Blaming affordable housing regulations established in the 1990s for a sudden spike in subprime origination is problematic at best.

[ 33 ] A more proximate government action to the sudden rise in subprime lending was the SEC relaxing lending standards for the top investment banks during an April 2004 meeting with bank leaders. These banks increased their risk-taking shortly thereafter, significantly increasing their purchases and securitization of lower-quality mortgages, thus encouraging additional subprime and Alt-A lending by mortgage companies.

[ 88 ] This action by its investment bank competitors also resulted in Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac taking on more risk.

[ 89 ] Systemic crisis [ edit ] The 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession were described as a symptom of another, deeper crisis by a number of economists. For example, Ravi Batra argues that growing inequality of financial capitalism produces speculative bubbles that burst and result in depression and major political changes .

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Feminist economists Ailsa McKay and Margunn Bjørnholt argue that the 2008 financial crisis and the response to it revealed a crisis of ideas in mainstream economics and within the economics profession, and call for a reshaping of both the economy, economic theory and the economics profession. They argue that such a reshaping should include new advances within feminist economics and ecological economics that take as their starting point the socially responsible, sensible and accountable subject in creating an economy and economic theories that fully acknowledge care for each other as well as the planet.

[ 92 ] Effects [ edit ] Main article: Effects of the Great Recession Effects on the United States [ edit ] Further information: Great Recession in the United States , Unemployment in the United States , and National debt of the United States Several major U.S. economic variables had recovered from the 2007–2009 Subprime mortgage crisis and Great Recession by the 2013–2014 time period.

U.S. Real GDP – Contributions to Percent Change by Component 2007–2009 Though no one knew they were in it at the time, the Great Recession had a significant economic and political impact on the United States. While the recession technically lasted from December 2007 – June 2009 (the nominal GDP trough), many important economic variables did not regain pre-recession (November or Q4 2007) levels until 2011–2016. For example, real GDP fell $650 billion (4.3%) and did not recover its $15 trillion pre-recession level until Q3 2011.

[ 93 ] Household net worth, which reflects the value of both stock markets and housing prices, fell $11.5 trillion (17.3%) and did not regain its pre-recession level of $66.4 trillion until Q3 2012.

[ 94 ] The number of persons with jobs (total non-farm payrolls) fell 8.6 million (6.2%) and did not regain the pre-recession level of 138.3 million until May 2014.

[ 95 ] The unemployment rate peaked at 10.0% in October 2009 and did not return to its pre-recession level of 4.7% until May 2016.

[ 96 ] A key dynamic slowing the recovery was that both individuals and businesses paid down debts for several years, as opposed to borrowing and spending or investing as had historically been the case. This shift to a private sector surplus drove a sizable government deficit.

[ 97 ] However, the federal government held spending at about $3.5 trillion from fiscal years 2009–2014 (thereby decreasing it as a percent of GDP), a form of austerity . Then-Fed Chair Ben Bernanke explained during November 2012 several of the economic headwinds that slowed the recovery: The housing sector did not rebound, as was the case in prior recession recoveries, as the sector was severely damaged during the crisis. Millions of foreclosures had created a large surplus of properties and consumers were paying down their debts rather than purchasing homes.

Credit for borrowing and spending by individuals (or investing by corporations) was not readily available as banks paid down their debts.

Restrained government spending following initial stimulus efforts (i.e., austerity) was not sufficient to offset private sector weaknesses.

[ 98 ] On the political front, widespread anger at banking bailouts and stimulus measures (begun by President George W. Bush and continued or expanded by President Obama ) with few consequences for banking leadership, were a factor in driving the country politically rightward starting in 2010. The Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) was the largest of the bailouts. In 2008, TARP allocated $426.4 billion to various major financial institutions. However, the US collected $441.7 billion in return from these loans in 2010, recording a profit of $15.3 billion.

[ 99 ] Nonetheless, there was a political shift from the Democratic party. Examples include the rise of the Tea Party and the loss of Democratic majorities in subsequent elections. President Obama declared the bailout measures started under the Bush administration and continued during his administration as completed and mostly profitable as of December 2014 [update] .

[ 100 ] As of January 2018 [update] , bailout funds had been fully recovered by the government, when interest on loans is taken into consideration. A total of $626B was invested, loaned, or granted due to various bailout measures, while $390B had been returned to the Treasury. The Treasury had earned another $323B in interest on bailout loans, resulting in an $87B profit.

[ 101 ] Economic and political commentators have argued the Great Recession was also an important factor in the rise of populist sentiment that resulted in the election of right-wing populist President Trump in 2016, and left-wing populist Bernie Sanders ' candidacy for the Democratic nomination.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Effects on Europe [ edit ] Further information: European debt crisis , Austerity , and Great Recession in Europe Public Debt to GDP Ratio for Selected European Countries – 2008 to 2011. Source Data: Eurostat The crisis in Europe generally progressed from banking system crises to sovereign debt crises, as many countries elected to bail out their banking systems using taxpayer money.

[ citation needed ] Greece was different in that it faced large public debts rather than problems within its banking system. Several countries received bailout packages from the troika (European Commission, European Central Bank, International Monetary Fund), which also implemented a series of emergency measures.

Many European countries embarked on austerity programs, reducing their budget deficits relative to GDP from 2010 to 2011. For example, according to the CIA World Factbook Greece improved its budget deficit from 10.4% GDP in 2010 to 9.6% in 2011. Iceland, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, France, and Spain also improved their budget deficits from 2010 to 2011 relative to GDP.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] However, with the exception of Germany, each of these countries had public-debt-to-GDP ratios that increased (i.e., worsened) from 2010 to 2011, as indicated in the chart at right. Greece's public-debt-to-GDP ratio increased from 143% in 2010 to 165% in 2011 [ 106 ] to 185% in 2014. This indicates that despite improving budget deficits, GDP growth was not sufficient to support a decline (improvement) in the debt-to-GDP ratio for these countries during this period.

Eurostat reported that the debt to GDP ratio for the 17 Euro area countries together was 70.1% in 2008, 79.9% in 2009, 85.3% in 2010, and 87.2% in 2011.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] According to the CIA World Factbook , from 2010 to 2011, the unemployment rates in Spain, Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal, and the UK increased. France had no significant changes, while in Germany and Iceland the unemployment rate declined.

[ 106 ] Eurostat reported that Eurozone unemployment reached record levels in September 2012 at 11.6%, up from 10.3% the prior year. Unemployment varied significantly by country.

[ 109 ] Relationship between fiscal tightening (austerity) in Eurozone countries with their GDP growth rate, 2008–2012 [ 110 ] Economist Martin Wolf analysed the relationship between cumulative GDP growth from 2008 to 2012 and total reduction in budget deficits due to austerity policies (see chart) in several European countries during April 2012. He concluded that: "In all, there is no evidence here that large fiscal contractions [budget deficit reductions] bring benefits to confidence and growth that offset the direct effects of the contractions. They bring exactly what one would expect: small contractions bring recessions and big contractions bring depressions." Changes in budget balances (deficits or surpluses) explained approximately 53% of the change in GDP, according to the equation derived from the IMF data used in his analysis.

[ 110 ] Economist Paul Krugman analysed the relationship between GDP and reduction in budget deficits for several European countries in April 2012 and concluded that austerity was slowing growth, similar to Martin Wolf. He also wrote: "... this also implies that 1 euro of austerity yields only about 0.4 euros of reduced deficit, even in the short run. No wonder, then, that the whole austerity enterprise is spiraling into disaster." [ 111 ] Britain's decision to leave the European Union in 2016 has been partly attributed to the after-effects of the Great Recession on the country.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Effects on democracy [ edit ] During the Great Recession and in the immediate aftermath, Bangladesh , Ukraine , Honduras , Guatemala , Palestine , and Hong Kong went from democracies to a mix of democracy and authoritarianism and Madagascar , the Gambia , Ethiopia , Russia , and Fiji went from mixed regimes to authoritarian ones. While each country had democratic backsliding for different reasons, economic calamity has long been known to contribute to instability that can cause authoritarian forces to take hold.

[ 117 ] Countries that avoided recession [ edit ] Sydney 's financial district at night. Throughout the Great Recession, the Australian economy remained resilient and stable.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Poland was the only member of the European Union to avoid a GDP recession during the Great Recession. As of December 2009, the Polish economy had not entered recession nor even contracted, while its IMF 2010 GDP growth forecast of 1.9 percent was expected to be upgraded.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Analysts identified several causes for the positive economic development in Poland: Extremely low levels of bank lending and a relatively small mortgage market; the relatively recent dismantling of EU trade barriers and the resulting surge in demand for Polish goods since 2004; Poland being the recipient of direct EU funding since 2004; lack of over-dependence on a single export sector; a tradition of government fiscal responsibility; a relatively large internal market; the free-floating Polish zloty ; low labour costs attracting continued foreign direct investment; economic difficulties at the start of the decade, which prompted austerity measures in advance of the world crisis.

[ citation needed ] While India , Uzbekistan , China , and Iran experienced slowing growth, they did not enter recessions.

South Korea narrowly avoided technical recession in the first quarter of 2009.

[ 123 ] The International Energy Agency stated in mid September that South Korea could be the only large [ clarify ] OECD country to avoid recession for the whole of 2009.

[ 124 ] Australia avoided a technical recession after experiencing only one quarter of negative growth in the fourth quarter of 2008, with GDP returning to positive in the first quarter of 2009.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The 2008 financial crisis did not affect developing countries to a great extent. Experts see several reasons: Africa was not affected because it is not fully integrated in the world market. Latin America and Asia seemed better prepared, since they have experienced crises before. In Latin America, for example, banking laws and regulations are very stringent. Bruno Wenn of the German DEG suggests that Western countries could learn from these countries when it comes to regulations of financial markets.

[ 127 ] Timeline of effects [ edit ] Main article: Timeline of the Great Recession The few recessions appearing early in 2006–07 are commonly never associated to be part of the Great Recession, which is illustrated by the fact that only two countries (Iceland and Jamaica) were in recession in Q4 2007.

One year before the maximum, in Q1 2008, only six countries were in recession (Iceland, Sweden, Finland, Ireland, Portugal and New Zealand). The number of countries in recession was 25 in Q2 2008, 39 in Q3 2008 and 53 in Q4 2008. At the steepest part of the Great Recession in Q1 2009, a total of 59 out of 71 countries were simultaneously in recession. The number of countries in recession was 37 in Q2 2009, 13 in Q3 2009 and 11 in Q4 2009. One year after the maximum, in Q1 2010, only seven countries were in recession (Greece, Croatia, Romania, Iceland, Jamaica, Venezuela and Belize).

The recession data for the overall G20 zone (representing 85% of all GWP ), depict that the Great Recession existed as a global recession throughout Q3 2008 until Q1 2009.

Subsequent follow-up recessions in 2010–2013 were confined to Belize, El Salvador, Paraguay, Jamaica, Japan, Taiwan, New Zealand and 24 out of 50 European countries (including Greece). As of October 2014, only five out of the 71 countries with available quarterly data (Cyprus, Italy, Croatia, Belize and El Salvador), were still in ongoing recessions.

[ 16 ] [ 128 ] The many follow-up recessions hitting the European countries, are commonly referred to as being direct repercussions of the European debt crisis .

Country specific details about recession timelines [ edit ] Iceland fell into an economic depression in 2008 following the collapse of its banking system ( see 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis ). By mid-2012 Iceland is regarded as one of Europe's recovery success stories largely as a result of a currency devaluation that has effectively reduced wages by 50%--making exports more competitive.

[ 129 ] The following countries had a recession starting in the fourth quarter of 2007: United States.

[ 16 ] The following countries had a recession starting in the first quarter of 2008: Latvia, [ 130 ] Ireland, [ 131 ] New Zealand, [ 132 ] and Sweden.

[ 16 ] The following countries/territories had a recession starting in the second quarter of 2008: Japan, [ 133 ] Hong Kong, [ 134 ] Singapore, [ 135 ] Italy, [ 136 ] Turkey, [ 16 ] Germany, [ 137 ] United Kingdom, [ 16 ] the Eurozone, [ 138 ] the European Union, [ 16 ] and the OECD.

[ 16 ] The following countries/territories had a recession starting in the third quarter of 2008: Spain , [ 139 ] and Taiwan.

[ 140 ] The following countries/territories had a recession starting in the fourth quarter of 2008: Switzerland.

[ 141 ] South Korea avoided recession with GDP returning positive at a 0.1% expansion in the first quarter of 2009.

[ 142 ] Of the seven largest economies in the world by GDP, only China avoided a recession in 2008. In the year to the third quarter of 2008 China grew by 9%. Until recently Chinese officials considered 8% GDP growth to be required simply to create enough jobs for rural people moving to urban centres.

[ 143 ] This figure may more accurately be considered to be 5–7% now [ when?

] that the main growth in working population is receding.

[ citation needed ] Ukraine went into technical depression in January 2009 with a GDP growth of −20%, when comparing on a monthly basis with the GDP level in January 2008.

[ 144 ] Overall the Ukrainian real GDP fell 14.8% when comparing the entire part of 2009 with 2008.

[ 145 ] When measured quarter-on-quarter by changes of seasonally adjusted real GDP, Ukraine was more precisely in recession/depression throughout the four quarters from Q2-2008 until Q1-2009 (with respective qoq-changes of: -0.1%, -0.5%, -9.3%, -10.3%), and the two quarters from Q3-2012 until Q4-2012 (with respective qoq-changes of: -1.5% and -0.8%).

[ 146 ] Japan was in recovery in the middle of the decade 2000s but slipped back into recession and deflation in 2008.

[ 147 ] The recession in Japan intensified in the fourth quarter of 2008 with a GDP growth of −12.7%, [ 148 ] and deepened further in the first quarter of 2009 with a GDP growth of −15.2%.

[ 149 ] Political instability related to the economic crisis [ edit ] The anti-austerity movement in Spain , May 2011 Slovenian anarchist anti-fascist protest due to the Great Recession On February 26, 2009, an Economic Intelligence Briefing was added to the daily intelligence briefings prepared for the President of the United States . This addition reflects the assessment of U.S. intelligence agencies that the 2008 financial crisis presented a serious threat to international stability.

[ 150 ] Business Week stated in March 2009 that global political instability was rising fast because of the 2008 financial crisis and is creating new challenges that need managing.

[ 151 ] The Associated Press reported in March 2009 that: United States "Director of National Intelligence Dennis Blair has said the economic weakness could lead to political instability in many developing nations." [ 152 ] Even some developed countries are seeing political instability.

[ 153 ] NPR reports that David Gordon, a former intelligence officer who now leads research at the Eurasia Group , said: "Many, if not most, of the big countries out there have room to accommodate economic downturns without having large-scale political instability if we're in a recession of normal length. If you're in a much longer-run downturn, then all bets are off." [ 154 ] Political scientists have argued that the economic stasis triggered social churning that got expressed through protests on a variety of issues across the developing world. In Brazil, disaffected youth rallied against a minor bus-fare hike [ 155 ] and in Israel, they protested against high rents in Tel Aviv. In all these cases, the ostensible immediate cause of the protest was amplified by the underlying social suffering induced by the great recession.

In January 2009, the government leaders of Iceland were forced to call elections two years early after the people of Iceland staged mass protests and clashed with the police because of the government's handling of the economy.

[ 153 ] Hundreds of thousands protested in France against President Sarkozy's economic policies.

[ 156 ] Prompted by the 2008 Latvian financial crisis , the opposition and trade unions there organised a rally against the cabinet of premier Ivars Godmanis. The rally gathered some 10–20 thousand people. In the evening the rally turned into a riot . The crowd moved to the building of the parliament and attempted to force their way into it, but were repelled by the state's police. In late February many Greeks took part in a massive general strike because of the economic situation and they shut down schools, airports, and many other services in Greece.

[ 157 ] Police and protesters clashed in Lithuania where people protesting the economic conditions were shot with rubber bullets.

[ 158 ] Communists and others rallied in Moscow to protest the Russian government's economic plans.

[ 159 ] However the impact was mild in Russia, whose economy gained from high oil prices.

[ 160 ] Asian countries saw various degrees of protest.

[ 161 ] Protests have also occurred in China as demands from the west for exports have been dramatically reduced and unemployment has increased. Beyond these initial protests, the protest movement has grown and continued in 2011. In late 2011, the Occupy Wall Street protest took place in the United States, spawning several offshoots that came to be known as the Occupy movement .

In 2012 the economic difficulties in Spain increased support for secession movements. In Catalonia, support for the secession movement expanded. On September 11, a pro-independence march drew a crowd that police estimated at 1.5 million.

[ 162 ] Policy responses [ edit ] Main article: National fiscal policy responses to the Great Recession See also: 2008–2009 Keynesian resurgence The 2008 financial crisis led to emergency interventions in many national financial systems. As the crisis developed into genuine recession in many major economies, economic stimulus meant to revive economic growth became the most common policy tool. After having implemented rescue plans for the banking system, major developed and emerging countries announced plans to relieve their economies. In particular, economic stimulus plans were announced in China , the United States , and the European Union .

[ 163 ] In the final quarter of 2008, the G-20 group of major economies assumed a new significance as a focus of economic and financial crisis management.

The crisis accelerated the financialization of states around the world, as governments increased the use of market instruments to achieve public goals through approaches like bond issuance, securitization of state assets, and creating sovereign funds .

[ 164 ] : 9 United States policy responses [ edit ] Main article: Subprime mortgage crisis Federal Reserve holdings of Treasury and mortgage-backed securities The U.S. government passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (EESA or TARP) during October 2008. This law included $700 billion in funding for the " Troubled Assets Relief Program " (TARP). Following a model initiated by the United Kingdom bank rescue package , [ 165 ] [ 166 ] $205 billion was used in the Capital Purchase Program to lend funds to banks in exchange for dividend-paying preferred stock.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] On February 17, 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 , an $787 billion stimulus package with a broad spectrum of spending and tax cuts.

[ 169 ] Over $75 billion of the package was specifically allocated to programs which help struggling homeowners. This program was referred to as the Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan.

[ 170 ] The U.S. Federal Reserve (central bank) lowered interest rates and significantly expanded the money supply to help address the crisis.

The New York Times reported in February 2013 that the Fed continued to support the economy with various monetary stimulus measures: "The Fed, which has amassed almost $3 trillion in Treasury and mortgage-backed securities to promote more borrowing and lending, is expanding those holdings by $85 billion a month until it sees clear improvement in the labor market. It plans to hold short-term interest rates near zero even longer, at least until the unemployment rate falls below 6.5 percent." [ 171 ] The U.S. Federal reserve established some swap agreements to help banks' liquidity crisis, although this emergency liquidity only benefitted a dozen countries and excluded most developing economies.

[ 172 ] : 267 Asia-Pacific policy responses [ edit ] On September 15, 2008, China cut its interest rate for the first time since 2002. Indonesia reduced its overnight rate, at which commercial banks can borrow overnight funds from the central bank, by two percentage points to 10.25 percent. The Reserve Bank of Australia injected nearly $1.5 billion into the banking system, nearly three times as much as the market's estimated requirement. The Reserve Bank of India added almost $1.32 billion, through a refinance operation, its biggest in at least a month.

[ 173 ] On November 9, 2008, the Chinese economic stimulus program , a RMB¥ 4 trillion ($586 billion) stimulus package, was announced by the central government of the People's Republic of China in its biggest move to stop the 2008 financial crisis from affecting the world's second largest economy. A statement on the government's website said the State Council had approved a plan to invest 4 trillion yuan ($586 billion) in infrastructure and social welfare by the end of 2010. The stimulus package was invested in key areas such as housing, rural infrastructure, transportation, health and education, environment, industry, disaster rebuilding, income-building, tax cuts, and finance. China's massive stimulus was also an important contributor to overall global recovery.

[ 174 ] : 34 In addition to helping stabilize the global economy, China's stimulus and also provided an opportunity for China to retool its domestic infrastructure.

[ 175 ] During the 2008 financial crisis , the BSE Sensex experienced a sharp decline. It dropped from over 21,000 points in January 2008 to below 8,000 points in October 2008 [ 176 ] Later that month, China's export driven economy was starting to feel the impact of the economic slowdown in the United States and Europe despite the government already cutting key interest rates three times in less than two months in a bid to spur economic expansion. On November 28, 2008, the Ministry of Finance of the People's Republic of China and the State Administration of Taxation jointly announced a rise in export tax rebate rates on some labour-intensive goods. These additional tax rebates took place on December 1, 2008.

[ 177 ] During the People's Bank of China helped address banks' liquidity crisis by signing swap agreements with numerous other countries to provide them with liquidity based on the renminbi .

[ 172 ] : 267 In Taiwan, the central bank on September 16, 2008, said it would cut its required reserve ratios for the first time in eight years. The central bank added $3.59 billion into the foreign-currency interbank market the same day. Bank of Japan pumped $29.3 billion into the financial system on September 17, 2008, and the Reserve Bank of Australia added $3.45 billion the same day.

[ 178 ] In developing and emerging economies, responses to the global crisis mainly consisted in low-rates monetary policy (Asia and the Middle East mainly) coupled with the depreciation of the currency against the dollar. There were also stimulus plans in some Asian countries, in the Middle East and in Argentina. In Asia, plans generally amounted to 1 to 3% of GDP, with the notable exception of China , which announced a plan accounting for 16% of GDP (6% of GDP per year).

European policy responses [ edit ] Until September 2008, European policy measures were limited to a small number of countries (Spain and Italy). In both countries, the measures were dedicated to households (tax rebates) reform of the taxation system to support specific sectors such as housing. The European Commission proposed a €200 billion stimulus plan to be implemented at the European level by the countries. At the beginning of 2009, the UK and Spain completed their initial plans, while Germany announced a new plan.

On September 29, 2008, the Belgian, Luxembourg and Dutch authorities partially nationalised Fortis . The German government bailed out Hypo Real Estate .

On October 8, 2008, the British Government announced a bank rescue package of around £500 billion [ 179 ] ($850 billion at the time). The plan comprised three parts. The first £200 billion would be made in regard to the banks in liquidity stack. The second part would consist of the state government increasing the capital market within the banks. Along with this, £50 billion would be made available if the banks needed it, finally the government would write off any eligible lending between the British banks with a limit to £250 billion.

[ citation needed ] In early December 2008, German Finance Minister Peer Steinbrück indicated a lack of belief in a "Great Rescue Plan" and reluctance to spend more money addressing the crisis.

[ 180 ] In March 2009, The European Union Presidency confirmed that the EU was at the time strongly resisting the US pressure to increase European budget deficits.

[ 181 ] From 2010, the United Kingdom began a fiscal consolidation program to reduce debt and deficit levels while at the same time stimulating economic recovery.

[ 182 ] Other European countries also began fiscal consolidation with similar aims.

[ 183 ] Global responses [ edit ] Bank bailouts in the United Kingdom and in the United States in proportion to their GDPs Most political responses to the 2008 financial crisis were taken, as seen above, by individual nations. Some coordination took place at the European level, but the need to cooperate at the global level has led leaders to activate the G-20 major economies entity. A first summit dedicated to the crisis took place, at the Heads of state level in November 2008 ( 2008 G-20 Washington summit ).

The G-20 countries met in a summit held in November 2008 in Washington to address the economic crisis. Apart from proposals on international financial regulation, they pledged to take measures to support their economy and to coordinate them, and refused any resort to protectionism.

Another G-20 summit was held in London in April 2009. Finance ministers and central banks leaders of the G-20 met in Horsham , England, on March to prepare the summit, and pledged to restore global growth as soon as possible. They decided to coordinate their actions and to stimulate demand and employment. They also pledged to fight against all forms of protectionism and to maintain trade and foreign investments. These actions will cost $1.1tn.

[ 184 ] They also committed to maintain the supply of credit by providing more liquidity and recapitalising the banking system, and to implement rapidly the stimulus plans. As for central bankers, they pledged to maintain low-rates policies as long as necessary. Finally, the leaders decided to help emerging and developing countries, through a strengthening of the IMF.

Policy recommendations [ edit ] IMF recommendation [ edit ] The IMF stated in September 2010 that the 2008 financial crisis would not end without a major decrease in unemployment as hundreds of millions of people were unemployed worldwide. The IMF urged governments to expand social safety nets and to generate job creation even as they are under pressure to cut spending. The IMF also encouraged governments to invest in skills training for the unemployed and even governments of countries, similar to that of Greece, with major debt risk to first focus on long-term economic recovery by creating jobs.

[ 185 ] Raising interest rates [ edit ] Further information: Corporate debt bubble The Bank of Israel was the first to raise interest rates after the global recession began.

[ 186 ] It increased rates in August 2009.

[ 186 ] On October 6, 2009, Australia became the first G20 country to raise its main interest rate, with the Reserve Bank of Australia moving rates up from 3.00% to 3.25%.

[ 187 ] The Norges Bank of Norway and the Reserve Bank of India raised interest rates in March 2010.

[ 188 ] On November 2, 2017, the Bank of England raised interest rates for the first time since March 2009 from 0.25% to 0.5% in an attempt to curb inflation.

Comparisons with the Great Depression [ edit ] Main article: Comparisons between the Great Recession and the Great Depression On April 17, 2009, the then head of the IMF Dominique Strauss-Kahn said that there was a chance that certain countries may not implement the proper policies to avoid feedback mechanisms that could eventually turn the recession into a depression. "The free-fall in the global economy may be starting to abate, with a recovery emerging in 2010, but this depends crucially on the right policies being adopted today." The IMF pointed out that unlike the Great Depression, this recession was synchronised by global integration of markets. Such synchronized recessions were explained to last longer than typical economic downturns and have slower recoveries.

[ 189 ] Olivier Blanchard , IMF Chief Economist, stated that the percentage of workers laid off for long stints has been rising with each downturn for decades but the figures have surged this time. "Long-term unemployment is alarmingly high: in the United States, half the unemployed have been out of work for over six months, something we have not seen since the Great Depression." The IMF also stated that a link between rising inequality within Western economies and deflating demand may exist. The last time that the wealth gap reached such skewed extremes was in 1928–1929.

[ 190 ] See also [ edit ] Economics portal Money portal World portal 2000s portal 2000s commodities boom 2008 financial crisis Basel Accords Collateralized debt obligation COVID-19 recession Economic bubble Fractional-reserve banking Great Recession in Asia Great Recession in Europe Great Recession in the United States Great Regression International relations since 1989 Kondratiev wave Lost Decade Peak oil Recession pop Savings and loan crisis Stock market crash Stock market crashes in India References [ edit ] ^ "US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions" , United States NBER, or National Bureau of Economic Research, updated March 14, 2023. This government agency dates the Great Recession as starting in December 2007 and bottoming-out in June 2009.

^ "World Economic Situation and Prospects 2013" . Development Policy and Analysis Division of the UN secretariat . Retrieved December 19, 2012 .

^ United Nations (January 15, 2013).

World Economic Situation and Prospects 2013 (trade paperback) (1st ed.). United Nations. p. 200.

ISBN 978-9211091663 .

The global economy continues to struggle with post-crisis adjustments ^ a b Bernanke, Ben (September 2, 2010).

"Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis" . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ a b US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions Archived September 25, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , NBER, accessed August 9, 2012.

^ Park, Byeong U.; Simar, Léopold; Zelenyuk, Valentin (2020).

"Forecasting of recessions via dynamic probit for time series: Replication and extension of Kauppi and Saikkonen (2008)" .

Empirical Economics .

58 : 379– 392.

doi : 10.1007/s00181-019-01708-2 .

hdl : 2078.1/216348 .

^ Merriam-Webster (May 31, 2023), "headword 'recession' " , Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary online .

^ Hulbert, Mark (July 15, 2010).

"It's Dippy to Fret About a Double-Dip Recession" .

Barron's .

^ V.I. Keilis-Borok et al., Pattern of Macroeconomic Indicators Preceding the End of an American Economic Recession.

Archived July 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Journal of Pattern Recognition Research, JPRR Vol. 3 (1) 2008.

^ Wingfield, Brian (September 20, 2010).

"The End Of The Great Recession? Hardly" .

Forbes .

^ Evans-Schaefer, Steve (September 20, 2010).

"Street Rallies Around Official Recession End" .

Forbes .

^ Kuttner, Robert.

Debtors’ Prison: The Politics of Austerity Versus Possibility . New York: Vintage Books, 2013, 40.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Davis, Bob (April 22, 2009).

"What's a Global Recession?" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved September 17, 2013 .

^ "World Economic Outlook – April 2009: Crisis and Recovery" (PDF) , Box 1.1 , IMF, pp.

11– 14, April 24, 2009 , retrieved September 17, 2013 ^ "Members" . G20. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015 . Retrieved January 15, 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h "Quarterly National Accounts : Quarterly Growth Rates of real GDP, change over previous quarter" . Stats.oecd.org. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023 . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ "NBER Makes It Official: Recession Started in December 2007" .

The Wall Street Journal . December 1, 2008.

^ Wearden, Graeme (June 3, 2008).

"Oil prices: George Soros warns that speculators could trigger stock market crash" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ Andrews, Edmund L. (October 24, 2008).

"Greenspan Concedes Error on Regulation" .

The New York Times .

^ Nouriel Roubini (January 15, 2009).

"A Global Breakdown of the Recession in 2009" .

Forbes .

^ a b c Krugman, Paul (July 10, 2014).

"Geithner: Does He Pass the Test?" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved August 23, 2014 .

^ Isidore, Chris (December 1, 2008).

"It's official: Recession since Dec '07" .

CNN Money . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ David Lightman.

Congressional Budget Office compares downturn to Great Depression Archived March 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine .

McClatchy Washington Bureau.

January 27, 2009.

^ Finch, Julia (January 26, 2009).

"Twenty-five People at the Heart of the Meltdown" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ Krugman, Paul (January 4, 2009).

"Fighting Off Depression" .

The New York Times .

^ "IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2009: 'Exit strategies will be needed to transition fiscal and monetary policies from extraordinary short-term support to sustainable medium-term frameworks.' (p. 38)" (PDF) . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "Olivier Blanchard, the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund, "is advising officials around the world to keep economic stimulus programs in place no longer than necessary to chart a path to sustainable growth." " . Bloomberg.com. May 30, 2005 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ Cooke, Kristin (August 21, 2009).

"U.S deficit poses potential systemic risk: Taylor" . Reuters.com . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ Binyamin, Appelbaum (September 4, 2014).

"Fed Says Growth Lifts the Affluent, Leaving Behind Everyone Else" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 13, 2014 .

^ Chokshi, Niraj (August 11, 2014).

"Income inequality seems to be rising in more than 2 in 3 metro areas" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 13, 2014 .

^ Kurtzleben, Danielle (August 23, 2014).

"Middle class households' wealth fell 35 percent from 2005 to 2011" .

Vox . Retrieved September 13, 2014 .

^ Allen, Paddy (January 29, 2009).

"Global recession – where did all the money go?" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ a b c d e "Financial Crisis Inquiry Report-Conclusions-January 2011" . Fcic.law.stanford.edu. March 10, 2011 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ "FCIC-Final Report Dissent of Wallison" (PDF) . January 2011.

^ "Declaration of G20" . Whitehouse.gov. November 2008.

^ "Gary Gorton – NBER and Yale – Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007" (PDF) . May 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 20, 2014 . Retrieved April 16, 2013 .

^ FRED-Private Residential Investment – Retrieved March 3, 2019 ^ Martin, Fernando M. (2016).

"Private Investment and the Great Recession" .

Economic Synopses .

2016 .

doi : 10.20955/es.2016.1 .

S2CID 155967009 .

^ "CEPR-Dean Baker-The Economics of the Great Recession-June 29, 2014" . Cepr.net. June 29, 2014. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved August 23, 2014 .

^ "Learned Macroeconomic Helplessness" . July 2014 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Mian, Atif; Sufi, Amir (2014).

House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-08194-6 .

^ Sowell, Thomas (2009).

The Housing Boom and Bust . Basic Books. pp.

57– 58.

ISBN 978-0-465-01880-2 .

^ Guilford, Gwynn (August 29, 2017).

"House flippers triggered the US housing market crash, not poor subprime borrowers" . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "Jon Wisman-Wage Stagnation, Rising Inequality and the Crisis of 2008-Retrieved June 2015" (PDF) . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "IMF-Inequality, Leverage and Crises-Kumhoff and Ranciere-November 2010" (PDF) . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "Stockhammer-Rising Inequality as a Cause of the Present Crisis-Amherst PERI-April 2012" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "Rethinking how the housing crisis happened" .

mitsloan.mit.edu . November 9, 2016 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ "Points of Light" . Economist.com. July 14, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ "This American Life – The Giant Pool of Money" . Thisamericanlife.org. May 9, 2008 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ "European Crisis Realities" . Opinion.

The Conscience of a Liberal . The New York Times. February 25, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ Polleit, Thorsten (December 13, 2007).

"Manipulating the Interest Rate: a Recipe for Disaster" . Mises Institute . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Pettifor, Ann (September 16, 2008).

"America's financial meltdown: lessons and prospects" . openDemocracy. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Karlsson, Stefan (November 8, 2004).

"America's Unsustainable Boom" . Mises Institute . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Reinhart, Carmen M.; Reinhart, Vincent R. (September 2010).

"After the Fall" .

NBER Working Paper No. 16334 .

doi : 10.3386/w16334 .

^ "The End of the Affair" . Economist. October 30, 2008 . Retrieved February 27, 2009 .

^ Krugman, Paul (December 12, 2010).

"Opinion – Block Those Economic Metaphors" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Martti Randveer; Lenno Uusküla; Liina Kulu.

"The Impact of Private Debt on Economic Growth" . Eestipank.ee. Archived from the original on March 27, 2016 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

Both theoretical and empirical evidence show that recessions are steeper in countries with high levels of private debt and/or credit booms." and "We find that a higher level of debt before a recession is correlated with smaller economic growth after the economic slowdown has finished.

^ Bianco, James (June 13, 2012).

"Chart titled 'Anyone See Deleveraging?' " . Ritholtz.com . Retrieved August 23, 2014 .

^ McCarthy, Ryan (October 22, 2010).

"How American Income Inequality Hit Levels Not Seen Since The Depression" .

huffingtonpost.com . Retrieved October 24, 2010 .

^ "IMF-Report Extract Chapter 3 – April 2012" (PDF) . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ "Debt and deleveraging: The global credit bubble and its economic consequences-Updated-July 2011" . McKinsey.com. March 13, 2013. Archived from the original on March 7, 2013 . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ a b Dirk J Bezemer: "No One Saw This Coming" Understanding Financial Crisis Through Accounting Models , available via: MPRA Archived April 15, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , esp. p. 9 and appendix.

^ Langlois, Hugues; Lussier, Jacques (2017).

Rational Investing Book – What Can Be Forecasted . Columbia University Press. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 9780231543781 .

^ Bezemer, Dirk J. (June 16, 2009).

" "No One Saw This Coming": Understanding Financial Crisis Through Accounting Models" .

MPRA Paper – via ideas.repec.org.

^ "From the subprime to the terrigenous: Recession begins at home" . Land Values Research Group. June 2, 2009.

(A survey of recessions or expected recessions in 40 countries, 33 of which arguably had property bubbles.) ^ "The end of Poland's house price boom" . Global Property Guide. August 25, 2008.

^ "Real estate prices in Adriatic Coast up, Zagreb down" . Global Property Guide. August 19, 2008.

^ "The good times are here again" . Global Property Guide. February 28, 2008.

^ "Looming housing slump in China" . Global Property Guide. September 1, 2008.

^ Monica Davey (December 25, 2005).

"2005: In a Word" .

The New York Times .

^ "The global housing boom" . The Economist. June 16, 2005.

^ The Warning | Frontline ^ a b Bethany McLean and Joe Nocera , All the Devils Are Here: The Hidden History of the Financial Crisis Portfolio, Penguin, 2010, pp. 104–107 ^ a b Anthony Faiola; Ellen Nakashima; Jill Drew (October 15, 2008).

"What Went Wrong" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ Michael Lewis (March 2010).

"Vanity Fair – Michael Lewis – Betting the Blind Side – April 2010" . Vanityfair.com . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ a b Lanman, Scott (March 5, 2009).

"Senators Dodd & Shelby Demand Information" . Bloomberg . Retrieved July 11, 2011 .

^ Krugman, Paul (2009).

The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 . W.W. Norton Company Limited.

ISBN 978-0-393-07101-6 .

^ Krugman, Paul (April 1, 2010).

"Opinion – Financial Reform 101" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Labaton, Stephen (October 3, 2008).

"Agency's '04 Rule Let Banks Pile Up New Debt, and Risk" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 24, 2010 .

^ Reported and Narrated by Stephen Labaton Produced by Amy O'Leary (September 28, 2008).

"The Day the S.E.C. Changed the Game" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 20, 2012 .

^ "Gary Gorton – NBER and Yale – Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: Banking and the Panic of 2007 – Updated May 2009" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 20, 2014 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ Who's Whining Now? Gramm Slammed By Economists Archived August 5, 2011, at Wikiwix.

ABC News . September 19, 2008.

^ Peter J. Wallison, "Cause and Effect: Government Policies and the Financial Crisis", Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute, November 2008.

^ Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Statement of Edward Pinto, December 9, 2008, 4.

^ Peter J. Wallison (January 2011).

"Dissent from the Majority Report of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission" . American Enterprise Institute . Retrieved November 20, 2012 .

^ Barry Ritholtz (November 26, 2011).

"Examining the Big Lie" . The Big Picture.

^ Paul Krugman (November 6, 2014).

"Triumph of the Wrong" .

The New York Times .

^ Labaton, Stephen (October 2, 2008).

"Agency's '04 Rule Let Banks Pile Up New Debt" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Duhigg, Charles (October 4, 2008).

"Pressured to Take More Risk, Fannie Reached Tipping Point" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Batra, Ravi (May 8, 2011).

"Weapons of Mass Exploitation?" . Truthout.org. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011 . Retrieved June 4, 2011 .

^ Batra, Ravi (April 29, 2011).

"Ravi Batra interview" . Thom Hartman's radio show (at 1:15) . Retrieved June 4, 2011 .

^ Bjørnholt, Margunn ; McKay, Ailsa (2014).

"Advances in Feminist Economics in Times of Economic Crisis" (PDF) . In Bjørnholt, Margunn ; McKay, Ailsa (eds.).

Counting on Marilyn Waring: New Advances in Feminist Economics .

Demeter Press . pp.

7– 20.

ISBN 9781927335277 .

^ U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (January 1, 1947).

"Real Gross Domestic Product" .

FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) (October 1, 1945).

"Households and Nonprofit Organizations; Net Worth, Level" .

FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ FRED-All Employees Total Nonfarm Payrolls-Retrieved July 7, 2018 ^ U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (January 1, 1948).

"Civilian Unemployment Rate" .

FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ "United States sector balances over five decades" .

New Policy Institute . Archived from the original on February 23, 2020 . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ "Federal Reserve Board – The Economic Recovery and Economic Policy" .

federalreserve.gov . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ "TARP Programs" .

treasury.gov . Retrieved November 14, 2019 .

^ Weisman, Jonathan (December 19, 2014).

"U.S. Declares Bank and Auto Bailouts Over, and Profitable" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ "Bailout Scorecard – Eye on the Bailout" .

projects.propublica.org . August 18, 0202 . Retrieved January 16, 2019 .

^ Carol Graham and Sergio Pinto (February 2, 2017).

"The Trump "unhappiness" effect nears the Great Recession for many" . Brookings Institution.

^ Eric Schnurer (June 2, 2016).

"Politics Are Not Recession-Proof" . US News.

^ Ben Chu (November 13, 2016).

"Why did Trump win – 'Whitelash' or economic frustration?" . Independent.

^ Martin Sandbu (November 12, 2016).

"Free Lunch: It's still the economy, stupid" .

Financial Times .

^ a b c "CIA World Factbook – Greece Example" . Cia.gov . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ a b "Eurostat-Selected Principal European Economic Indicators" . Archived from the original on January 19, 2013.

^ "Eurostat News Release-Euro indicators-23 April 2012" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2013 . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ Smith, Aaron (October 31, 2012).

"Eurozone unemployment hits record high" . Money.cnn.com . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ a b Wolf, Martin (April 27, 2012).

"The Impact of Fiscal Austerity in the Eurozone" . Blogs.ft.com . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

^ "Austerity And Growth, Again (Wonkish)" . April 24, 2012 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Ruchir Sharma (June 28, 2016).

"Globalisation as we know it is over – and Brexit is the biggest sign yet" . Independent.

^ Edward Alden (June 29, 2016).

"What Brexit Reveals About Rising Populism" . Council on Foreign Relations.

^ Vesna Poljak (June 29, 2016).

"Brexit 'just another chapter in the global financial crisis': UBS bond manager" . Australian Financial Review.

^ Robert E. Scott (June 28, 2016).

"Brexit: The end of globalization as we know it?" . Economic Policy Institute.

^ "Britain's election offers little respite for its woes: Brexit is both a cause and a symptom of the country's troubles" . The Economist. June 3, 2017.

^ "Where democracy is most at risk" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved May 10, 2024 .

^ "Aussie jumps on surprising economic strength" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . March 2, 2016. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016 . Retrieved March 4, 2016 .

^ "Economy puts aside post-mining boom blues" .

Nine Network News . March 2, 2016 . Retrieved March 4, 2016 .

^ Brogger, Tasneem; Lovasz, Agnes (September 21, 2009).

"Central Europe Risks Downgrades on Worsening Finances (Update1)" .

Bloomberg . Archived from the original on December 2, 2010 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "Zloty to Gain, Says LBBW, Most Accurate Forecaster (Update1)" . Bloomberg.com. October 9, 2009. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ Andrusz, Katya (December 15, 2009).

"Poland's Economic Outlook May Be Raised by IMF, PAP Reports" .

Bloomberg . Archived from the original on April 29, 2011.

^ "S Korea avoids entering recession" . BBC. April 24, 2009 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "IEA:S Korea May Be Only Large OECD Country To Avoid Recession" .

The Wall Street Journal . December 1, 2009. Archived from the original on December 1, 2009 . Retrieved March 14, 2018 .

^ Zappone, Chris (June 3, 2009).

"Australia dodges recession" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

^ "Australia's economy shrank in last quarter of 2008" .

Wotnews . March 2009. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011.

^ Wenn, Bruno (January 25, 2013).

"Exceedingly high interest rates" .

D+C . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

^ "GDP and main components – volumes: Percentage change on previous quarter (seasonally adjusted, and adjusted by working days)" . Eurostat. January 10, 2014 . Retrieved January 10, 2014 .

^ Charles Forelle (May 19, 2012).

"In European Crisis, Iceland Emerges as an Island of Recovery" .

Wall Street Journal .

^ "Latvia" .

Oxford Economic Country Briefings . Findarticles.com. September 26, 2008. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Evans-Pritchard, Ambrose (September 25, 2008).

"Ireland leads eurozone into recession" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "New Zealand falls into recession" . BBC News. September 26, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "HIGHLIGHTS: Crisis sends Japan into first recession in 7 years" . Reuters. November 17, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "HK shares may fall; exporters may drop" . Reuters. November 16, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Dunkley, Jamie (October 10, 2008).

"Singapore slides into recession" . London: Telegraph . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "OECD area GDP down 0.1% in the third quarter of 2008" (PDF) . OECD. November 20, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2009 . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ Fitzgibbons, Patrick (November 14, 2008).

"TOPWRAP 10-Germany, China, US feel pain of global downturn" .

Reuters . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ Strupczewski, Jan (November 14, 2008).

"Euro zone in recession, December rate cut expected" . Reuters.com . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "Spain's economy enters recession" . BBC News. January 28, 2009 . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ "Taiwan in recession as economy contracts record 8.36 pct" . AFP. February 18, 2009. Archived from the original on January 24, 2013 . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ "SECO – Gross Domestic Product in Q2 2009" . Seco.admin.ch. November 25, 2009. Archived from the original on March 3, 2010 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ In-Soo Nam (April 24, 2009).

"South Korea Economy Avoids Recession, Grows 0.1%" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "Reflating the dragon" . Beijing: The Economist. November 13, 2008 . Retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "National Bank estimate: Ukraine GDP down 20 percent in January" . Kyiv Post. February 17, 2009 . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ "Ukraine | Global Finance Magazine" . Gfmag.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2010 . Retrieved August 23, 2014 .

^ "Ukrainian recession data" "Seasonal Adjustment of gross domestic product at constant prices of 2007 (Table 5.1 – Gross Domestic Product)" .

Quarterly gross domestic product estimates of Ukraine for 2001 – 2012 . State Statistics Service of Ukraine. August 30, 2013. p. 99. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013.

^ "Why Did Japan Stop Growing?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 14, 2012 . Retrieved May 1, 2012 .

^ Alford, Peter (February 16, 2009).

"Japan headed for longest, deepest post-war recession" . The Australian. Archived from the original on February 19, 2009 . Retrieved April 10, 2009 .

^ "Japanese GDP falls at biggest rate since 1955" . NBC News. May 19, 2009 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "CIA Adds Economy To Threat Updates White House Given First Daily Briefing" article by Joby Warrick, Washington Post Staff Writer, Thursday, February 26, 2009 ^ Jack Ewing (March 10, 2009).

"Economic Woes Raising Global Political Risk" .

Business Week .

^ "Experts: Financial crisis threatens US security" .

Politico . Associated Press. March 11, 2009.

^ a b "Europe | Iceland protest ends in clashes" . BBC News. November 23, 2008 . Retrieved May 15, 2012 .

^ NPR article "Economic Crisis Poses Threat To Global Stability" by Tom Gjelten ^ Romero, Simon.

"Bus-fare protests hit Brazil's two biggest cities" The New York Times , June 2013.

^ Dobbs, David.

"The New York Times – Breaking News, World News & Multimedia" . International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on February 28, 2009 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ Maltezou, Renee (February 25, 2009).

"Greeks shut airports, services to protest economy" . Reuters . Retrieved May 15, 2012 .

^ Megan K. Stack (January 17, 2009).

"Protests spread in Europe amid economic crisis" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved May 15, 2012 .

^ Dobbs, David.

"The New York Times – Breaking News, World News & Multimedia" .

International Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on February 4, 2009 . Retrieved April 22, 2013 .

^ E. Shadrina et al. "Russia and the "Great Recession", International Affairs: A Russian Journal of World Politics, Diplomacy & International Relations (2010), 56#2, pp 113–129.

^ Ian Traynor (January 31, 2009).

"Governments across Europe tremble as effects of global recession prompt angry people to take to the streets" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved May 15, 2012 .

^ Abend, Lisa (September 11, 2012).

"Barcelona Warns Madrid: Pay Up, or Catalonia Leaves Spain" .

Time . Retrieved September 16, 2012 .

A pro-independence march, which in the past has never drawn more than 50,000 people, pulled in a crowd estimated by city police at 1.5 million.

^ "EU Proposes €200 Billion Stimulus Plan" .

Businessweek . November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ Chen, Muyang (2024).

The Latecomer's Rise: Policy Banks and the Globalization of China's Development Finance . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501775857 .

^ Langley, Paul (2015).

Liquidity Lost: The Governance of the Global Financial Crisis . Oxford University Press. pp.

83– 86.

ISBN 978-0199683789 .

^ "Gordon Does Good" .

The New York Times . October 12, 2008 . Retrieved February 5, 2016 .

^ "Treasury – Paulson News Release" . Archived from the original on September 24, 2008.

^ Herszenhorn, David M. (September 21, 2008).

"Administration Is Seeking $700 Billion for Wall Street" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 24, 2010 .

^ "Stimulus Package 2009" .

BBC News . February 14, 2009 . Retrieved February 27, 2009 .

^ "Obama-Homeowner Affordability and Stability Plan" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 19, 2009.

^ Appelbaum, Binyamin (February 26, 2013).

"Fed Chairman Defends Stimulus Efforts" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 5, 2017 .

^ a b Jin, Keyu (2023).

The New China Playbook: Beyond Socialism and Capitalism . New York: Viking.

ISBN 978-1-9848-7828-1 .

^ "Asian central banks spend billions to prevent crash" .

International Herald Tribune . September 16, 2008. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008 . Retrieved September 21, 2008 .

^ Massot, Pascale (2024).

China's Vulnerability Paradox: How the World's Largest Consumer Transformed Global Commodity Markets . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-777140-2 .

^ Mitter, Rana (2020).

China's Good War: How World War II is Shaping a New Nationalism . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-674-98426-4 .

OCLC 1141442704 .

^ "The Sensex journey: From 2008 to 2013" .

NDTV Profit . November 1, 2013.

^ "Chinese pharmaceutical exporters to benefit from latest tax rebates increases" .

Asia Manufacturing Pharma . December 1, 2008. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008 . Retrieved December 1, 2008 .

^ "Germany Rescues Hypo Real Estate" .

Deutsche Welle . October 6, 2008.

^ "Gordon Brown should say 'sorry' " . London: The Telegraph. March 9, 2009 . Retrieved March 9, 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ "It Doesn't Exist!" .

Newsweek.com . December 6, 2008 . Retrieved December 15, 2008 .

^ Waterfield, Bruno (March 25, 2009).

"EU resists deficits" .

Telegraph.co.uk . London. Archived from the original on March 28, 2009 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "Cutting the deficit: three years down, five to go?" . The Institute for Fiscal Studies. May 8, 2013 . Retrieved February 2, 2016 .

^ "EU fiscal consolidation after the financial crisis: Lessons from past experiences" . VOX CEPR's Policy Portal. October 2, 2010 . Retrieved February 2, 2016 .

^ "G20 leaders seal tn global deal" .

BBC News . April 2, 2009.

^ Alderman, Liz (September 13, 2010).

"I.M.F. Calls for Countries to Focus on Jobs" .

The New York Times .

^ a b "Israel rate cut suggests more emerging market cuts – Emerging Markets Report" . MarketWatch. September 26, 2011 . Retrieved May 15, 2012 .

^ "Australia raises interest rates" . BBC News. October 6, 2009 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "India's Central Bank Raises Interest Rates" .

The New York Times . March 19, 2010.

^ Evans, Ambrose (April 16, 2009).

"IMF warns over parallels to Great Depression" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009 . Retrieved January 21, 2010 .

^ "IMF fears 'social explosion' from world jobs crisis" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. September 13, 2010. Archived from the original on September 15, 2010 . Retrieved August 17, 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bernanke, Ben S.

(2015).

The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and Its Aftermath . New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 978-0393247213 .

Coffee, John C.

(2009). "What Went Wrong? An Initial Inquiry Into the Causes of the 2008 Financial Crisis".

Journal of Corporate Law Studies .

9 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1080/14735970.2009.11421533 .

S2CID 153278046 .

Duménil, Gérard ; Lévy, Dominique (2013).

The Crisis of Neoliberalism (Reprint ed.).

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-07224-4 .

Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. "What happened: Financial factors in the great recession." Journal of Economic Perspectives 32.3 (2018): 3–30.

online Archived March 5, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Gorman, Tom (2010).

The Complete Idiot's Guide to the Great Recession .

Greenspan, Alan (2008) [2007].

The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World . New York: Penguin Books . pp.

507– 532.

ISBN 978-0143114161 .

Greenspan, Alan ; Wooldridge, Adrian (2018).

Capitalism in America: A History . New York: Penguin Press . pp.

368– 388.

ISBN 978-0735222441 .

Krugman, Paul (2009).

The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 ; excerpt .

Kynaston, David (2017).

Till Time's Last Sand: A History of the Bank of England, 1694–2013 . New York: Bloomsbury . pp.

747– 776.

ISBN 978-1408868560 .

Lo, Andrew W.

(2012). "Reading About the Financial Crisis: A Twenty-One-Book Review".

Journal of Economic Literature .

50 (1): 151– 178.

doi : 10.1257/jel.50.1.151 .

hdl : 1721.1/75360 .

JSTOR 23269975 .

S2CID 145081442 .

Levy, Jonathan (2021).

Ages of American Capitalism: A History of the United States .

Excerpt .

Meltzer, Allan H.

(2009).

A History of the Federal Reserve – Volume 2, Book 2: 1970–1986 . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . pp.

1243– 1256.

ISBN 978-0226213514 .

OECD (2010).

OECD Insights From Crisis to Recovery: The Causes, Course and Consequences of the Great Recession . OECD Publishing.

Paulson, Hank (2010).

On the Brink: Inside the Race to Stop the Collapse of the Global Financial System . London: Headline.

ISBN 978-0-7553-6054-3 .

Ramey, Valerie A.

"Ten years after the financial crisis: What have we learned from the renaissance in fiscal research?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 33.2 (2019): 89–114.

Read, Colin (2009).

Global Financial Meltdown: How We Can Avoid the Next Economic Crisis . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-22218-2 .

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff.

This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly (Princeton UP, 2009) summary .

Rosenberg, Jerry M. (2012).

The Concise Encyclopedia of The Great Recession 2007–2012 (2nd ed.). Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 9780810883406 .

Shimelse Ali, Uri Dadush , Lauren Falcao (June 2009).

Financial Transmission of the Crisis: What's the Lesson?

.

International Economics Bulletin .

Stein, Howard (July 25, 2012).

"The Neoliberal Policy Paradigm and the Great Recession" .

Panoeconomicus .

59 (4): 421– 440.

doi : 10.2298/PAN1204421S .

S2CID 26437908 .

Sorkin, Andrew Ross.

Too big to fail: The inside story of how Wall Street and Washington fought to save the financial system – and themselves (Penguin, 2010) online Archived April 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

Stiglitz, Joseph E.

Freefall: America, free markets, and the sinking of the world economy (WW Norton & Company, 2010).

online Archived April 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Tooze, Adam (2018).

Crashed: How a Decade of Financial Crises Changed the World . New York: Viking .

ISBN 9780670024933 .

Woods, Thomas E.

(2009).

Meltdown: A Free-Market Look at Why the Stock Market Collapsed, the Economy Tanked, and Government Bailouts Will Make Things Worse . Washington, DC: Regnery Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-59698-587-2 .

Worswick, G. David N. "Two great recessions: the 1980s and the 1930s in Britain." Scottish Journal of Political Economy 31.3 (1984): 209–228.

Zuckerman, Gregory.

The greatest trade ever: The behind-the-scenes story of how John Paulson defied Wall Street and made financial history (Crown, 2010).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Economic crisis from 2007 .

Wikinews has related news: Canadian dollar reaches parity with US dollar Fears grow about U.S. dollar stability Worldwide markets fall precipitously Wikiversity has learning resources about Great Recession at 2008 global economic crisis Wikiquote has quotations related to Great Recession .

Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath ( Archived December 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ), September 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Tracking the Global Recession – Information from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, "What Caused the Crisis" , collection of papers "Global Outlook" , Uri Dadush , International Economics Bulletin , June 2009.

Global Recession ( Archived June 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ) ongoing coverage from BBC News Global Recession ongoing coverage from The Guardian ILO Job Crisis Observatory A Spectral Analysis of World GDP Dynamics: Kondratieff Waves, Kuznets Swings, Juglar and Kitchin Cycles in Global Economic Development, and the 2008–2009 Economic Crisis .

The Second Wave of the Global Crisis? On mathematical analyses of some dynamic series Recession 'link' with over 10,000 suicides in the West .

University of Oxford , June 2014.

v t e Great Recession By region Africa Americas United States South America Asia Europe Iceland Oceania United States-specific Automotive industry crisis California budget crisis Housing bubble Housing market correction Subprime mortgage crisis Banking losses and fraud Libor scandal Tom Hayes Société Générale trading loss Icesave dispute Forex scandal Bernie Madoff Tom Petters Scott W. Rothstein Allen Stanford Government entities Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Federal Home Loan Banks Federal Housing Administration Federal Housing Finance Agency Federal Housing Finance Board Federal Reserve System Government National Mortgage Association National Asset Management Agency Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight Office of Financial Stability UK Financial Investments Government policy and spending responses Banking and finance stability and reform Banking (Special Provisions) Act 2008 China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit Commercial Paper Funding Facility Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 Irish emergency budget, 2009 Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Troubled Asset Relief Program 2008 United Kingdom bank rescue package Bank stress tests EU U.S.

Stimulus and recovery 2008 European Union stimulus plan 2008–2009 Keynesian resurgence American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 Chinese economic stimulus program Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 Green New Deal Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 National fiscal policy response to the Great Recession Zero interest-rate policy Government interventions, rescues, and acquisitions List of banks acquired or bankrupted during the Great Recession Non-banking Chrysler General Motors Securities involved and financial markets Auction rate securities Collateralized debt obligations Collateralized mortgage obligations Credit default swaps Mortgage-backed securities Secondary mortgage market Social responses Tea Party protests (United States; c. 2009) 2009 May Day protests (Europe, Middle East and North Africa, Asia; 2009) Arab Spring (MENA; 2010–2012) Occupy movement (worldwide; 2011–2012) Occupy Wall Street Related topics 2000s energy crisis 2008 Central Asia energy crisis Effects of the Great Recession on museums Decline of newspapers 2007–2008 world food price crisis Retail apocalypse European debt crisis 2008 financial crisis List of countries by public debt v t e U.S. subprime mortgage crisis Background / timeline Background information Impact timeline Causes United States housing bubble / housing market correction Role of credit rating agencies Government policies Impacts 2008 financial crisis Great Recession Writedowns Indirect economic effects Responses Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act Acquired or bankrupt banks in the late 2000s financial crisis Capital Assistance Program Capital Purchase Program Federal Reserve responses Federal takeover of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Government intervention Homeowners Affordability and Stability Plan Hope Now Alliance Loan modification Public–Private Investment Program for Legacy Assets Regulatory responses Primary Dealer Credit Facility 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program Tea Party protests Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility Troubled Asset Relief Program Wall Street reform Related topics Error accounts Financial position of the United States Foreclosure rescue scheme Property derivatives v t e Economic history of the United States and Commonwealth of Nations countries Commercial revolution (1000–1760) Great Slump (1430–1490) Financial Revolution (1690–1800) Slump of 1706 Great Frost of 1709 1st Industrial Revolution / Market Revolution (1760–1870) British credit crisis of 1772–1773 1772–1774; England Scotland American Colonies Panic of 1785 (1785–1788) Copper Panic of 1789 / Panic of 1792 (1789–1793) Panic of 1796–1797 (1796–1799) 1802–1804 recession Depression of 1807 (1807–1810) 1812 recession Post-Napoleonic Depression (1815–1821) 1822–23 recession Panic of 1825 (1825–1826) 1828–29 recession 1833–34 recession Panic of 1837 (1836–1838 and 1839–1843) 1845–46 recession Panic of 1847 (1847–1848) 1853–54 recession Panic of 1857 (1857–1858) 1860–61 recession U.S. Civil War economy (1861–1865) Panic of 1866 (1865–1867) Black Friday (1869–1870) Gilded Age / 2nd Industrial Revolution (1870–1914) Long Depression / Great Deflation 1873–1879; United Kingdom United States Depression of 1882–1885 1887–88 recession Baring crisis (1890–1891) Panic of 1893 (1893–1897) 1899–1900 recession Panic of 1901 (1902–1904) Panic of 1907 (1907–1908) Panic of 1910–11 (1910–1912) Financial crisis of 1914 (1913–14) World War home fronts/ Interwar period (1914–1945) World War I home front Australia Canada United Kingdom United States Post–World War I recession (1918–1919) Recession of 1920–1921 Roaring Twenties 1923–1924 recession 1926–1927 recession Great Depression 1929–1939; Australia Canada India South Africa United Kingdom United States Recession of 1937–1938 World War II home front Australia Canada United Kingdom United States Post–WWII expansion / 1970s stagflation (1945–1982) 1945 recession Recession of 1949 (1948–1949) Hong Kong and Singapore Asian Tiger expansions (1950–1990) Recession of 1951 Recession of 1953 (1953–1954) Recession of 1958 (1957–1958) Recession of 1960–1961 Recession of 1969–1970 1973–1975 recession United Kingdom United States Early 1980s recession 1980–1982; Canada United Kingdom United States Computer Age / Second Gilded Age (1982–present) Great Moderation (1982–2007) Early 1990s recession 1990–1991; Australia Canada United Kingdom United States 1990s United States boom 1990s India economic boom 1997 Asian financial crisis Early 2000s recession (2001) Great Recession 2007–2009; Australia Bangladesh Canada India Malaysia New Zealand Pakistan South Africa Sri Lanka United Kingdom United States Malaysia Tiger Cub expansion (2010s) COVID-19 recession 2020–2022; Australia Bangladesh Belize Botswana Canada India Malaysia Namibia New Zealand Singapore United Kingdom United States Zambia 2023 recession Countries and sectors Australia Canada agriculture currencies early banking system list of recessions petroleum industry technological and industrial Ghana India agriculture Company rule British Raj Deindustrialisation Malaysia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan South Africa Uganda United Kingdom Agricultural Revolution history of banking British Empire Interwar unemployment and poverty list of recessions Middle Ages England / agriculture pre-Republic Ireland Scotland / agriculture / Middle Ages / Industrial Revolution trade unions Victorian era Wales / Industrial Revolution United States agriculture banking business central banking Industrial Revolution investment banking labor list of economic expansions list of recessions lumber industry monetary policy petroleum industry tariffs technological and industrial United States dollar Zimbabwe Related topics Aggregate demand / Supply Effective demand General glut Model Overproduction Paradox of thrift Price-and-wage stickiness Underconsumption Business cycle Credit cycle Deflation / Inflation Chronic Classical dichotomy Disinflation Money supply / demand Neutrality of money Price level Real and nominal values Velocity of money Expansion Miracle Recovery Stagnation Interest rate Nominal interest rate Real interest rate Yield curve / Inverted Recession Balance sheet Depression Global Rolling Shapes Stagflation Shock Demand Supply Unemployment Sahm rule v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor v t e Financial crises Bank run Commodity price shocks Credit crunch Credit cycle Currency crisis Debt crisis Energy crisis Financial contagion Social contagion Flash crash Hyperinflation Liquidity crisis Accounting Capital Funding Market Minsky moment Social crisis Stock market crash Pre- 1000 Financial crisis of 33 CE Crisis of the Third Century (235–284 CE) Commercial revolution (1000–1760) Great Bullion Famine (c. 1400–c. 1500) The Great Debasement (1544–1551) Dutch Republic stock market crashes (c. 1600–1760) Kipper und Wipper (1621–1623) Tulip mania (1637) South Sea bubble crash (1720) Mississippi bubble crash (1720) 1st Industrial Revolution (1760–1840) Amsterdam banking crisis of 1763 Bengal Bubble of 1769 (1769–1784) British credit crisis of 1772–1773 Dutch Republic financial collapse (c. 1780–1795) Copper Panic of 1789 Panic of 1792 Panic of 1796–1797 Danish state bankruptcy of 1813 Post-Napoleonic Irish grain price and land use shocks (1815–1816) Panic of 1819 Panic of 1825 Panic of 1837 1840–1870 European potato failure (1845–1856) Great Irish Famine Highland Potato Famine Panic of 1847 Panic of 1857 Panic of 1866 Black Friday (1869) 2nd Industrial Revolution (1870–1914) Panic of 1873 Paris Bourse crash of 1882 Panic of 1884 Arendal crash (1886) Baring crisis (1890) Encilhamento (1890–1893) Panic of 1893 Australian banking crisis of 1893 Black Monday (1894) Panic of 1896 Panic of 1901 Panic of 1907 Shanghai rubber stock market crisis (1910) Panic of 1910–11 Financial crisis of 1914 Interwar period (1918–1939) Early Soviet hyperinflation (1917–1924) Weimar Republic hyperinflation (1921–1923) Shōwa financial crisis (1927) Wall Street crash of 1929 Panic of 1930 Chinese hyperinflation (1937–1950) Wartime period (1939–1945) Greek hyperinflation (1941–1946) Chinese hyperinflation (1937–1950) Post–WWII expansion (1945–1973) Hungarian pengő hyperinflation (1945–1946) Kennedy Slide of 1962 1963–1965 Indonesian hyperinflation Chinese hyperinflation (1937–1950) Great Inflation (1973–1982) 1970s energy crisis (1973–1980) 1973 oil crisis 1973–1974 stock market crash Secondary banking crisis of 1973–1975 Steel crisis (1973–1982) Latin American debt crisis (1975–1982) 1976 sterling crisis 1979 oil crisis Brazilian hyperinflation (1980–1982) Great Moderation / Great Regression (1982–2007) Brazilian hyperinflation (1982–1994) Souk Al-Manakh stock market crash (1982) Chilean crisis of 1982 1983 Israel bank stock crisis Black Saturday (1983) Savings and loan crisis (1986–1995) Cameroonian economic crisis (1987–2000s) Black Monday (1987) 1988–1992 Norwegian banking crisis Japanese asset price bubble crash (1990–1992) Rhode Island banking crisis (1990–1992) 1991 Indian economic crisis 1990–1994 Swedish financial crisis 1990s Finnish banking crisis 1990s Armenian energy crisis Cuban Special Period (1991–2000) Black Wednesday (1992 Sterling crisis) Yugoslav hyperinflation (1992–1994) 1994 bond market crisis Venezuelan banking crisis of 1994 Mexican peso crisis (1994–1996) 1997 Asian financial crisis October 27, 1997, mini-crash 1998 Russian financial crisis 1998–1999 Ecuador economic crisis 1998–2002 Argentine great depression Samba effect (1999) Dot-com bubble (2000–2004) 9/11 stock market crash (2001) 2001 Turkish economic crisis South American economic crisis of 2002 Stock market downturn of 2002 2002 Uruguay banking crisis 2003 Myanmar banking crisis 2000s energy crisis (2003–2008) 2004 Argentine energy crisis Chinese stock bubble of 2007 Hyperinflation in Zimbabwe (2007–present) Great Recession (2007–2009) 2008 financial crisis September 2008 October 2008 November 2008 December 2008 2009 Subprime mortgage crisis 2000s U.S. housing market correction U.S. bear market of 2007–2009 2008 Latvian financial crisis 2008–2009 Belgian financial crisis Great Recession in Russia 2008–2009 Ukrainian financial crisis 2008–2011 Icelandic financial crisis Post-2008 Irish banking crisis 2008–2014 Spanish financial crisis Blue Monday Crash 2009 Euro area crisis Greek government-debt crisis Information Age (2009–present) 2009 Dubai debt standstill Venezuelan banking crisis of 2009–2010 2010–2014 Portuguese financial crisis Energy crisis in Venezuela (2010–present) Syrian economic crisis (2011–present) August 2011 stock markets fall 2011 Bangladesh share market scam 2012–2013 Cypriot financial crisis Chinese Banking Liquidity Crisis of 2013 Venezuela economic crisis (2013–present) 2014 Brazilian economic crisis Puerto Rican government-debt crisis (2014–2022) Russian financial crisis (2014–2016) 2015 Nepal blockade 2015–2016 Chinese stock market turbulence 2015–2016 stock market selloff Brexit stock market crash (2016) Hyperinflation in Venezuela (2016–2022) 2017 Sri Lankan fuel crisis Ghana banking crisis (2017–2018) Turkish economic crisis (2018–current) Lebanese liquidity crisis (2019–present) Sri Lankan economic crisis (2019–2024) COVID-19 pandemic Financial market impact 2020 stock market crash Recession Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) 2021–2023 inflation surge 2022 Russian financial crisis Pakistani economic crisis (2022–present) 2022 stock market decline German economic crisis (2022–present) 2023 United States banking crisis 2023–2024 Egyptian financial crisis 2025 stock market crash List of banking crises List of economic crises List of sovereign debt crises List of stock market crashes and bear markets Authority control databases : National Spain NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250817045523
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.207 seconds
Real time usage: 2.465 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14412/1000000
Revision size: 131168/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 560093/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15780/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 740009/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.280/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9898556/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1963.943      1 -total
 57.20% 1123.446      1 Template:Reflist
 23.10%  453.584     87 Template:Cite_news
 21.48%  421.915     68 Template:Cite_web
  6.77%  132.915     22 Template:Cite_book
  4.43%   86.930      1 Template:Great_Recession_series
  4.32%   84.883      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.93%   77.227      8 Template:Navbox
  3.88%   76.146      1 Template:Short_description
  3.19%   62.576      1 Template:Infobox_event Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19337279:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045523 and revision id 1303795156. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Recession&oldid=1303795156 " Categories : Great Recession 2000s in economic history 2007 in economic history 2010s in economic history World economy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Webarchive template other archives CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from September 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2024 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Great Recession 51 languages Add topic

