Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Decompression theory Toggle Decompression theory subsection 1.1 Physics and physiology of decompression 1.2 Decompression models 2 Decompression practice Toggle Decompression practice subsection 2.1 Procedures 2.2 Equipment 3 History of decompression research and development Toggle History of decompression research and development subsection 3.1 Early developments 3.2 Start of systematic work on decompression models 3.3 Beginnings of alternative models 3.4 Development of several additional approaches 3.5 Bubble models started to become prevalent 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Decompression (diving) 13 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pressure reduction and its effects during ascent from depth For other uses, see Decompression (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Decompression sickness .

Divers decompressing in the water at the end of a dive Basic deck decompression chamber The decompression of a diver is the reduction in ambient pressure experienced during ascent from depth.  It is also the process of elimination of dissolved inert gases from the diver's body which accumulate during ascent, largely during pauses in the ascent known as decompression stops, and after surfacing, until the gas concentrations reach equilibrium. Divers breathing gas at ambient pressure need to ascend at a rate determined by their exposure to pressure and the breathing gas in use.  A diver who only breathes gas at atmospheric pressure when free-diving or snorkelling will not usually need to decompress. Divers using an atmospheric diving suit do not need to decompress as they are never exposed to high ambient pressure.

When a diver descends in the water, the hydrostatic pressure , and therefore the ambient pressure, rises. Because breathing gas is supplied at ambient pressure , some of this gas dissolves into the diver's blood and is transferred by the blood to other tissues. Inert gas such as nitrogen or helium continues to be taken up until the gas dissolved in the diver is in a state of equilibrium with the breathing gas in the diver's lungs , at which point the diver is saturated for that depth and breathing mixture, or the depth, and therefore the pressure, is changed, or the partial pressures of the gases are changed by modifying the breathing gas mixture.  During ascent, the ambient pressure is reduced, and at some stage the inert gases dissolved in any given tissue will be at a higher concentration than the equilibrium state and start to diffuse out again. If the pressure reduction is sufficient, excess gas may form bubbles, which may lead to decompression sickness , a possibly debilitating or life-threatening condition. It is essential that divers manage their decompression to avoid excessive bubble formation and decompression sickness.  A mismanaged decompression usually results from reducing the ambient pressure too quickly for the amount of gas in solution to be eliminated safely.  These bubbles may block arterial blood supply to tissues or directly cause tissue damage.  If the decompression is effective, the asymptomatic venous microbubbles present after most dives are eliminated from the diver's body in the alveolar capillary beds of the lungs. If they are not given enough time, or more bubbles are created than can be eliminated safely, the bubbles grow in size and number causing the symptoms and injuries of decompression sickness. The immediate goal of controlled decompression is to avoid development of symptoms of bubble formation in the tissues of the diver, and the long-term goal is to avoid complications due to sub-clinical decompression injury.

The mechanisms of bubble formation and the damage bubbles cause has been the subject of medical research for a considerable time and several hypotheses have been advanced and tested. Tables and algorithms for predicting the outcome of decompression schedules for specified hyperbaric exposures have been proposed, tested and used, and in many cases, superseded.  Although constantly refined and generally considered acceptably reliable, the actual outcome for any individual diver remains slightly unpredictable. Although decompression retains some risk, this is now generally considered acceptable for dives within the well tested range of normal recreational and professional diving. Nevertheless, currently popular decompression procedures advise a 'safety stop' additional to any stops required by the algorithm, usually of about three to five minutes at 3 to 6 metres (10 to 20 ft), particularly 1 on an otherwise continuous no-stop ascent.

Decompression may be continuous or staged .  A staged decompression ascent is interrupted by decompression stops at calculated depth intervals, but the entire ascent is actually part of the decompression and the ascent rate is critical to harmless elimination of inert gas.

A no-decompression dive , or more accurately, a dive with no-stop decompression, relies on limiting the ascent rate for avoidance of excessive bubble formation in the fastest tissues. The elapsed time at surface pressure immediately after a dive is also an important part of decompression and can be thought of as the last decompression stop of a dive. It can take up to 24 hours for the body to return to its normal atmospheric levels of inert gas saturation after a dive. When time is spent on the surface between dives this is known as the "surface interval" and is considered when calculating decompression requirements for the subsequent dive.

Efficient decompression requires the diver to ascend fast enough to establish as high a decompression gradient, in as many tissues, as safely possible, without provoking the development of symptomatic bubbles. This is facilitated by the highest acceptably safe oxygen partial pressure in the breathing gas, and avoiding gas changes that could cause counterdiffusion bubble formation or growth. The development of schedules that are both safe and efficient has been complicated by the large number of variables and uncertainties, including personal variation in response under varying environmental conditions and workload.

Decompression theory [ edit ] Main article: Decompression theory Recreational decompression tables printed on plastic cards Decompression theory is the study and modelling of the transfer of the inert gas component of breathing gases from the gas in the lungs to the tissues of the diver and back during exposure to variations in ambient pressure. In the case of underwater diving and compressed air work, this mostly involves ambient pressures greater than the local surface pressure—but astronauts , high altitude mountaineers , and occupants of unpressurised aircraft, are exposed to ambient pressures less than standard sea level atmospheric pressure.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In all cases, the symptoms of decompression sickness occur during or within a relatively short period of hours, or occasionally days, after a significant reduction of ambient pressure.

[ 3 ] Physics and physiology of decompression [ edit ] See also: Physiology of decompression The absorption of gases in liquids depends on the solubility of the specific gas in the specific liquid, the concentration of gas, customarily expressed as partial pressure, and temperature. The main variable in the study of decompression theory is pressure.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Once dissolved, distribution of the dissolved gas may be by diffusion , where there is no bulk flow of the solvent , or by perfusion where the solvent (in this case blood) is circulated around the diver's body, where gas can diffuse to local regions of lower concentration .

[ 7 ] Given sufficient time at a specific partial pressure in the breathing gas, the concentration in the tissues stabilises, or saturates , at a rate that depends on solubility, diffusion rate and perfusion, all of which vary in the different tissues of the body. This process is referred to as in-gassing, and is usually modelled as an inverse exponential process .

[ 7 ] If the concentration of the inert gas in the breathing gas is reduced below that of any of the tissues, there is a tendency for gas to return from the tissues to the breathing gas. This is known as out-gassing , and occurs during decompression, when the reduction in ambient pressure reduces the partial pressure of the inert gas in the lungs. This process may be complicated by the formation of gas bubbles, and the modelling is more complex and varied.

[ 7 ] The combined concentrations of gases in any given tissue depend on the history of pressure and gas composition. Under equilibrium conditions, the total concentration of dissolved gases is less than the ambient pressure—as oxygen is metabolised in the tissues, and the carbon dioxide produced is much more soluble. However, during a reduction in ambient pressure, the rate of pressure reduction may exceed the rate at which gas is eliminated by diffusion and perfusion. If the concentration gets too high, it may reach a stage where bubble formation can occur in the supersaturated tissues. When the pressure of gases in a bubble exceed the combined external pressures of ambient pressure and the surface tension of the bubble-liquid interface, the bubbles grow , and this growth can damage tissue.

[ 7 ] If the dissolved inert gases come out of solution within the tissues of the body and form bubbles, they may cause the condition known as decompression sickness , or DCS, also known as divers' disease, the bends or caisson disease. However, not all bubbles result in symptoms, and Doppler bubble detection shows that venous bubbles are present in a significant number of asymptomatic divers after relatively mild hyperbaric exposures.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Since bubbles can form in or migrate to any part of the body, DCS can produce many symptoms, and its effects may vary from joint pain and rashes to paralysis and death. Individual susceptibility can vary from day to day, and different individuals under the same conditions may be affected differently or not at all. The classification of types of DCS by its symptoms has evolved since its original description.

[ 8 ] The risk of decompression sickness after diving can be managed through effective decompression procedures and contracting it is now uncommon, though it remains to some degree unpredictable. Its potential severity has driven much research to prevent it and divers almost universally use decompression tables or dive computers to limit or monitor their exposure and to control their ascent speed and decompression procedures. If DCS is contracted, it is usually treated by hyperbaric oxygen therapy in a recompression chamber . If treated early, there is a significantly higher chance of successful recovery.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] A diver who only breathes gas at atmospheric pressure when free-diving or snorkelling will not usually need to decompress but it is possible to get decompression sickness, or taravana , from repetitive deep free-diving with short surface intervals.

[ 10 ] Decompression models [ edit ] See also: Decompression theory § Decompression model concepts , and Decompression theory § Decompression models in practice Actual rates of diffusion and perfusion, and solubility of gases in specific physiological tissues are not generally known, and vary considerably. However mathematical models have been proposed that approximate the real situation to a greater or lesser extent. These models predict whether symptomatic bubble formation is likely to occur for a given dive profile.

Algorithms based on these models produce decompression tables .

[ 7 ] In personal dive computers , they produce a real-time estimate of decompression status and display a recommended ascent profile for the diver, which may include decompression stops.

[ 11 ] Two different concepts have been used for decompression modelling. The first assumes that dissolved gas is eliminated while in the dissolved phase, and that bubbles are not formed during asymptomatic decompression. The second, which is supported by experimental observation, assumes that bubbles are formed during most asymptomatic decompressions, and that gas elimination must consider both dissolved and bubble phases.

[ 12 ] Early decompression models tended to use the dissolved phase models, and adjusted them by factors derived from experimental observations to reduce the risk of symptomatic bubble formation.

[ 7 ] There are two main groups of dissolved phase models: In parallel compartment models , several compartments with varying rates of gas absorption ( half time ), are considered to exist independently of each other, and the limiting condition is controlled by the compartment that shows the worst case for a specific exposure profile. These compartments represent conceptual tissues and do not represent specific organic tissues. They merely represent the range of possibilities for the organic tissues. The second group uses serial compartments , which assumes that gas diffuses through one compartment before it reaches the next.

[ 7 ] More recent models attempt to model bubble dynamics , also usually by simplified models, to facilitate the computation of tables, and later to allow real time predictions during a dive. Models that approximate bubble dynamics are varied. They range from those that are not much more complex than the dissolved phase models, to those that require considerably greater computational power.

[ 12 ] Bubble models have not been experimentally shown to be more efficient, nor to reduce risk of decompression sickness for dives where the bottom profile and total ascent time are the same as for dissolved gas models. Limited experimental work suggests that for some dive profiles the increased ingassing due to deeper stops may cause greater decompression stress in slower tissues with consequent greater venous bubble loading after dives.

[ 13 ] Decompression practice [ edit ] Main article: Decompression practice Divers using the anchor cable as an aid to depth control during a decompression stop Diver deploying a DSMB Diver with bailout and decompression cylinders The practice of decompression by divers comprises the planning and monitoring of the profile indicated by the algorithms or tables of the chosen decompression model , the equipment available and appropriate to the circumstances of the dive, and the procedures authorised for the equipment and profile to be used. There is a large range of options in all of these aspects. In many cases decompression practice takes place in a framework or "decompression system" which imposes extra constraints on diver behaviour. Such constraints may include: limiting the ascent rate; making stops during the ascent additional to any decompression stops; limiting the number of dives performed in a day; limiting the number of days of diving within a week; avoiding dive profiles that have large numbers of ascents and descents; avoiding heavy work immediately after a dive; not diving prior to flying or ascending to altitude; [ 14 ] and organisational requirements.

Procedures [ edit ] See also: Decompression practice and Ascending and descending (diving) § Historical variation in recommended ascent rates Decompression may be continuous or staged, where the ascent is interrupted by stops at regular depth intervals, but the entire ascent is part of the decompression, and ascent rate can be critical to harmless elimination of inert gas.

[ 15 ] What is commonly known as no-decompression diving, or more accurately no-stop decompression, relies on limiting ascent rate for avoidance of excessive bubble formation.

[ 16 ] The procedures used for decompression depend on the mode of diving, the available equipment , the site and environment and the actual dive profile . Standardised procedures have been developed that provide an acceptable level of risk in appropriate circumstances. Different sets of procedures are used by commercial , military , scientific and recreational divers, though there is considerable overlap where similar equipment is used, and some concepts are common to all decompression procedures.

Normal diving decompression procedures range from continuous ascent for no-stop dives, where the necessary decompression occurs during the ascent, which is kept to a controlled rate for this purpose, [ 16 ] through staged decompression in open water or in a bell, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] or following the decompression ceiling, to decompression from saturation, which generally occurs in a decompression chamber that is part of a saturation system.

[ 19 ] Decompression may be accelerated by the use of breathing gases that provide an increased concentration differential of the inert gas components of the breathing mixture by maximising the acceptable oxygen content, while avoiding problems caused by inert gas counterdiffusion .

[ 20 ] Therapeutic recompression is a medical procedure for treatment of decompression sickness , and is followed by decompression, usually to a relatively conservative schedule.

[ 21 ] Equipment [ edit ] See also: Decompression practice § Decompression equipment Equipment directly associated with decompression includes: The decompression tables or software used to plan the dive, [ 22 ] The equipment used to control and monitor depth and dive time, such as: personal dive computers , depth gauges , and timers , [ 23 ] Shot lines , surface marker buoys (SMBs), Decompression buoys (DSMBs) and decompression trapezes [ 23 ] diving stages (baskets), wet and dry bells , deck and saturation decompression chambers [ broken anchor ] , [ 24 ] and hyperbaric treatment chambers .

[ 25 ] The supply of decompression gases , which may be: carried by the diver, [ 23 ] supplied from the surface via the diver's umbilical or bell umbilical, [ 24 ] or supplied in the chamber at the surface.

[ 25 ] History of decompression research and development [ edit ] Main article: History of decompression research and development This painting, An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump by Joseph Wright of Derby , 1768, depicts an experiment performed by Robert Boyle in 1660.

Dry bell The symptoms of decompression sickness are caused by damage from the formation and growth of bubbles of inert gas within the tissues and by blockage of arterial blood supply to tissues by gas bubbles and other emboli consequential to bubble formation and tissue damage.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The precise mechanisms of bubble formation [ 28 ] and the damage they cause has been the subject of medical research for a considerable time and several hypotheses have been advanced and tested. Tables and algorithms for predicting the outcome of decompression schedules for specified hyperbaric exposures have been proposed, tested, and used, and usually found to be of some use but not entirely reliable. Decompression remains a procedure with some risk, but this has been reduced and is generally considered acceptable for dives within the well-tested range of commercial, military and recreational diving.

[ 7 ] Early developments [ edit ] The first recorded experimental work related to decompression was conducted by Robert Boyle , who subjected experimental animals to reduced ambient pressure by use of a primitive vacuum pump. In the earliest experiments the subjects died from asphyxiation, but in later experiments signs of what was later to become known as decompression sickness were observed.

[ 29 ] Later, when technological advances allowed the use of pressurisation of mines and caissons to exclude water ingress, miners were observed to present symptoms [ 29 ] of what would become known as caisson disease, compressed air illness, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] the bends, [ 29 ] and decompression sickness.

Once it was recognised that the symptoms were caused by gas bubbles, [ 30 ] and that re-compression could relieve the symptoms, [ 29 ] [ 32 ] Paul Bert showed in 1878 that decompression sickness is caused by nitrogen bubbles released from tissues and blood during or after decompression, and showed the advantages of breathing oxygen after developing decompression sickness.

[ 33 ] Further work showed that it was possible to avoid symptoms by slow decompression, [ 30 ] and subsequently various theoretical models have been derived to predict safe decompression profiles and treatment of decompression sickness.

[ 34 ] Start of systematic work on decompression models [ edit ] In 1908 John Scott Haldane prepared the first recognized decompression table for the British Admiralty, based on extensive experiments on goats using an end point of symptomatic DCS.

[ 18 ] [ 29 ] George D. Stillson of the United States Navy tested and refined Haldane's tables in 1912, [ 35 ] and this research led to the first publication of the United States Navy Diving Manual and the establishment of a Navy Diving School in Newport, Rhode Island. At about the same time Leonard Erskine Hill was working on a system of continuous uniform decompression [ 29 ] [ 32 ] The Naval School, Diving and Salvage was re-established at the Washington Navy Yard in 1927, and the Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) was moved to the same venue. In the following years, the Experimental Diving Unit developed the US Navy Air Decompression Tables, which became the accepted world standard for diving with compressed air.

[ 36 ] During the 1930s, Hawkins, Schilling and Hansen conducted extensive experimental dives to determine allowable supersaturation ratios for different tissue compartments for Haldanean model, [ 37 ] Albert R. Behnke and others experimented with oxygen for re-compression therapy, [ 29 ] and the US Navy 1937 tables were published.

[ 37 ] In 1941, altitude decompression sickness was first treated with hyperbaric oxygen.

[ 38 ] and the revised US Navy Decompression Tables were published in 1956.

Beginnings of alternative models [ edit ] In 1965 LeMessurier and Hills published A thermodynamic approach arising from a study on Torres Strait diving techniques , which suggests that decompression by conventional models forms bubbles that are then eliminated by re-dissolving at the decompression stops—which is slower than elimination while still in solution. This indicates the importance of minimizing bubble phase for efficient gas elimination, [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Groupe d'Etudes et Recherches Sous-marines published the French Navy MN65 decompression tables, and Goodman and Workman introduced re-compression tables using oxygen to accelerate elimination of inert gas.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] The Royal Naval Physiological Laboratory published tables based on Hempleman's tissue slab diffusion model in 1972, [ 43 ] isobaric counterdiffusion in subjects who breathed one inert gas mixture while being surrounded by another was first described by Graves, Idicula, Lambertsen, and Quinn in 1973, [ 44 ] [ 45 ] and the French government published the MT74 Tables du Ministère du Travail in 1974.

From 1976, decompression sickness testing sensitivity was improved by ultrasonic methods that can detect mobile venous bubbles before symptoms of DCS become apparent.

[ 46 ] Development of several additional approaches [ edit ] Paul K Weathersby, Louis D Homer and Edward T Flynn introduced survival analysis into the study of decompression sickness in 1982.

[ 47 ] Albert A. Bühlmann published Decompression–Decompression sickness in 1984.

[ 17 ] Bühlmann recognised the problems associated with altitude diving, and proposed a method that calculated maximum nitrogen loading in the tissues at a particular ambient pressure by modifying Haldane's allowable supersaturation ratios to increase linearly with depth.

[ 48 ] In 1984 DCIEM (Defence and Civil Institution of Environmental Medicine, Canada) released No-Decompression and Decompression Tables based on the Kidd/Stubbs serial compartment model and extensive ultrasonic testing, [ 49 ] and Edward D. Thalmann published the USN E-L algorithm and tables for constant PO 2 Nitrox closed circuit rebreather applications, and extended use of the E-L model for constant PO 2 Heliox CCR in 1985. The E-L model may be interpreted as a bubble model.
The 1986 Swiss Sport Diving Tables were based on the Haldanean Bühlmann model, [ 50 ] as were the 1987 SAA Bühlmann tables in the UK.

[ 48 ] Bubble models started to become prevalent [ edit ] D. E. Yount and D. C. Hoffman proposed a bubble model in 1986, and the BSAC'88 tables were based on Hennessy's bubble model.

[ 51 ] The 1990 DCIEM sport diving tables were based on fitting experimental data, rather than a physiological model, [ 49 ] and the 1990 French Navy Marine Nationale 90 (MN90) decompression tables were a development of the earlier Haldanean model of the MN65 tables.

[ 52 ] In 1991 D.E. Yount described a development of his earlier bubble model, the Varied Permeability Model, and the 1992 French civilian Tables du Ministère du Travail (MT92) also have a bubble model interpretation.

[ 53 ] NAUI published Trimix and Nitrox tables based on the Wienke reduced gradient bubble model (RGBM) in 1999, [ 54 ] followed by recreational air tables based on the RGBM model in 2001.

[ 55 ] In 2007, Wayne Gerth and David Doolette published VVal 18 and VVal 18M parameter sets for tables and programs based on the Thalmann E-L algorithm, and produced an internally compatible set of decompression tables for open circuit and CCR on air and Nitrox, including in water air/oxygen decompression and surface decompression on oxygen.

[ 56 ] In 2008, the US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 included a version of the 2007 tables developed by Gerth and Doolette.

This section needs expansion with: USNDM R7. You can help by adding to it .

( February 2021 ) See also [ edit ] Decompression practice – Techniques and procedures for safe decompression of divers Decompression sickness – Disorder caused by dissolved gases forming bubbles in tissues Decompression theory – Theoretical modelling of decompression physiology Equivalent air depth – Method of comparing decompression requirements for air and a given nitrox mix Equivalent narcotic depth – Method for comparing the narcotic effects of a mixed diving gas with air History of decompression research and development – Chronological list of notable events in the history of diving decompression.

Hyperbaric treatment schedules – Planned hyperbaric exposure using a specified breathing gas as medical treatment Oxygen window – Physiological effect of oxygen metabolism on the total dissolved gas concentration in venous blood Physiology of decompression – Physiological basis for decompression theory and practice Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm – Mathematical model of tissue inert gas uptake and release with pressure change Haldane's decompression model – Decompression model developed by John Scott Haldane Reduced gradient bubble model – Decompression algorithm Thalmann algorithm – Mathematical model for diver decompression Thermodynamic model of decompression – Early model in which decompression is controlled by volume of gas bubbles forming in tissues Varying Permeability Model – Decompression model and algorithm based on bubble physics References [ edit ] ^ Van Liew, HD; Conkin, J (14–16 June 2007).

"A start toward micronucleus-based decompression models:Altitude decompression" . Bethesda, Maryland: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society, Inc. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015 . Retrieved 28 March 2016 .

^ Brown, J.R.; Antuñano, Melchor J.

"Altitude-induced Decompression Sickness" (PDF) .

AM-400-95/2 Medical Facts for Pilots . Washington, DC: Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 21 February 2012 .

^ US Navy 2008 , Vol. 5 Chpt. 20 Sect. 3.1 ^ Young, C. L.; Battino, R.; Clever, H. L. (1982).

"The solubility of gases in liquids" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ Hill, John W.; Petrucci, Ralph H. (1999).

General Chemistry (2nd ed.). Prentice Hall.

^ P. Cohen, ed. (1989).

The ASME handbook on Water Technology for Thermal Power Systems . New York City: The American Society of Mechanical Engineers. p. 442.

^ a b c d e f g h Huggins 1992 , chpt. 1 ^ a b c Thalmann, Edward D. (April 2004).

"Decompression Illness: What is it and what is the treatment?" .

DAN Medical articles . Durham, North Caroline: Divers Alert Network . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ a b Huggins 1992 , Introduction ^ Wong, R. M. (1999).

"Taravana revisited: Decompression illness after breath-hold diving" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (3). Melbourne, Victoria: SPUMS.

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on 21 August 2009 . Retrieved 8 April 2008 .

^ Lang, M.A.; Hamilton, R.W. Jr. (1989).

Proceedings of the AAUS Dive Computer Workshop . United States: USC Catalina Marine Science Center. p. 231. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 7 August 2008 .

^ a b Møllerløkken, Andreas (24 August 2011). Blogg, S. Lesley; Lang, Michael A.; Møllerløkken, Andreas (eds.).

"Proceedings of Validation of Dive Computers Workshop" . Gdansk, Poland: European Underwater and Baromedical Society. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ Mitchell, Simon J. (2016). Pollock, N.W.; Sellers, S.H.; Godfrey, J.M. (eds.).

Decompression Science: Critical Gas Exchange (PDF) .

Rebreathers and Scientific Diving. Proceedings of NPS/NOAA/DAN/AAUS June 16–19, 2015 Workshop . Wrigley Marine Science Center, Catalina Island, CA. pp. 163–1 74.

^ Cole, Bob (March 2008). "4. Diver Behaviour".

The SAA Buhlmann Deep-Stop System Handbook . Liverpool, UK: Sub-Aqua Association.

ISBN 978-0953290482 .

^ US Navy 2008 , chpt. 9-3.12 ^ a b Huggins 1992 , chpt. 3 page 9 ^ a b Bühlmann Albert A.

(1984).

Decompression–Decompression Sickness . Berlin and New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 978-0-387-13308-9 .

^ a b Boycott, A.E.; Damant, G.C.C.; Haldane, John Scott (1908).

"Prevention of compressed air illness" .

Journal of Hygiene .

8 (3): 342– 443.

doi : 10.1017/S0022172400003399 .

PMC 2167126 .

PMID 20474365 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2011 . Retrieved 30 May 2010 .

^ US Navy 2008 , chpt. 15 ^ Latson, Gary (December 2000).

"Accelerated decompression using oxygen for submarine rescue - Summary report and operational guidance" . Navy Experimental Diving Unit . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ US Navy 2008 , chpt. 15 page 1 ^ Huggins 1992 , chpt. 4 ^ a b c Staff (2015).

"BSAC Safe Diving" . Ellesmere Port, Cheshire: British Sub-Aqua Club. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012 . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

^ a b US Navy 2008 , Vol. 2 Chpt. 9 ^ a b US Navy 2008 , Vol. 5 Chpt. 21 ^ Ackles, K.N. (1973).

"Blood-Bubble Interaction in Decompression Sickness" .

Defence R&D Canada (DRDC) Technical Report .

DCIEM-73 – CP-960 . Downsview, Ontario: Defence and Civil Institute of Environmental Medicine. Archived from the original on 21 August 2009 . Retrieved 12 March 2016 .

^ Vann, Richard D., ed. (1989).

The Physiological Basis of Decompression . 38th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop. Vol. 75(Phys)6–1–89.

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society . p. 437. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008 . Retrieved 16 February 2019 .

^ Papadopoulou, Virginie; Eckersley, Robert J.; Balestra, Costantino; Karapantsios, Thodoris D.; Tang, Meng-Xing (May 2013). "A critical review of physiological bubble formation in hyperbaric decompression".

Advances in Colloid and Interface Science .

191– 192. Amsterdam: Elsevier B.V.: 22– 30.

doi : 10.1016/j.cis.2013.02.002 .

hdl : 10044/1/31585 .

PMID 23523006 .

S2CID 34264173 .

^ a b c d e f g Acott, C. (1999).

"A brief history of diving and decompression illness" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (2). Melbourne, Victoria: SPUMS.

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 . Archived from the original on 27 June 2008 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ a b c Huggins 1992 , chpt. 1 page 8 ^ Butler, W.P. (2004).

"Caisson disease during the construction of the Eads and Brooklyn Bridges: A review" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

31 (4): 445– 59.

PMID 15686275 . Archived from the original on 22 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ a b Hill, Leonard Erskine (1912).

Caisson sickness, and the physiology of work in compressed air . London, UK: E. Arnold . Retrieved 31 October 2011 .

^ Bert, P. (1878). "Barometric Pressure: researches in experimental physiology".

Translated by: Hitchcock MA and Hitchcock FA. College Book Company; 1943 .

* ^ Zuntz, N. (1897). "Zur Pathogenese und Therapie der durch rasche Luftdruck-änderungen erzeugten Krankheiten".

Fortschritte der Medizin (in German).

15 : 532– 639.

^ Stillson, G. D. (1915).

"Report in Deep Diving Tests" .

US Bureau of Construction and Repair, Navy Department. Technical Report . Archived from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2008 .

^ Staff, US Navy (15 August 2016).

"Diving in the U.S. Navy: A Brief History" .

Naval History and Heritage Command website . Washington, DC: Naval History and Heritage Command . Retrieved 21 November 2016 .

^ a b Huggins 1992 , chpt. 3 page 2 ^ Davis, Jefferson C.; Sheffield, Paul J.; Schuknecht, L.; Heimbach, R. D.; Dunn, J. M.; Douglas, G.; Anderson, G. K. (August 1977). "Altitude decompression sickness: hyperbaric therapy results in 145 cases".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

48 (8): 722– 30.

PMID 889546 .

^ LeMessurier, D. Hugh; Hills, Brian Andrew (1965). "Decompression Sickness. A thermodynamic approach arising from a study on Torres Strait diving techniques".

Hvalradets Skrifter (48): 54– 84.

^ Hills, B. A. (1978).

"A fundamental approach to the prevention of decompression sickness" .

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

8 (2). Melbourne, Victoria: SPUMS. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ How, J.; West, D.; Edmonds, C. (June 1976). "Decompression sickness and diving".

Singapore Medical Journal .

17 (2). Singapore: Singapore Medical Association: 92– 7.

PMID 982095 .

^ Goodman, M. W.; Workman, R. D. (1965).

"Minimal-recompression, oxygen-breathing approach to treatment of decompression sickness in divers and aviators" .

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report . NEDU-RR-5-65. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ Huggins 1992 , chpt. 4 page 3 ^ Graves, D.J.; Idicula, J.; Lambertsen, C.J.; Quinn, J.A. (9 February 1973). "Bubble formation in physical and biological systems: a manifestation of counterdiffusion in composite media".

Science .

179 (4073). Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science: 582– 584.

Bibcode : 1973Sci...179..582G .

doi : 10.1126/science.179.4073.582 .

PMID 4686464 .

S2CID 46428717 .

^ Graves, D.J.; Idicula, J.; Lambertsen, Christian J.; Quinn, J.A. (March 1973). "Bubble formation resulting from counterdiffusion supersaturation: a possible explanation for isobaric inert gas 'urticaria' and vertigo".

Physics in Medicine and Biology .

18 (2). Bristol, UK: IOP Publishing: 256– 264.

Bibcode : 1973PMB....18..256G .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.555.429 .

doi : 10.1088/0031-9155/18/2/009 .

PMID 4805115 .

S2CID 250737144 .

^ Spencer, M.P. (February 1976). "Decompression limits for compressed air determined by ultrasonically detected blood bubbles".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

40 (2): 229– 35.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1976.40.2.229 .

PMID 1249001 .

^ Weathersby, Paul K.; Homer, Louis D.; Flynn, Edward T. (September 1984). "On the likelihood of decompression sickness".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

57 (3): 815– 25.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1984.57.3.815 .

PMID 6490468 .

^ a b Powell, Mark (2008).

Deco for Divers . Southend-on-Sea: Aquapress. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 978-1-905492-07-7 .

^ a b Huggins 1992 , chpt. 4 page 6 ^ Huggins 1992 , chpt. 4 page 11 ^ Huggins 1992 , chpt. 4 page 4 ^ Trucco, Jean-Noël; Biard, Jef; Redureau, Jean-Yves; Fauvel, Yvon (1999).

"Table Marine National 90 (MN90), Version du 3 May 1999" (PDF) (in French). F.F.E.S.S.M. Comité interrégional Bretagne & Pays de la Loire; Commission Technique Régionale. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 4 March 2016 .

^ Travaux en Milieu Hyperbare. Mesures particulières de prévention. Fascicule no 1636. Imprimerie du Journal Officiel, 26 rue Desaix, 75732 Paris cedex 15.

ISBN 2-11-073322-5 .

^ Wienke, Bruce R.; O'Leary, Timothy R. (2001).

"Full Up Phase Model Decompression Tables" . Advanced diver magazine . Retrieved 4 March 2016 .

^ "Decompression Diving" . Divetable.de . Retrieved 17 July 2012 .

^ Gerth, W. A.; Doolette, D. J. (2007). "VVal-18 and VVal-18M Thalmann Algorithm Air Decompression Tables and Procedures".

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report .

Sources [ edit ] Ball, R.; Himm, J.; Homer, L.D.; Thalmann, E.D. (1995).

"Does the time course of bubble evolution explain decompression sickness risk?" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

22 (3): 263– 280.

ISSN 1066-2936 .

PMID 7580767 . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 28 January 2012 .

Brubakk, A.O.; Neuman, T.S. (2003).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

Gerth, Wayne A.; Doolette, David J. (2007).

"VVal-18 and VVal-18M Thalmann Algorithm – Air Decompression Tables and Procedures" .

Navy Experimental Diving Unit, TA 01-07, NEDU TR 07-09 . Archived from the original on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 27 January 2012 .

Hamilton, Robert W.; Thalmann, Edward D.

(2003). "10.2: Decompression Practice". In Brubakk, Alf O.; Neuman, Tom S. (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th Revised ed.). United States: Saunders. pp.

455– 500.

ISBN 978-0-7020-2571-6 .

OCLC 51607923 .

Huggins, Karl E. (1992).

"Dynamics of decompression workshop" .

Course Taught at the University of Michigan . Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

Lippmann, John (1990).

Deeper into Diving (1st ed.). Melbourne, Australia: J L Publications.

ISBN 978-0-9590306-3-1 .

Parker, E.C.; Survanshi, S.S.; Weathersby, P.K.; Thalmann, E.D. (1992).

"Statistically Based Decompression Tables VIII: Linear Exponential Kinetics" .

Naval Medical Research Institute Report .

92– 73. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2008 .

Powell, Mark (2008).

Deco for Divers . Southend-on-Sea: Aquapress.

ISBN 978-1-905492-07-7 .

Thalmann, E.D. (1984).

"Phase II testing of decompression algorithms for use in the U.S. Navy underwater decompression computer" .

Navy Exp. Diving Unit Res. Report .

1– 84 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2012 . Retrieved 16 March 2008 .

Thalmann, E.D. (1985).

"Development of a Decompression Algorithm for Constant Oxygen Partial Pressure in Helium Diving" .

Navy Exp. Diving Unit Res. Report .

1– 85 . Archived from the original on 18 April 2012 . Retrieved 16 March 2008 .

US Navy (2008).

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 June 2008 .

Yount, D.E. (1991). Hans-Jurgen, K.; Harper, D.E. Jr. (eds.).

Gelatin, bubbles, and the bends .

Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences Eleventh Annual Scientific Diving Symposium held 25–30 September 1991. University of Hawaii.

(Report). Honolulu, Hawaii: International Pacifica Scientific Diving. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gribble, M. de G. (1960); "A Comparison of the High-Altitude and High-Pressure Syndromes of Decompression Sickness", Br. J. Ind. Med.

, 1960, 17, 181.

Hills. B. (1966); A Thermodynamic and Kinetic Approach to Decompression Sickness . Thesis.

Lippmann, John; Mitchell, Simon (2005).

Deeper into Diving (2nd ed.). Melbourne, Australia: J L Publications. Section 2, chapters 13–24, pages 181–350.

ISBN 978-0-9752290-1-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Decompression (diving) .

Dive tables from the NOAA German BGV C 23 table, permitting a simplified procedure of decompression planning v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐f5txz
Cached time: 20250818092601
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.333 seconds
Real time usage: 1.665 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8393/1000000
Revision size: 54902/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 612392/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4506/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 209515/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.752/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26863525/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1184.052      1 -total
 35.78%  423.599      1 Template:Reflist
 15.32%  181.355     25 Template:Cite_journal
 15.08%  178.558     15 Template:Annotated_link
 13.48%  159.621      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 13.14%  155.628      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.29%  121.800     11 Template:Cite_web
  8.00%   94.777     35 Template:Navbox
  5.99%   70.877     13 Template:Cite_book
  5.38%   63.740      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33395587:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818092601 and revision id 1299060731. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decompression_(diving)&oldid=1299060731 " Categories : Underwater diving decompression Underwater diving hazards Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2011 Use dmy dates from September 2020 Pages with broken anchors Articles to be expanded from February 2021 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata Good articles This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 09:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decompression (diving) 13 languages Add topic

