Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions and examples 2 A difficult question 3 Another argument for non-naturalism 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ethical non-naturalism 4 languages العربية Français Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meta-ethical view This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ethical non-naturalism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .

Please help improve it by rewriting it in a balanced fashion that contextualises different points of view.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ethical non-naturalism (or moral non-naturalism ) is the meta-ethical view which claims that: Ethical sentences express propositions .

Some such propositions are true.

Those propositions are made true by objective features of the world, independent of human opinion.

These moral features of the world are not reducible to any set of non-moral features.

This makes ethical non-naturalism a non-definist form of moral realism , which is in turn a form of cognitivism . Ethical non-naturalism stands in opposition to ethical naturalism , which claims that moral terms and properties are reducible to non-moral terms and properties, as well as to all forms of moral anti-realism , including ethical subjectivism (which denies that moral propositions refer to objective facts), error theory (which denies that any moral propositions are true), and non-cognitivism (which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all).

Definitions and examples [ edit ] According to G. E. Moore , " Goodness is a simple, undefinable, non-natural property ." To call goodness "non-natural" does not mean that it is supernatural or divine . It does mean, however, that goodness cannot be reduced to natural properties such as needs, wants or pleasures. Moore also stated that a reduction of ethical properties to a divine command would be the same as stating their naturalness. This would be an example of what he referred to as "the naturalistic fallacy ." Moore claimed that goodness is " indefinable ", i.e., it cannot be defined in any other terms. This is the central claim of non-naturalism. Thus, the meaning of sentences containing the word "good" cannot be explained entirely in terms of sentences not containing the word "good." One cannot substitute words referring to pleasure , needs or anything else in place of "good." Some properties, such as hardness, roundness and dampness, are clearly natural properties. We encounter them in the real world and can perceive them. On the other hand, other properties, such as being good and being right, are not so obvious. A great novel is considered to be a good thing; goodness may be said to be a property of that novel. Paying one's debts and telling the truth are generally held to be right things to do; rightness may be said to be a property of certain human actions .

However, these two types of property are quite different. Those natural properties, such as hardness and roundness, can be perceived and encountered in the real world. On the other hand, it is not immediately clear how to physically see, touch or measure the goodness of a novel or the rightness of an action.

A difficult question [ edit ] Moore did not consider goodness and rightness to be natural properties, i.e., they cannot be defined in terms of any natural properties. How, then, can we know that anything is good and how can we distinguish good from bad?

Moral epistemology, the part of epistemology (and/or ethics) that studies how we know moral facts and how moral beliefs are justified, has proposed an answer. British epistemologists, following Moore, suggested that humans have a special faculty , a faculty of moral intuition , which tells us what is good and bad, right and wrong.

Ethical intuitionists assert that, if we see a good person or a right action, and our faculty of moral intuition is sufficiently developed and unimpaired, we simply intuit that the person is good or that the action is right. Moral intuition is supposed to be a mental process different from other, more familiar faculties like sense-perception, and that moral judgments are its outputs. When someone judges something to be good, or some action to be right, then the person is using the faculty of moral intuition. The faculty is attuned to those non-natural properties. Perhaps the best ordinary notion that approximates moral intuition would be the idea of a conscience .

Another argument for non-naturalism [ edit ] Moore also introduced what is called the open-question argument , a position he later rejected.

Suppose a definition of "good" is "pleasure-causing." In other words, if something is good, it causes pleasure; if it causes pleasure, then it is, by definition, good. Moore asserted, however, that we could always ask, "But are pleasure-causing things good?" This would always be an open question. There is no foregone conclusion that, indeed, pleasure-causing things are good. 
In his initial argument, Moore concluded that any similar definition of goodness could be criticized in the same way.

See also [ edit ] Principia Ethica The Right and the Good References [ edit ] "Moral Non-Naturalism" entry  in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethical_non-naturalism&oldid=1217199807 " Categories : Metaethics Naturalism (philosophy) Ethical theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from December 2022 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 4 April 2024, at 12:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethical non-naturalism 4 languages Add topic

