Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 The Original Initiative of World Oceans Day 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents World Oceans Day 56 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Basa Bali বাংলা भोजपुरी བོད་ཡིག Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gaeilge ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית کٲشُر Latina Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Observance day on or around June 8 "Ocean Day" redirects here; not to be confused with Marine Day , China National Maritime Day , or Día del Mar .

This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "World Oceans Day" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "World Oceans Day" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue .

( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) World Ocean Day A sunset over the White Sea Observed by All UN member states , including Argentina Australia , Austria , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Denmark , Finland , France , Germany , India , Israel , Italy , Japan , Mexico , the Netherlands , Norway , the Philippines , Poland , South Africa , Spain , Switzerland , Thailand and the United States Date 8 June Next time 8 June 2026 ( 2026-06-08 ) Frequency Annual First time 8 June 1992 ; 33 years ago ( 1992-06-08 ) World Ocean Day ( WOD ) is an international day that takes place annually on June 8. The concept was originally proposed in 1992 by Canada's International Centre for Ocean Development (ICOD) and the Ocean Institute of Canada (OIC) at the Earth Summit – UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

[ 1 ] The Ocean Project started global coordination of World Ocean Day starting in 2002.  "World Oceans Day" was officially recognized by the United Nations in 2008. The international day supports the implementation of worldwide Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and fosters public interest in the protection of the ocean and the sustainable management of its resources.

[ 2 ] World Oceans Day is observed by all UN member states.

History [ edit ] The Original Initiative of World Oceans Day [ edit ] The Brundtland Commission (also known as the World Commission on Environment and Development) noted in the 1987 Brundtland Report that the ocean sector lacked a strong voice compared to other sectors.

[ 3 ] At the first World Ocean Day in 1992, the objectives were to move the ocean from the sidelines to the center of the intergovernmental and NGO discussions and policy and to strengthen the voice of ocean and coastal constituencies worldwide.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Coral Triangle Day European Maritime Day Marine pollution Ocean governance Overfishing Spaceship Earth References [ edit ] ^ Swan, Judith.

"About" .

United Nations . Retrieved 4 March 2019 .

^ "World Oceans Day, 8 June" .

www.un.org . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ ARE, Federal Office for Spatial Development.

"1987: Brundtland Report" .

www.are.admin.ch . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ "World Oceans Day" .

World Celebration Days . 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official United Nations World Oceans Day Website Official United Nations World Oceans Day Website (2009–2017) World Ocean Day website The Ocean Project website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_Oceans_Day&oldid=1301976181 " Categories : Recurring events established in 1992 Environmental awareness days June observances Oceans United Nations days Sea in culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing more viewpoints from March 2019 Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2023 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from May 2018 Infobox holiday with missing field Infobox holiday fixed day (2) This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 18:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World Oceans Day 56 languages Add topic

