Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Legacy 3 Works 4 See also 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Friedrich Pfaff 26 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1765–1825) Johann Friedrich Pfaff Born ( 1765-12-22 ) 22 December 1765 Stuttgart , Holy Roman Empire Died 21 April 1825 (1825-04-21) (aged 59) Halle , German Confederation ( Prussia ) Alma mater University of Göttingen Known for Pfaffians Pfaffian constraint Pfaffian function Pfaffian system Pfaffian orientation Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Helmstedt Halle University Doctoral advisor Abraham Kästner Johann Elert Bode Doctoral students Carl Friedrich Gauss August Möbius Karl Mollweide Other notable students Johann Christian Martin Bartels Johann Friedrich Pfaff (sometimes spelled Friederich ; 22 December 1765 – 21 April 1825) was a German mathematician. He was described as one of Germany's most eminent mathematicians during the 19th century. He was a precursor of the German school of mathematical thinking, under which Carl Friedrich Gauss and his followers largely determined the lines on which mathematics developed during the 19th century.

Biography [ edit ] He received his early education at the Carlsschule , where he met Friedrich Schiller , his lifelong friend. His mathematical capacity was noticed during his early years. He pursued his studies at Göttingen under Abraham Gotthelf Kästner , and in 1787 he went to Berlin and studied practical astronomy under J. E. Bode . In 1788, Pfaff became professor of mathematics in Helmstedt , and continued his work as a professor until that university was abolished in 1810. After this event, he became professor of mathematics at the University of Halle , where he stayed for the rest of his life.

[ 1 ] He studied mathematical series and integral calculus , and is noted for his work on partial differential equations of the first order Pfaffian systems , as they are now called, which became part of the theory of differential forms ; and as Carl Friedrich Gauss 's formal research supervisor. He knew Gauss well, when they both lived together in Helmstedt in 1798.

August Möbius was later his student.

His two principal works are Disquisitiones analyticae maxime ad calculum integralem et doctrinam serierum pertinentes (4to., vol. i., Helmstädt, 1797) and "Methodus generalis, aequationes differentiarum particularum, necnon aequationes differentiales vulgares, utrasque primi ordinis inter quotcumque variabiles, complete integrandi" in Abhandlungen der Königlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin (1814–1815).

[ 1 ] His brother Johann Wilhelm Andreas Pfaff was a professor of pure and applied mathematics . Another brother, Christoph Heinrich Pfaff , was a professor of medicine, physics and chemistry.

[ 1 ] Legacy [ edit ] They asked Laplace who, in his opinion, was the greatest mathematician of Germany. "It's Pfaff," he answered. - "I thought," the questioner replied, "that Gauss was superior to him." - "But," exclaimed Laplace, "you're asking me who is the greatest mathematician of Germany, and Gauss is the greatest mathematician of Europe." — Nouvelle Biographie Générale , volume 19, page 686 .

Works [ edit ] Commentatio de ortibus et occasibus siderum apud auctores classicos commemoratis , 1786 Commentatio de ortibus et occasibus siderum apud auctores classicos commemoratis (in Latin). Göttingen: Johann Christian Dieterich. 1786.

See also [ edit ] Pfaffian Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Pfaff, Johann Friedrich ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

339– 340.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Johann Friedrich Pfaff" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Johann Friedrich Pfaff at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Friedrich_Pfaff&oldid=1286698628 " Categories : 1765 births 1825 deaths 18th-century German mathematicians 19th-century German mathematicians Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Members of the French Academy of Sciences German mathematical analysts Linear algebraists People educated at the Karlsschule Stuttgart People from the Duchy of Württemberg Partial differential equation theorists University of Göttingen alumni Academic staff of the University of Helmstedt Academic staff of the Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg Scientists from Stuttgart Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards CS1 Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Friedrich Pfaff 26 languages Add topic

