Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 2.1 Law 2.2 Science and engineering 2.3 Other uses 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ab initio 16 languages العربية বাংলা Bosanski Cymraeg Deutsch Español Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Română Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin term meaning "from the beginning" For other uses, see Ab initio (disambiguation) .

Ab initio ( / ˌ æ b ɪ ˈ n ɪ ʃ i oʊ / AB in- ISH -ee-oh ) [ 1 ] is a Latin term meaning "from the beginning" and is derived from the Latin ab ("from") + initio , ablative singular of initium ("beginning").

Etymology [ edit ] c.

1600 , from Latin, literally "from the beginning", from ablative case of initium "entrance", "beginning", related to verb inire "to go into", "enter upon", "begin".

[ 2 ] Uses [ edit ] Ab initio (abbreviation: ab init.

) is used in several contexts, including the following: Law [ edit ] In law , ab initio refers to something being the case from the start or from the instant of the act rather than from when the court declared it so. For instance, the term "void ab initio " means "to be treated as invalid from the outset." E.g., in many jurisdictions , if a person signs a contract under duress, that contract is treated as being "void ab initio ".

Typically, documents or acts which are void ab initio cannot be fixed and if a jurisdiction, a document, or an act is so declared at law to be void ab initio , the parties are returned to their respective positions that they were at the beginning of the event.

"Void ab initio " is often contrasted with "voidable" in futuro , such documents which become void only as of the date of a certain event or of the judicial declaration to that effect. For example, termination of a contract only operates in futuro .

An insurer facing a claim from an insured who had deceived the insurer on a material fact would claim that the insurance contract was void ab initio ; it was null and void from the beginning and that since there was no legally enforceable contract, the insurer ought not to have to pay.

[ 3 ] Science and engineering [ edit ] In general, a calculation is said to be ab initio (or "from first principles ") if it relies on basic and established laws of nature without additional assumptions or special models.

For example, an ab initio calculation of the properties of liquid water might start with the properties of the constituent hydrogen and oxygen atoms and the laws of electrostatics and quantum mechanics. From these basics, the properties of isolated individual water molecules would be derived, followed by computations of the interactions of larger and larger groups of water molecules, until the bulk properties of water had been determined. This in contrast to an approach that uses approximations (which could allow for easier computations) that have no direct link to these first principles.

Documentation of a process is said to be ab initio (or from scratch , or from the ground up ) if the documentation shows how to set up and complete the process from basic materials (to which a competent practitioner is expected to have access) without prior special preparation.

In nuclear physics , the mass-energy of different nuclei can be determined with ab initio methods by solving the Schrödinger equation over all particles.

Likewise in chemistry , this refers to ab initio quantum chemistry methods .

In biophysics , this refers to a method for the prediction of protein structures in protein folding.

In bioinformatics , ab initio (or de novo ) methods make predictions about biological features using only a computational model without extrinsic comparison to existing data.

In aviation , this refers to the first stage of flight training.

Other uses [ edit ] In literature , a story told ab initio is told from the beginning; Horace called this method ab ovo ('from the egg'). This is as opposed to in medias res (in the middle of the story).

In Aviation , ab initio flight training refers to a pilot training program that starts from zero flight experience.

In learning a subject or foreign language, ab initio refers to study without previous knowledge or assumptions.

See also [ edit ] Law portal A priori Abatement ab initio Ab ovo Ad fontes List of legal Latin terms References [ edit ] ^ Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary ^ "Etymology for ab initio" .

etymonline.com . Retrieved 7 February 2010 .

^ "Legal definition at Duhaime.org" .

duhaime.org . Archived from the original on 14 February 2010 . Retrieved 7 February 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Look up ab initio in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Definition at Dictionary.com Archived 2012-10-25 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ab_initio&oldid=1286816571 " Categories : Latin legal terminology Latin literary phrases Narrative techniques Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 04:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ab initio 16 languages Add topic

