Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Wechsler Memory Scale 2 languages Deutsch Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical diagnostic method Wechsler Memory Scale ICD-9-CM 94.02 The Wechsler Memory Scale ( WMS ) is a neuropsychological test designed to measure different memory functions in a person. Anyone ages 16 to 90 is eligible to take this test. The current version is the fourth edition (WMS-IV) which was published in 2009 and which was designed to be used with the WAIS-IV . A person's performance is reported as five Index Scores: Auditory Memory, Visual Memory, Visual Working Memory, Immediate Memory, and Delayed Memory.

[ 1 ] The WMS-IV also incorporates an optional cognitive exam (Brief Cognitive Status Exam) that helps to assess global cognitive functioning in people with suspected memory deficits or those who have been diagnosed with a various neural, psychiatric and/or developmental disorders. This may include conditions such as dementias or mild learning difficulties.

[ 2 ] There is clear evidence that the WMS differentiates clinical groups (such as those with dementias or neurological disorders) from those with normal memory functioning and that the primary index scores can distinguish among the memory-impaired clinical groups.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The original WMS was published by The Psychological Corporation (later acquired by Pearson ), first in 1945, with revisions in 1987, 1997, and 2009.

[ 4 ] In late 2024, Pearson announced that it would be releasing a fifth revision of the scale in 2025.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The WMS-IV was normed with the WAIS-IV in the United States. This resulted in a representative normative sample of 1,400 adults (between the ages of 16 and 90) who completed both scales.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS)" .

APA Dictionary of Psychology . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association . n.d.

^ "Brief Cognitive Status Exam" (PDF) .

^ Hunsley, J., and C. M. Lee.

Introduction to clinical psychology: An evidence-based approach . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2010. Print.

^ Chlebowski, Colby (October 30, 2011). Kreutzer, Jeffrey S.; DeLuca, John; Caplan, Bruce (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Clinical Neuropsychology . Springer. pp.

2688– 2690.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-79948-3_1163 – via Springer Link.

^ "Wechsler Memory Scale Fifth Edition" .

Pearson Assessments US . Retrieved April 28, 2025 .

^ @PearsonAssessUS (December 17, 2024).

"The fifth edition of the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS-5) is just around the corner and will be available in 2025. Pre-orders will begin soon" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ "WMS-IV: Clinical Features of the New Edition" (PDF) .

Further reading [ edit ] Lezak, Muriel D.; Howieson, Diane B.; Bigler, Erin D.; Tranel, Daniel (2012).

Neuropsychological Assessment (Fifth ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-539552-5 . Retrieved 17 June 2014 .

Peter J Anderson (April 2013). "Leader of the Pack".

Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society (Review).

19 (4).

doi : 10.1017/S1355617713000337 .

S2CID 144213730 .

Strauss, Esther; Sherman, Elizabeth M.; Spreen, Otfried (2006).

A Compendium of Neuropsychological Tests: Administration, Norms, and Commentary . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-515957-8 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wechsler Memory Scale – Fourth Edition (WMS-IV) at publisher v t e Neuropsychological tests Battery Cognistat Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Montreal Cognitive Assessment Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status Arousal/Attention Continuous performance task D2 Test of Attention Four boxes test Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test Morningness–eveningness questionnaire Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test Posner cueing task Test of everyday attention Test of Variables of Attention Sensation/Perception Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Dot cancellation test Judgment of Line Orientation Navon figure Rey–Osterrieth complex figure Memory 1-2-AX working memory task California Verbal Learning Test Corsi block-tapping test Digit symbol substitution test Doors and People MCI Screen Wechsler Memory Scale Language Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination Boston Naming Test Comprehensive aphasia test Controlled Oral Word Association Test Thurstone Word Fluency Test Motor Compensatory tracking task Purdue Pegboard Test Problem-solving Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System Hayling and Brixton tests Tower of London test Trail Making Test Wisconsin Card Sorting Test Sleep Epworth Sleepiness Scale Specific impairments British Columbia Postconcussion Symptom Inventory Clinical Dementia Rating Digit Cancellation Test Disability Rating Scale Florida Cognitive Activities Scale Glasgow Coma Scale Glasgow Outcome Scale Pediatric Attention Disorders Diagnostic Screener Rivermead post-concussion symptoms questionnaire Intelligence National Adult Reading Test Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence Wechsler Test of Adult Reading Raven's Progressive Matrices Bed-side Abbreviated mental test score Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition Mini–mental state examination Social Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale Malingering Test of Memory Malingering v t e Psychological and psychiatric evaluation and testing Intelligence tests Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Stanford–Binet Intelligence Scales Woodcock–Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children Cognitive Assessment System Differential Ability Scales Ammons Quick Test Raven's Progressive Matrices Binet–Simon Intelligence Test Personality tests Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 16PF Questionnaire Revised NEO Personality Inventory Projective tests Thematic apperception test Ink blot test ( Rorschach test , Holtzman inkblot test ) Szondi test Animal Metaphor Test Sentence completion tests Neuropsychological test Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Rey–Osterrieth Complex Figure Delis–Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) Other tests Mental status examination Wechsler Memory Scale Benton Visual Retention Test Vineland Social Maturity Scale Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wechsler_Memory_Scale&oldid=1287870462 " Category : Neuropsychological tests Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 23:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wechsler Memory Scale 2 languages Add topic

