Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Distribution 3 Nesting 4 Foraging Behavior 5 Gallery 6 References Toggle the table of contents Ultramarine flycatcher 20 languages Български Català Cebuano Cymraeg Deutsch Diné bizaad Español Esperanto Euskara Magyar मराठी မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of bird Ultramarine flycatcher Male from Pangot village of Nainital district of Uttarakhand , India Conservation status Least Concern ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Aves Order: Passeriformes Family: Muscicapidae Genus: Ficedula Species: F. superciliaris Binomial name Ficedula superciliaris ( Jerdon , 1840) The ultramarine flycatcher or the white-browed blue flycatcher ( Ficedula superciliaris ) is a small arboreal Old World flycatcher in the Ficedula genus. Its breeding range extends from eastern Afghanistan to the Hengduan Mountains ; it winters in India and northwestern Indochina.

Description [ edit ] Male Somewhat smaller in size than a sparrow (ca. 10 cm) and with a stocky build.  The male is deep blue above, sides of head and neck are deep blue, and a prominent white patch runs from centre of throat, through breast to belly.  
The amount of white on the brow and tail show clinal variation from West to East along the Himalayan foothills, which is sometimes taken to distinguish three subspecies: The western subspecies from the western Himalayas has a distinctive white supercilium and white bases to the outer tail feathers.

The eastern subspecies ( Ficedula superciliaris aestigma ) from the eastern Himalayas lacks distinct white patches.

The population from the south Assam hills (sometimes designated a third subspecies cleta ) completely lack any supercilium.

[ citation needed ] Usually singly, though sometimes in mixed hunting parties in the winter.  Keeps largely to the low trees and bushes, feeding among the foliage canopy, not venturing much into the open. Constantly jerks up its tail, often accompanied by fluffing of head feathers and trrr note, especially in proximity of nest. Diet is mainly insects.

[ citation needed ] Distribution [ edit ] Summer: Common breeding visitor to the western Himalayas, from Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh to Uttarakhand (western race), and intergrading within Nepal with the eastern race Ficedula superciliaris aestigma which continues in the eastern Himalayas through Bhutan to Arunachal Pradesh . Breeding between 2000 and 2700 m, occasionally as low as 1800 m and as high as 3200 m. 
Also in the lower hills of Meghalaya and Nagaland , Khasi and Cachar hills, sometimes considered a third race; winter movements of this population are not known.

[ 2 ] Habitat: Open, mixed forests of oak , rhododendron , pine , fir , etc., occasionally orchards.

Winter: Central India from Delhi south to northern Maharashtra , Goa , and eastward to Andhra Pradesh and Odisha .  Wintering populations in the eastern states, possibly from Nepal/Sikkim, are mixed: a good part of this population also have a white supercilium and basal tail patches (see description below). Also sometimes found as a vagrant in the northern part of Bangladesh.

[ 3 ] Nesting [ edit ] Season: middle of April to early July Nest: soft structure of fine moss with some strips of bark and fine grass, lined with hair and rootlets, placed in holes or clefts in trees, at heights up to seven meters, or in a depression on a steep bank.  Readily takes to nest boxes in hill station gardens.

Eggs: 3 to 5, usually 4, olive greenish to dull stone-buff, densely freckled all over with reddish brown, or in another type, mostly around the large end, forming a cap.  Average size 16x12.2 mm.

[ citation needed ] Foraging Behavior [ edit ] Typically they respond to indirect cues more than direct cues in relation to risk management when foraging for food.

[ 4 ] Gallery [ edit ] Male from Himachal Pradesh , India Female at Kullu - Manali District of Himachal Pradesh, India Female at Sattal, India Male from Phoolchoki Forest, Godawari, Lalitpur Nepal .

References [ edit ] ^ BirdLife International (2020).

" Ficedula superciliaris " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2020 : e.T22709406A181848930.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2020-3.RLTS.T22709406A181848930.en . Retrieved 11 November 2021 .

^ Ali, Salim ; Sidney Dillon Ripley (2001) [1986].

Handbook of the Birds of India and Pakistan, 2nd ed.,10 vols (2nd ed.). New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Bird Number 1421-1422 (races F.s.superciliaris and F.s.aestigma ), vol. 7, p. 166-168.

^ "Ultramarine Flycatcher (Ficedula superciliaris) :: xeno-canto" .

www.xeno-canto.org .

^ Fong, Tracy E. “The Importance of Indirect Cues for White-Browed Sparrow-Weaver ( Plocepasser Mahali) Risk Assessment.” Acta Ethologica , vol. 12, no. 2, 10 Jan. 2009, pp. 79–85.

Ebscohost , white-browed sparrow-weaver.

Taxon identifiers Ficedula superciliaris Wikidata : Q900078 Wikispecies : Ficedula superciliaris BirdLife : 22709406 BOW : ultfly1 CoL : 6HWHW eBird : ultfly1 EURING : 13390 GBIF : 5231283 iNaturalist : 13114 IRMNG : 10211581 ITIS : 560091 IUCN : 22709406 NCBI : 393720 Observation.org : 76166 Xeno-canto : Ficedula-superciliaris Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ultramarine_flycatcher&oldid=1273280041 " Categories : IUCN Red List least concern species Ficedula Birds of the Himalayas Birds of North India Birds of Pakistan Birds of Tibet Birds of Yunnan Wintering birds of Indomalaya Birds described in 1840 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017 This page was last edited on 1 February 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ultramarine flycatcher 20 languages Add topic

