Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Early writing 2.2 Flight to Canada, mental health and suicide attempt 2.3 Paranormal experiences 3 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 3.1 Politics 4 Death 5 Style and works Toggle Style and works subsection 5.1 Themes 5.2 Pen names 5.3 Selected works 5.4 Adaptations 5.4.1 Films 5.4.2 Television 5.4.3 Stage and radio 5.4.4 Comics 5.5 Alternative formats 6 Influence and legacy Toggle Influence and legacy subsection 6.1 Film 6.2 In fiction 6.3 Music 6.4 Radio 6.5 Theater 6.6 Contemporary philosophy 6.7 Video games 7 Awards and honors 8 Philip K. Dick Award 9 Bibliography 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Philip K. Dick 73 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Kernowek Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American science fiction author (1928–1982) Philip K. Dick Dick in the 1960s Born Philip Kindred Dick ( 1928-12-16 ) December 16, 1928 Chicago , Illinois, U.S.

Died March 2, 1982 (1982-03-02) (aged 53) Santa Ana, California , U.S.

Pen name Richard Phillipps Jack Dowland Occupation Novelist, short story writer, essayist Period 1951–1982 Genre Science fiction , paranoid fiction , philosophical fiction Literary movement Postmodernism Notable works Ubik Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

The Man in the High Castle A Scanner Darkly Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said VALIS trilogy " Second Variety " We Can Remember It For You Wholesale Spouse Jeanette Marlin ​ ​ ( m.

1948 ; div.

1948 ) ​ Kleo Apostolides ​ ​ ( m.

1950 ; div.

1959) ​ Anne Williams Rubinstein ​ ​ ( m.

1959 ; div.

1965 ) ​ Nancy Hackett ​ ​ ( m.

1966 ; div.

1972) ​ Leslie "Tessa" Busby ​ ​ ( m.

1973 ; div.

1977) ​ Children 3, including Isa Signature Philip Kindred Dick (December 16, 1928 – March 2, 1982) was an American science fiction writer and novelist.

[ 1 ] He wrote 44 novels and about 121 short stories , most of which appeared in science fiction magazines during his lifetime.

[ 2 ] His fiction explored varied philosophical and social questions such as the nature of reality , perception , human nature , and identity , and commonly featured characters struggling against alternate realities , illusory environments, monopolistic corporations, drug abuse, authoritarian governments, and altered states of consciousness .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He is considered one of the most important figures in 20th-century science fiction.

[ 5 ] Born in Chicago , Dick moved to the San Francisco Bay Area with his family at a young age. He began publishing science fiction stories in 1952, at age 23. He found little commercial success [ 6 ] until his alternative history novel The Man in the High Castle (1962) earned him acclaim, including a Hugo Award for Best Novel , when he was 33.

[ 7 ] He followed with science fiction novels such as Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

(1968) and Ubik (1969). His 1974 novel Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said won the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel .

[ 8 ] Following years of drug use and a series of mystical experiences in 1974, Dick's work engaged more explicitly with issues of theology , metaphysics , and the nature of reality, as in the novels A Scanner Darkly (1977), VALIS (1981), and The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982).

[ 9 ] A collection of his speculative nonfiction writing on these themes was published posthumously as The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011). He died in 1982 at the age of 53 due to complications of a stroke.

[ 10 ] Following his death, he became "widely regarded as a master of imaginative, paranoid fiction in the vein of Franz Kafka and Thomas Pynchon ".

[ 11 ] Dick's posthumous influence has been widespread, extending beyond literary circles into Hollywood filmmaking.

[ 12 ] Popular films based on his works include Blade Runner (1982), Total Recall (adapted twice: in 1990 and in 2012 ), Screamers (1995), Minority Report (2002), A Scanner Darkly (2006), The Adjustment Bureau (2011), and Radio Free Albemuth (2010). Beginning in 2015, Amazon Prime Video produced the multi-season television adaptation The Man in the High Castle , based on Dick's 1962 novel; and in 2017 Channel 4 produced the anthology series Electric Dreams , based on various Dick stories.

In 2005, Time magazine named Ubik (1969) one of the hundred greatest English-language novels published since 1923.

[ 13 ] In 2007, Dick became the first science fiction writer included in The Library of America series .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Early life [ edit ] Philip K. Dick (c. 1953, age 24) Philip Kindred Dick and his twin sister, Jane Charlotte Dick, were born six weeks prematurely on December 16, 1928, in Chicago, Illinois, to Dorothy (née Kindred; 1900–1978) and Joseph Edgar Dick (1899–1985), who worked for the United States Department of Agriculture .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] His paternal grandparents were Irish.

[ 19 ] Jane's death on January 26, 1929, six weeks after their birth, profoundly affected Philip's life, leading to the recurrent motif of the " phantom twin " in his books.

[ 17 ] Dick's family later moved to the San Francisco Bay Area . When he was five, his father was transferred to Reno, Nevada , and when Dorothy refused to move, she and Joseph divorced. Both fought for custody of Philip, which was awarded to Dorothy. Determined to raise Philip alone, she took a job in Washington, D.C.

, and moved there with her son. Philip was enrolled at John Eaton Elementary School (1936–1938), completing the second through fourth grades. His lowest grade was a "C" in Written Composition, although a teacher said he "shows interest and ability in story telling ". He was educated in Quaker schools.

[ 20 ] In June 1938, Dorothy and Philip returned to California, and it was around this time that he became interested in science fiction.

[ 21 ] Dick stated that he read his first science fiction magazine, Stirring Science Stories, in 1940.

[ 21 ] Dick attended Berkeley High School in Berkeley, California . He and fellow science fiction author Ursula K. Le Guin were members of the class of 1947 but did not know each other at the time. He claimed to have hosted a classical music program on KSMO Radio in 1947.

[ 22 ] From 1948 to 1952, he worked at Art Music Company, a record store on Telegraph Avenue .

He attended the University of California, Berkeley , from September 1949 to November 11, 1949, ultimately receiving an honorable dismissal dated January 1, 1950. He did not declare a major and took classes in history, psychology, philosophy, and zoology. Dick dropped out because of ongoing anxiety problems, according to his third wife Anne's memoir. She also says he disliked the mandatory ROTC training. At Berkeley, he befriended poet Robert Duncan and poet and linguist Jack Spicer , who gave Dick ideas for a Martian language.

Through his studies in philosophy, he believed that existence is based on internal human perception, which does not necessarily correspond to external reality. He described himself as "an acosmic panentheist ", which he explained as meaning that "I don't believe that the universe exists. I believe that the only thing that exists is God and he is more than the universe. The universe is an extension of God into space and time. That's the premise I start from in my work, that so-called 'reality' is a mass delusion that we've all been required to believe for reasons totally obscure".

[ 23 ] After reading the works of Plato and pondering the possibilities of metaphysical realms, he came to the conclusion that, in a certain sense, the world is not entirely real and there is no way to confirm whether it is truly there. That question was a theme in many of his novels.

Career [ edit ] Early writing [ edit ] Dick's novelette "The Defenders" was the cover story for the January 1953 issue of Galaxy Science Fiction , illustrated by Ed Emshwiller .

Dick's short story "The World She Wanted" took the cover of the May 1953 issue of Science Fiction Quarterly .

Dick's novel The Cosmic Puppets originally appeared in the December 1956 issue of Satellite Science Fiction as "A Glass of Darkness".

Dick sold his first story, " Roog "—about "a dog who imagined that the garbagemen who came every Friday morning were stealing valuable food which the family had carefully stored away in a safe metal container" [ 24 ] —in 1951, when he was 22. From then on he wrote full-time. During 1952, his first speculative fiction publications appeared in July and September numbers of Planet Stories , edited by Jack O'Sullivan, and in If and The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction ( F&SF ) that year.

[ 25 ] By 1953, F&SF described Dick as "one of the most prolific new professionals in the field", joking that "the editors of Whizzing Star Patrol and of the Quaint Quality Publication are in complete agreement upon Mr. Dick as a singularly satisfactory contributor".

[ 26 ] His debut novel, Solar Lottery , was published in 1955 as half of Ace Double #D-103 alongside The Big Jump by Leigh Brackett .

[ 25 ] The 1950s were a difficult and impoverished time for Dick, who once lamented, "We couldn't even pay the late fees on a library book." He published almost exclusively within the science fiction genre but dreamed of a career in mainstream fiction.

[ 27 ] During the 1950s, he produced a series of non-genre, relatively conventional novels.

[ 28 ] In 1960, Dick wrote that he was willing to "take twenty to thirty years to succeed as a literary writer". The dream of mainstream success formally died in January 1963 when the Scott Meredith Literary Agency returned all of his unsold mainstream novels. Only one of them, Confessions of a Crap Artist , was published during Dick's lifetime, [ 29 ] in 1975 by Paul Williams ' Entwhistle Books .

In 1963 Dick won the Hugo Award for The Man in the High Castle .

[ 7 ] Although he was hailed as a genius in the science fiction world, the mainstream literary world was unappreciative, and he could publish books only through low-paying science fiction publishers such as Ace . He said in a 1977 interview that were it not for interest by a French publishing company in the mid-1960s, which decided to publish all of his catalog to date, he would not have been able to continue as a writer.

[ 30 ] But even in his later years, he continued to have financial troubles. In the introduction to the 1980 short story collection, The Golden Man , he wrote: "Several years ago, when I was ill, Heinlein offered his help, anything he could do, and we had never met; he would phone me to cheer me up and see how I was doing. He wanted to buy me an electric typewriter , God bless him—one of the few true gentlemen in this world. I don't agree with any ideas he puts forth in his writing, but that is neither here nor there. One time when I owed the IRS a lot of money and couldn't raise it, Heinlein loaned the money to me. I think a great deal of him and his wife; I dedicated a book to them in appreciation. Robert Heinlein is a fine-looking man, very impressive and very military in stance; you can tell he has a military background, even to the haircut. He knows I'm a flipped-out freak and still he helped me and my wife when we were in trouble. That is the best in humanity, there; that is who and what I love." [ 31 ] Flight to Canada, mental health and suicide attempt [ edit ] In 1971, Dick's marriage to Nancy Hackett broke down, and she moved out of their house in Santa Venetia, California . He had abused amphetamine for much of the previous decade, stemming in part from his need to maintain a prolific writing regimen due to the financial exigencies of the science fiction field. He allowed other drug users to move into the house. Following the release of 21 novels between 1960 and 1970, these developments were exacerbated by unprecedented periods of writer's block , with Dick ultimately failing to publish new fiction until 1974.

[ 32 ] One day, in November 1971, Dick returned to his home to discover it had been burglarized, with his safe blown open and personal papers missing. The police could not determine the culprit, and even suspected Dick of having done it himself.

[ 33 ] Shortly thereafter, he was invited to be guest of honor at the Vancouver Science Fiction Convention in February 1972. Within a day of arriving at the conference and giving his speech, The Android and the Human , he informed people that he had fallen in love with a woman named Janis whom he had met there and announced that he would be remaining in Vancouver.

[ 33 ] A conference attendee, Michael Walsh , movie critic for the local newspaper The Province , invited Dick to stay in his home, but asked him to leave two weeks later due to his erratic behavior. Janis then ended their relationship and moved away. On March 23, 1972, Dick attempted suicide by taking an overdose of the sedative potassium bromide .

[ 33 ] Subsequently, after deciding to seek help, Dick became a participant in X-Kalay (a Canadian Synanon -type recovery program), and was well enough by April to return to California.

[ 33 ] In October 1972, Dick wrote a letter to the FBI about science fiction writer Thomas Disch . Dick said he had been approached by a covert Anti-American organization which attempted to recruit him. Dick said he recognized their ideology in a book Disch wrote.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] On relocating to Orange County, California at the behest of California State University, Fullerton professor Willis McNelly (who initiated a correspondence with Dick during his X-Kalay stint), he donated manuscripts , papers and other materials to the university's Special Collections Library, where they are in the Philip K. Dick Science Fiction Collection in the Pollak Library. During this period, Dick befriended a circle of Fullerton State students that included several aspiring science fiction writers, including K. W. Jeter , James Blaylock and Tim Powers . Jeter would later continue Dick's Bladerunner series with three sequels.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Dick returned to the events of these months while writing his novel A Scanner Darkly (1977), [ 39 ] which contains fictionalized depictions of the burglary of his home, his time using amphetamines and living with addicts, and his experiences of X-Kalay (portrayed in the novel as "New-Path"). A factual account of his recovery program participation was portrayed in his posthumously released book The Dark Haired Girl , a collection of letters and journals from the period.

[ citation needed ] Paranormal experiences [ edit ] On February 20, 1974, while recovering from the effects of sodium pentothal administered for the extraction of an impacted wisdom tooth , Dick received a home delivery of Darvon from a young woman. When he opened the door, he was struck by the dark-haired girl's beauty, and was especially drawn to her golden necklace. He asked her about its curious fish-shaped design. As she was leaving, she replied: "This is a sign used by the early Christians." Dick called the symbol the "vesicle pisces". This name seems to have been based on his conflation of two related symbols, the Christian ichthys symbol (two intersecting arcs delineating a fish in profile), which the woman was wearing, and the vesica piscis .

[ 40 ] Dick recounted that as the sun glinted off the gold pendant, the reflection caused the generation of a "pink beam" of light that mesmerized him. He came to believe the beam imparted wisdom and clairvoyance, and also believed it to be intelligent. On one occasion, he was startled by a separate recurrence of the pink beam, which imparted the information that his infant son was ill. The Dicks rushed the child to the hospital, where the illness was confirmed by professional diagnosis.

[ 41 ] [ verification needed ] After the woman's departure, Dick began experiencing strange hallucinations. Although initially attributing them to side effects from medication, he considered this explanation implausible after weeks of continued hallucination. He told Charles Platt : "I experienced an invasion of my mind by a transcendentally rational mind, as if I had been insane all my life and suddenly I had become sane." [ 42 ] Throughout February and March 1974, Dick experienced a series of hallucinations which he referred to as "2-3-74", [ 27 ] [ 43 ] shorthand for February–March 1974. Aside from the "pink beam", he described the initial hallucinations as geometric patterns, and, occasionally, brief pictures of Jesus and ancient Rome . As the hallucinations increased in duration and frequency, Dick claimed he began to live two parallel lives—one as himself, "Philip K. Dick", and one as "Thomas", [ 44 ] a Christian persecuted by Romans in the first century AD. He referred to the "transcendentally rational mind" as "Zebra", "God" and " VALIS " (an acronym for Vast Active Living Intelligence System ). He wrote about the experiences, first in the semi-autobiographical novel Radio Free Albemuth , then in VALIS , The Divine Invasion , The Transmigration of Timothy Archer and the unfinished The Owl in Daylight (the VALIS trilogy ).

[ citation needed ] In 1974, Dick wrote a letter to the FBI , accusing various people, including University of California, San Diego professor Fredric Jameson , of being foreign agents of Warsaw Pact powers.

[ 45 ] He also wrote that Stanisław Lem was probably a false name used by a composite committee operating on orders of the Communist party to gain control over public opinion.

[ 46 ] At one point, Dick felt he had been taken over by the spirit of the prophet Elijah . He believed that an episode in his novel Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said was a detailed retelling of a biblical story from the Book of Acts , which he had never read.

[ 47 ] He documented and discussed his experiences and faith in a private journal he called his "exegesis", portions of which were later published as The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick . The last novel he wrote was The Transmigration of Timothy Archer ; it was published shortly after his death in 1982.

[ 48 ] Personal life [ edit ] Dick was married five times: Jeanette Marlin [ 49 ] (May to November 1948) Kleo Apostolides [ 50 ] (June 14, 1950, to 1959) Anne Williams Rubinstein (April 1, 1959, to October 1965) Nancy Hackett (July 6, 1966, to 1972) Leslie "Tessa" Busby (April 18, 1973, to 1977) Dick had three children, Laura Archer Dick [ 51 ] (born February 25, 1960, to Dick and his third wife, Anne Williams Rubenstein), Isolde Freya Dick [ 52 ] (now Isa Dick Hackett ) (born March 15, 1967, to Dick and his fourth wife, Nancy Hackett), and Christopher Kenneth Dick (born July 25, 1973, to Dick and his fifth wife, Leslie "Tessa" Busby).

[ 53 ] In 1955, Dick and his second wife, Kleo Apostolides, received a visit from the FBI , which they believed to be the result of Kleo's socialist views and left-wing activities .

[ 54 ] He physically fought with Anne Williams Rubinstein, his third wife. Dick wrote to a friend that he and Anne had "dreadful violent fights...slamming each other around, smashing every object in the house." In 1963, Dick told his neighbors that his wife was attempting to kill him and had her involuntarily committed to a psychiatric institution for two weeks.

[ 55 ] After filing for divorce in 1964, Dick moved to Oakland to live with a fan, author and editor Grania Davis . Shortly after, he attempted suicide by driving off the road while she was a passenger.

[ 56 ] Politics [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Philip K. Dick" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early in life, Dick attended Communist Party USA meetings but later shifted more towards anti-communism and libertarianism as time passed. In an interview, Dick once described himself as a " religious anarchist ".

[ 57 ] Dick generally tried to stay out of the political scene because of high societal turmoil from the Vietnam War . Still, he showed some anti-Vietnam War and anti-governmental sentiments. In 1968, he joined the " Writers and Editors War Tax Protest ", [ 23 ] [ 58 ] an anti-war pledge to pay no U.S.

federal income tax , which resulted in the confiscation of his car by the IRS .

[ 59 ] Dick was a critic of the U.S. federal government, regarding it to be just as "bad as the Soviet Union ", and cheered on "a great decentralization of the government". Dick's politics occasionally influenced his literature. Dick's 1967 short story " Faith of Our Fathers " is critical of communism . Dick's 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

condemns the eugenics movement.

[ 60 ] In 1974, as a response to the Roe v. Wade decision, Dick published " The Pre-persons ", a satirical anti-abortion and anti- Malthusianism short story. Following the story's publication, Dick stated that he received death threats from feminists.

[ 61 ] Death [ edit ] On February 17, 1982, after completing an interview, Dick contacted his therapist, complaining of failing eyesight, and was advised to go to a hospital immediately, but did not. The following day, he was found unconscious on the floor of his Santa Ana, California , home, having suffered a stroke. On February 25, 1982, Dick suffered another stroke in the hospital, which led to brain death . Five days later, on March 2, 1982, he was disconnected from life support .

After his death, Dick's father, Joseph, took his son's ashes to Riverside Cemetery in Fort Morgan, Colorado (section K, block 1, lot 56), where they were buried next to his twin sister Jane, who died in infancy. Her tombstone had been inscribed with both of their names at the time of her death, 53 years earlier.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Philip died four months before the release of Blade Runner , the film based on his novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

[ 64 ] Style and works [ edit ] Themes [ edit ] Dick's stories typically focus on the fragile nature of what is real and the construction of personal identity . His stories often become surreal fantasies, as the main characters slowly discover that their everyday world is actually an illusion assembled by powerful external entities, such as the suspended animation in Ubik , [ 65 ] vast political conspiracies or the vicissitudes of an unreliable narrator . "All of his work starts with the basic assumption that there cannot be one, single, objective reality", writes science fiction author Charles Platt . "Everything is a matter of perception. The ground is liable to shift under your feet. A protagonist may find himself living out another person's dream, or he may enter a drug-induced state that actually makes better sense than the real world, or he may cross into a different universe completely." [ 42 ] Alternate universes and simulacra are common plot devices , with fictional worlds inhabited by common, working people, rather than galactic elites. "There are no heroes in Dick's books", Ursula K. Le Guin wrote, "but there are heroics. One is reminded of Dickens : what counts is the honesty, constancy, kindness and patience of ordinary people." [ 65 ] Dick made no secret that much of his thinking and work was heavily influenced by the writings of Carl Jung .

[ 62 ] [ 66 ] The Jungian constructs and models that most concerned Dick seem to be the archetypes of the collective unconscious , group projection/hallucination, synchronicities , and personality theory.

[ 62 ] Many of Dick's protagonists overtly analyze reality and their perceptions in Jungian terms (see Lies, Inc.

).

[ citation needed ] Dick identified one major theme of his work as the question, "What constitutes the authentic human being?" [ 67 ] In works such as Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, beings can appear totally human in every respect while lacking soul or compassion, while completely alien beings such as Glimmung in Galactic Pot-Healer may be more humane and complex than their human peers. Understood correctly, said Dick, the term "human being" applies "not to origin or to any ontology but to a way of being in the world." [ 68 ] This authentic way of being manifests itself in compassion that recognizes the oneness of all life. "In Dick's vision, the moral imperative calls on us to care for all sentient beings, human or nonhuman, natural or artificial, regardless of their place in the order of things. And Dick makes clear that this imperative is grounded in empathy, not reason, whatever subsequent role reason may play." [ 69 ] The figure of the android depicts those who are deficient in empathy, who are alienated from others and are becoming more mechanical (emotionless) in their behaviour. "In general, then, it can be said that for Dick robots represent machines that are becoming more like humans, while androids represent humans that are becoming more like machines." [ 70 ] Dick's third major theme is his fascination with war and his fear and hatred of it. One hardly sees critical mention of it, yet it is as integral to his body of work as oxygen is to water.

[ 71 ] —Steven Owen Godersky Mental illness was a constant interest of Dick's, and themes of mental illness permeate his work. The character Jack Bohlen in the 1964 novel Martian Time-Slip is an "ex-schizophrenic". The novel Clans of the Alphane Moon centers on an entire society made up of descendants of lunatic asylum inmates. In 1965, he wrote the essay titled "Schizophrenia and the Book of Changes".

[ 72 ] Drug use (including religious , recreational , and abuse ) was also a theme in many of Dick's works, such as A Scanner Darkly and The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch .

[ 73 ] Dick himself was a drug user for much of his life. According to a 1975 interview in Rolling Stone , [ 74 ] Dick wrote all of his books published before 1970 while on amphetamines . " A Scanner Darkly (1977) [ a ] was the first complete novel I had written without speed", said Dick in the interview. He also experimented briefly with psychedelics , but wrote The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1965), which Rolling Stone dubs "the classic LSD novel of all time", before he had ever tried them. Despite his heavy amphetamine use, however, Dick later said that doctors told him the amphetamines never actually affected him, that his liver had processed them before they reached his brain.

[ 74 ] Summing up all these themes in Understanding Philip K. Dick , Eric Carl Link discussed eight themes or "ideas and motifs": [ 75 ] : 48 Epistemology and the Nature of Reality, Know Thyself, The Android and the Human, Entropy and Pot Healing, The Theodicy Problem, Warfare and Power Politics, The Evolved Human, and "Technology, Media, Drugs and Madness".

[ 75 ] : 48–101 Pen names [ edit ] Dick had two professional stories published under the pen names Richard Phillipps and Jack Dowland. "Some Kinds of Life" was published in October 1953 in Fantastic Universe under byline Richard Phillipps, apparently because the magazine had a policy against publishing multiple stories by the same author in the same issue; "Planet for Transients" was published in the same issue under his own name.

[ 76 ] The short story " Orpheus with Clay Feet " was published under the pen name Jack Dowland. The protagonist desires to be the muse for fictional author Jack Dowland, considered the greatest science fiction author of the 20th century. In the story, Dowland publishes a short story titled "Orpheus with Clay Feet" under the pen name Philip K. Dick.

[ citation needed ] The surname Dowland refers to Renaissance composer John Dowland , who is featured in several works. The title Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said directly refers to Dowland's best-known composition, " Flow, my tears ". In the novel The Divine Invasion , the character Linda Fox, created specifically with Linda Ronstadt in mind, is an intergalactically famous singer whose entire body of work consists of recordings of John Dowland compositions.

[ citation needed ] Selected works [ edit ] For a complete bibliography, see Philip K. Dick bibliography .

The Man in the High Castle (1962) is set in an alternative history in which the United States is ruled by the victorious Axis powers . It is the only Dick novel to win a Hugo Award . In 2015 this was adapted into a television series by Amazon Studios .

[ 77 ] The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1965) utilizes an array of science fiction concepts and features several layers of reality and unreality. It is also one of Dick's first works to explore religious themes. The novel takes place in the 21st century, when, under UN authority, mankind has colonized the Solar System 's every habitable planet and moon . Life is physically daunting and psychologically monotonous for most colonists, so the UN must draft people to go to the colonies. Most entertain themselves using "Perky Pat" dolls and accessories manufactured by Earth-based "P.P. Layouts". The company also secretly creates "Can-D", an illegal but widely available hallucinogenic drug allowing the user to "translate" into Perky Pat (if the drug user is a woman) or Pat's boyfriend, Walt (if the drug user is a man). This recreational use of Can-D allows colonists to experience a few minutes of an idealized life on Earth by participating in a collective hallucination.

[ 1 ] Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

(1968) is the story of a bounty hunter policing the local android population. It occurs on a dying, poisoned Earth de-populated of almost all animals and all "successful" humans; the only remaining inhabitants of the planet are people with no prospects off-world. The 1968 novel is the literary source of the film Blade Runner (1982).

[ 78 ] It is both a conflation and an intensification of the pivotally Dickian question: "What is real, what is fake? What crucial factor defines humanity as distinctly 'alive', versus those merely alive only in their outward appearance?" [ citation needed ] Ubik (1969) employs extensive psychic telepathy and a suspended state after death in creating a state of eroding reality. A group of psychics is sent to investigate a rival organisation, but several of them are apparently killed by a saboteur's bomb. Much of the following novel flicks between different equally plausible realities and the "real" reality, a state of half-life and psychically manipulated realities. In 2005, Time magazine listed it among the "All-TIME 100 Greatest Novels" published since 1923.

[ 13 ] Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974) concerns Jason Taverner, a television star living in a dystopian near-future police state . After being attacked by an angry ex-girlfriend, Taverner awakens in a dingy Los Angeles hotel room. He still has his money in his wallet, but his identification cards are missing. This is no minor inconvenience, as security checkpoints (staffed by "pols" and "nats", the police and National Guard) are set up throughout the city to stop and arrest anyone without valid ID. Jason at first thinks that he was robbed, but soon discovers that his entire identity has been erased. There is no record of him in any official database, and even his closest associates do not recognize or remember him. For the first time in many years, Jason has no fame or reputation to rely on. He has only his innate charm and social graces to help him as he tries to find out what happened to his past while avoiding the attention of the pols. The novel was Dick's first published novel after years of silence, during which time his critical reputation had grown, and this novel was awarded the John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel .

[ 8 ] It is the only Philip K. Dick novel nominated for both a Hugo and a Nebula Award .

[ citation needed ] In an essay written two years before his death, Dick described how he learned from his Episcopal priest that an important scene in Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said – involving its other main character, the eponymous Police General Felix Buckman, was very similar to a scene in Acts of the Apostles , [ 47 ] a book of the New Testament . Film director Richard Linklater discusses this novel in his film Waking Life , which begins with a scene reminiscent of another Dick novel, Time Out of Joint .

[ citation needed ] A Scanner Darkly (1977) is a bleak mixture of science fiction and police procedural novels; in its story, an undercover narcotics police detective begins to lose touch with reality after falling victim to Substance D, the same permanently mind-altering drug he was enlisted to help fight. Substance D is instantly addictive, beginning with a pleasant euphoria which is quickly replaced with increasing confusion, hallucinations and eventually total psychosis. In this novel, as with all Dick novels, there is an underlying thread of paranoia and dissociation with multiple realities perceived simultaneously. It was adapted to film by Richard Linklater .

[ 79 ] The Philip K. Dick Reader [ 80 ] is an introduction to the variety of Dick's short fiction.

VALIS (1980) is perhaps Dick's most postmodern and autobiographical novel, examining his own unexplained experiences. It may also be his most academically studied work, and was adapted as an opera by Tod Machover .

[ 81 ] Later works like the VALIS trilogy were heavily autobiographical, many with "two-three-seventy-four" (2-3-74) references and influences. The word VALIS is the acronym for Vast Active Living Intelligence System . Later, Dick theorized that VALIS was both a "reality generator" and a means of extraterrestrial communication. A fourth VALIS manuscript, Radio Free Albemuth , although composed in 1976, was posthumously published in 1985. This work is described by the publisher (Arbor House) as "an introduction and key to his magnificent VALIS trilogy".

[ 82 ] Regardless of the feeling that he was somehow experiencing a divine communication, Dick was never fully able to rationalize the events. For the rest of his life, he struggled to comprehend what was occurring, questioning his own sanity and perception of reality. He transcribed what thoughts he could into an eight-thousand-page, one-million-word journal dubbed the Exegesis . From 1974 until his death in 1982, Dick spent many nights writing in this journal. A recurring theme in Exegesis is Dick's hypothesis that history had been stopped in the first century AD, and that "the Empire never ended". He saw Rome as the pinnacle of materialism and despotism , which, after forcing the Gnostics underground, had kept the population of Earth enslaved to worldly possessions. Dick believed that VALIS had communicated with him, and anonymously others, to induce the impeachment of U.S. President Richard Nixon , whom Dick believed to be the current Emperor of Rome incarnate.

[ 83 ] In a 1968 essay titled "Self Portrait", collected in the 1995 book The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick , Dick reflects on his work and lists which books he feels "might escape World War Three": Eye in the Sky , The Man in the High Castle , Martian Time-Slip , Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb , The Zap Gun , The Penultimate Truth , The Simulacra , The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (which he refers to as "the most vital of them all"), Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, and Ubik .

[ 84 ] In a 1976 interview, Dick cited A Scanner Darkly as his best work, feeling that he "had finally written a true masterpiece, after 25 years of writing".

[ 85 ] Adaptations [ edit ] Main article: List of adaptations of works by Philip K. Dick Films [ edit ] Several of Dick's stories have been made into films. Dick himself wrote a screenplay for an intended film adaptation of Ubik in 1974, but the film was never made. Many film adaptations have not used Dick's original titles. When asked why this was, Dick's ex-wife Tessa said, "Actually, the books rarely carry Phil's original titles, as the editors usually wrote new titles after reading his manuscripts. Phil often commented that he couldn't write good titles. If he could, he would have been an advertising writer instead of a novelist." [ 86 ] Films based on Dick's writing had accumulated a total revenue of over US$1 billion by 2009.

[ 87 ] Blade Runner (1982), based on Dick's 1968 novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, directed by Ridley Scott and starring Harrison Ford , Sean Young and Rutger Hauer . A screenplay had been in the works for years before Scott took the helm, with Dick being extremely critical of all versions. Dick was still apprehensive about how his story would be adapted for the film when the project was finally put into motion. Among other things, he refused to do a novelization of the film. But when Dick was given an opportunity to watch a few sequences portraying the film's imagined Los Angeles of 2019, he was amazed that the environment was "exactly as how I'd imagined it!"—even though Ridley Scott has mentioned he had never even read the source material.

[ 88 ] Following the screening, Dick and Scott had a frank but cordial discussion of Blade Runner ' s themes and characters, and although they had wildly differing views, Dick fully backed the film from then on, stating that his "life and creative work are justified and completed by Blade Runner ".

[ 89 ] Dick died from a stroke less than four months before the release of the film.

Total Recall (1990), based on the short story " We Can Remember It for You Wholesale ", directed by Paul Verhoeven and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger .

[ 90 ] Confessions d'un Barjo (1992), titled Barjo in its English-language release, a French film based on the non-science-fiction novel Confessions of a Crap Artist .

Screamers (1995), based on the short story " Second Variety ", [ 3 ] directed by Christian Duguay and starring Peter Weller . The location was altered from a war-devastated Earth to a distant planet. A sequel, titled Screamers: The Hunting , was released straight to DVD in 2009.

Minority Report (2002), based on the short story " The Minority Report ", directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Tom Cruise .

Impostor (2002), based on the 1953 story " Impostor ", directed by Gary Fleder and starring Gary Sinise , Vincent D'Onofrio and Madeleine Stowe . The story was also adapted in 1962 for the British television anthology series Out of This World .

Paycheck (2003), directed by John Woo and starring Ben Affleck , based on Dick's short story of the same name .

[ 3 ] A Scanner Darkly (2006), directed by Richard Linklater and starring Keanu Reeves , Winona Ryder , and Robert Downey Jr.

, based on Dick's novel of the same name . The film was produced using the process of rotoscoping : it was first shot in live-action and then the live footage was animated over.

[ 90 ] Next (2007), directed by Lee Tamahori and starring Nicolas Cage , loosely based on the short story " The Golden Man ".

[ 90 ] Radio Free Albemuth (2010), directed by John Alan Simon loosely based on the novel Radio Free Albemuth .

The Adjustment Bureau (2011), directed by George Nolfi and starring Matt Damon , loosely based on the short story " Adjustment Team ".

Total Recall (2012), directed by Len Wiseman and starring Colin Farrell , second film adaptation of the short story " We Can Remember It for You Wholesale ".

Future films based on Dick's writing include a film adaptation of Ubik which, according to Dick's daughter, Isa Dick Hackett, is in advanced negotiation.

[ 91 ] Ubik was set to be made into a film by Michel Gondry .

[ 92 ] In 2014, however, Gondry told French outlet Telerama (via Jeux Actu), that he was no longer working on the project.

[ 93 ] In November 2021, it was announced that Francis Lawrence will direct a film adaptation of Vulcan's Hammer , with Lawrence's about:blank production company, alongside New Republic Pictures and Electric Shepherd Productions , producing.

[ 94 ] An animated adaptation of The King of the Elves from Walt Disney Animation Studios was in production and was set to be released in the spring of 2016 but it was cancelled following multiple creative problems.

[ 95 ] The Terminator series prominently features the theme of humanoid assassination machines first portrayed in Second Variety .

The Halcyon Company , known for developing the Terminator franchise, acquired right of first refusal to film adaptations of the works of Philip K. Dick in 2007. In May 2009, they announced plans for an adaptation of Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said .

[ 96 ] Television [ edit ] It was reported in 2010 that Ridley Scott would produce an adaptation of The Man in the High Castle for the BBC, in the form of a miniseries.

[ 97 ] A pilot episode was released on Amazon Prime Video in January 2015 and season 1 was fully released in ten episodes of about 60 minutes each on November 20, 2015.

[ 98 ] Premiering in January 2015, the pilot was Amazon's "most-watched since the original series development program began." The next month Amazon ordered episodes to fill out a ten-episode season, which was released in November, to positive reviews. A second season of ten episodes premiered in December 2016, and a third season was released on October 5, 2018. The fourth and final season premiered on November 15, 2019.

[ 99 ] In late 2015, Fox aired Minority Report , a television series sequel adaptation to the 2002 film of the same name based on Dick's short story " The Minority Report " (1956).  The show was cancelled after one 10-episode season.

[ 100 ] In May 2016, it was announced that a 10-part anthology series was in the works. Titled Philip K. Dick's Electric Dreams , the series was distributed by Sony Pictures Television and premiered on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom and Amazon Prime Video in the United States.

[ 101 ] It was written by executive producers Ronald D. Moore and Michael Dinner , with executive input from Dick's daughter Isa Dick Hackett , and stars Bryan Cranston , also an executive producer.

[ 102 ] Stage and radio [ edit ] Four of Dick's works have been adapted for the stage.

One was the opera VALIS , composed and with libretto by Tod Machover , which premiered at the Pompidou Center in Paris [ 103 ] on December 1, 1987, with a French libretto. It was subsequently revised and readapted into English, and was recorded and released on CD (Bridge Records BCD9007) in 1988.

[ 104 ] Another was Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said , adapted by Linda Hartinian and produced by the New York-based avant-garde company Mabou Mines . It premiered in Boston at the Boston Shakespeare Theatre (June 18–30, 1985) and was subsequently staged in New York and Chicago. Productions of Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said were also staged by the Evidence Room [ 105 ] in Los Angeles in 1999 [ 106 ] and by the Fifth Column Theatre Company at the Oval House Theatre in London in the same year.

[ 107 ] A play based on Radio Free Albemuth also had a brief run in the 1980s.

[ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] In November 2010, a production of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, adapted by Edward Einhorn , premiered at the 3LD Art and Technology Center in Manhattan.

[ 108 ] A radio drama adaptation of Dick's short story "Mr. Spaceship" was aired by the Finnish Broadcasting Company (Yleisradio) in 1996 under the name Menolippu Paratiisiin . Radio dramatizations of Dick's short stories Colony and The Defenders [ 109 ] were aired by NBC in 1956 as part of the series X Minus One .

[ citation needed ] In January 2006, a theatre adaptation of The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (English for Trzy stygmaty Palmera Eldritcha ) premiered in Stary Teatr in Kraków , with an extensive use of lights and laser choreography.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] In June 2014, the BBC broadcast a two-part adaptation of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

on BBC Radio 4 , starring James Purefoy as Rick Deckard.

[ 112 ] Comics [ edit ] Marvel Comics adapted Dick's short story " The Electric Ant " as a limited series which was released in 2009. The comic was produced by writer David Mack ( Daredevil ) and artist Pascal Alixe ( Ultimate X-Men ), with covers provided by artist Paul Pope .

[ 113 ] " The Electric Ant " had earlier been loosely adapted by Frank Miller and Geof Darrow in their 3-issue mini-series Hard Boiled published by Dark Horse Comics in 1990–1992.

[ 114 ] In 2009, BOOM! Studios started publishing a 24-issue miniseries comic book adaptation of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

[ 115 ] Blade Runner , the 1982 film adapted from Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

, had previously been adapted to comics as A Marvel Comics Super Special: Blade Runner .

[ 116 ] In 2011, Dynamite Entertainment published a four-issue miniseries Total Recall , a sequel to the 1990 film Total Recall , inspired by Philip K. Dick's short story " We Can Remember It for You Wholesale ".

[ 117 ] In 1990, DC Comics published the official adaptation of the original film as a DC Movie Special: Total Recall .

[ 118 ] Alternative formats [ edit ] In response to a 1975 request from the National Library for the Blind for permission to make use of The Man in the High Castle , Dick responded, "I also grant you a general permission to transcribe any of my former, present or future work, so indeed you can add my name to your 'general permission' list." [ 119 ] Some of his books and stories are available in braille and other specialized formats through the NLS.

[ 120 ] As of December 2012, thirteen of Philip K. Dick's early works in the public domain in the United States are available in ebook form from Project Gutenberg . As of December 2019, Wikisource has three of Philip K. Dick's early works in the public domain in the United States available in ebook form which is not from Project Gutenberg.

[ citation needed ] Influence and legacy [ edit ] This article may contain irrelevant references to popular culture .

Please help improve it by removing such content and adding citations to reliable , independent sources .

( October 2019 ) Lawrence Sutin wrote a 1989 biography of Dick, titled Divine Invasions: A Life of Philip K. Dick .

[ 72 ] In 1993, French writer Emmanuel Carrère published I Am Alive and You Are Dead: A Journey into the Mind of Philip K. Dick ( French : Je suis vivant et vous êtes morts ), which the author describes in his preface in this way: The book you hold in your hands is a very peculiar book. I have tried to depict the life of Philip K. Dick from the inside, in other words, with the same freedom and empathy – indeed with the same truth – with which he depicted his own characters.

[ 62 ] The book omits fact checking, sourcing, notes and index.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] It can be considered a non-fiction novel about his life.

[ citation needed ] Dick has influenced many writers, including Jonathan Lethem [ 124 ] and Ursula K. Le Guin . The prominent literary critic Fredric Jameson proclaimed Dick the " Shakespeare of Science Fiction", and praised his work as "one of the most powerful expressions of the society of spectacle and pseudo-event".

[ 125 ] The author Roberto Bolaño also praised Dick, describing him as " Thoreau plus the death of the American dream ".

[ 126 ] Dick has also influenced filmmakers, his work being compared to films such as the Wachowskis ' The Matrix , [ 127 ] David Cronenberg 's Videodrome , [ 128 ] eXistenZ , [ 127 ] and Spider , [ 128 ] Spike Jonze 's Being John Malkovich , [ 128 ] Adaptation , [ 128 ] Michel Gondry 's Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind , [ 129 ] [ 130 ] Alex Proyas 's Dark City , [ 127 ] Peter Weir 's The Truman Show , [ 127 ] Andrew Niccol 's Gattaca , [ 128 ] In Time , [ 131 ] Terry Gilliam 's 12 Monkeys , [ 128 ] Alejandro Amenábar 's Open Your Eyes , [ 132 ] David Fincher 's Fight Club , [ 128 ] Cameron Crowe 's Vanilla Sky , [ 127 ] Darren Aronofsky 's Pi , [ 133 ] Richard Kelly 's Donnie Darko [ 134 ] and Southland Tales , [ 135 ] Rian Johnson 's Looper , [ 136 ] Duncan Jones ' Source Code , Christopher Nolan 's Memento [ 137 ] and Inception , [ 138 ] and Owen Dennis ' Infinity Train .

[ citation needed ] The Philip K. Dick Society was an organization dedicated to promoting the literary works of Dick and was led by Dick's longtime friend and music journalist Paul Williams . Williams also served as Dick's literary executor [ 139 ] for several years after Dick's death and wrote one of the first biographies of Dick, entitled Only Apparently Real: The World of Philip K. Dick .

[ 140 ] The Philip K. Dick estate owns and operates the production company Electric Shepherd Productions, [ 141 ] which has produced the film The Adjustment Bureau (2011), the TV series The Man in the High Castle [ 142 ] and also a Marvel Comics 5-issue adaptation of Electric Ant .

[ 143 ] The Hanson Robotics Philip K. Dick Android, at the 2019 Web Summit event Dick was recreated by his fans in the form of a simulacrum or remote-controlled android designed in his likeness.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] Such simulacra had been themes of many of Dick's works. The Philip K. Dick simulacrum was included on a discussion panel in a San Diego Comic Con presentation about the film adaptation of the novel, A Scanner Darkly . In February 2006, an America West Airlines employee misplaced the android's head, and it has not yet been found.

[ 147 ] In January 2011, it was announced that Hanson Robotics had built a replacement.

[ 148 ] Film [ edit ] BBC2 released in 1994 a biographical documentary as part of its Arena arts series called Philip K. Dick: A Day in the Afterlife .

[ 149 ] The Gospel According to Philip K. Dick was a documentary film produced in 2001.

[ 150 ] The Penultimate Truth About Philip K. Dick was another biographical documentary film produced in 2007.

[ 151 ] The 1987 film The Trouble with Dick , in which Tom Villard plays a character named "Dick Kendred" (cf. Philip Kindred Dick), who is a science fiction author [ 152 ] The dialogue of Nikos Nikolaidis ' 1987 film Morning Patrol contains excerpts taken from published works authored by Philip K. Dick.

The Spanish feature film Proxima (2007) by Carlos Atanes , where the character Felix Cadecq is based on Dick [ 153 ] A 2008 film titled Your Name Here , by Matthew Wilder , features Bill Pullman as science fiction author William J. Frick, a character based on Dick [ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] The 2010 science fiction film 15 Till Midnight cites Dick's influence with an "acknowledgment to the works of" credit.

[ 158 ] The Prophets of Science Fiction episode, Philip K Dick. 2011 Documentary [ 159 ] In fiction [ edit ] Michael Bishop 's The Secret Ascension (1987; published as Philip K. Dick Is Dead, Alas ), which is set in an alternative universe where his non-genre work is published but his science fiction is banned by a totalitarian United States in thrall to a demonically possessed Richard Nixon .

The short story "The Transmigration of Philip K" (1984) by Michael Swanwick (in the 1991 collection Gravity's Angels ) In Ursula K. Le Guin 's 1971 novel The Lathe of Heaven , whose characters alter reality through their dreams.  Two made-for-TV films based on the novel have been made: The Lathe of Heaven (1980) and Lathe of Heaven (2002) In Thomas M. Disch 's The Word of God (2008) [ 160 ] The comics magazine Weirdo published "The Religious Experience of Philip K. Dick" by cartoonist Robert Crumb in 1986.

[ 161 ] Though this is not an adaptation of a specific book or story by Dick, it incorporates elements of Dick's experience which he related in short stories, novels, essays, and the Exegesis . The story parodies the form of a Chick tract , a type of evangelical comic, many of which relate the story of an epiphany leading to a conversion to fundamentalist Christianity .

In the 1976 alternate history novel The Alteration by Kingsley Amis , one of the novels-within-a-novel depicted is The Man in the High Castle (mirroring The Grasshopper Lies Heavy in the real-life novel), still written by Philip K. Dick.

[ 162 ] Instead of the novel being set in 1962 in an alternate universe where the Axis Powers won the Second World War and named for Hawthorne Abendsen, the author of its novel-within-a-novel, it depicts an alternate universe where the Protestant Reformation occurred (events including the continuation of Henry VIII's Schismatic policies by his son, Henry IX, and the creation of an independent North America in 1848), with one character speculating that the titular character was a wizard.

The short film trilogy Code 7 written and directed by Nacho Vigalondo starts with the line "Philip K. Dick presents". The story also contains some other references to Philip K. Dick's body of work.

[ 163 ] In the 2022 web anime Cyberpunk: Edgerunners , the character, Rebecca, has the words "PK DICK" tattooed on her right thigh.

Music [ edit ] "Flow My Tears" is the name of an instrumental by bassist Stuart Hamm , inspired by Dick's novel of the same name. The track is found on his album Radio Free Albemuth , also named after a Dick novel.

[ 164 ] "Flow My Tears, The Policeman Said" and other seminal Ph. K. Dick novels inspired the electronic music concept album " The Dowland Shores of Philip K. Dick's Universe " [ 165 ] by Levent American rapper and producer El-P is a fan of Dick and other science fiction. Many of Dick's themes, such as paranoia and questions about the nature of reality, feature in El-P's work.

[ 166 ] A song on the 2002 album Fantastic Damage is titled "T.O.J." and the chorus makes reference to the Dick work Time Out of Joint .

English singer Hugh Cornwell included an instrumental called "Philip K. Ridiculous" on his 2008 album "Hooverdam".

[ 167 ] Sister , a Sonic Youth album, "was in part inspired by the life and works of science fiction writer Philip K. Dick".

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Blind Guardian 's song "Time What is Time" from the 1992 album "Somewhere Far Beyond" is loosely based on the book "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?".

[ 170 ] American band Clutch's song, "X-Ray Visions" features images of Dick in their official music video. Additionally, Neil Fallon said "[Dick's] general philosophy and questions have always crept into my lyrics, because I share an interest in it. On Earth Rocker, 'Crucial Velocity' was definitely a Philip K. Dick song for me. On this record, 'X-Ray Visions' certainly is." [ 171 ] Radio [ edit ] In June 2014, BBC Radio 4 broadcast The Two Georges by Stephen Keyworth, inspired by the FBI's investigation of Phil and his wife Kleo in 1955, and the subsequent friendship that developed between Phil and FBI Agent Scruggs.

[ 172 ] Theater [ edit ] A 2005 play, 800 Words: the Transmigration of Philip K. Dick by Victoria Stewart, which re-imagines Dick's final days.

[ 173 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] Postmodernists such as Jean Baudrillard and Laurence Rickels have commented on Dick's writing's foreshadowing of postmodernity.

[ 174 ] Jean Baudrillard offers this interpretation: "It is hyperreal. It is a universe of simulation, which is something altogether different. And this is so not because Dick speaks specifically of simulacra. SF has always done so, but it has always played upon the double, on artificial replication or imaginary duplication, whereas here the double has disappeared. There is no more double; one is always already in the other world, an other world which is not another, without mirrors or projection or utopias as means for reflection. The simulation is impassable, unsurpassable, checkmated, without exteriority. We can no longer move 'through the mirror' to the other side, as we could during the golden age of transcendence." [ 175 ] Dick's anti-government skepticism was referred to in Mythmakers and Lawbreakers , a collection of interviews about fiction by anarchist authors. Noting his early authorship of The Last of the Masters , an anarchist-themed novelette, author Margaret Killjoy expressed that while Dick never fully sided with anarchism , his opposition to government centralization and organized religion has influenced anarchist interpretations of gnosticism .

[ 176 ] Video games [ edit ] The 3.0 update for the grand strategy video game Stellaris is named the "Dick" update, following the game's trend of naming updates after science fiction authors.

[ 177 ] The 2016 video game Californium was developed as a tribute to Philip K. Dick and his writings to coincide with an Arte 's documentary series.

[ 178 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Dick in 2005.

[ 179 ] During his lifetime he received numerous annual literary awards and nominations for particular works.

[ 180 ] Hugo Awards Best Novel 1963 – winner : The Man in the High Castle [ 7 ] 1975 – nominee: Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said [ 8 ] Best Novelette 1968 – nominee: Faith of Our Fathers Nebula Awards Best Novel 1965 – nominee: Dr. Bloodmoney [ 181 ] 1965 – nominee: The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch [ 181 ] 1968 – nominee: Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

[ 182 ] 1974 – nominee: Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said [ 183 ] 1982 – nominee: The Transmigration of Timothy Archer [ 184 ] John W. Campbell Memorial Award Best Novel 1975 – winner : Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said [ 8 ] British Science Fiction Association Award Best Novel 1978 – winner : A Scanner Darkly [ 185 ] Graoully d'Or (Festival de Metz, France) 1979 – winner : A Scanner Darkly Kurd-Laßwitz-Preis 1985 – winner VALIS Philip K. Dick Award [ edit ] Main article: Philip K. Dick Award The Philip K. Dick Award is a science fiction award that annually recognizes the previous year's best SF paperback original published in the U.S.

[ 186 ] It is conferred at Norwescon , sponsored by the Philadelphia Science Fiction Society , and since 2005 supported by the Philip K. Dick Trust. Winning works are identified on their covers as Best Original SF Paperback . It is currently administered by, John Silbersack, and Gordon Van Gelder .

[ 186 ] The award was inaugurated in 1983, the year after Dick's death. It was founded by Thomas Disch with assistance from David G. Hartwell , Paul S. Williams , and Charles N. Brown . Past administrators include Algis J. Budrys.

[ 187 ] Bibliography [ edit ] For a bibliography of Dick's works, see Philip K. Dick bibliography .

Precious Artifacts: A Philip K. Dick Bibliography, United States of America and United Kingdom Editions, 1955 – 2012 . Compiled by Henri Wintz and David Hyde. (Wide Books 2012). www.wide-books.com Precious Artifacts 2: A Philip K. Dick Bibliography, The Short Stories, United States, United Kingdom and Oceania, 1952 – 2014 . Compiled by Henri Wintz and David Hyde (Wide Books 2014). www.wide-books.com Precious Artifacts 3: Precieuses Reliques: A Philip K. Dick Bibliography, The French Editions, 1959–2018 (bi-lingual). Compiled by Henri Wintz and David Hyde. (Wide Books 2019). www.wide-books.com See also [ edit ] Speculative fiction portal Literature portal Consensus reality Cyberpunk Paranoid fiction Transcendental idealism Notes [ edit ] ^ Completed, but not yet published, by the time of the November 1975 interview.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Young, Molly (October 26, 2022).

"The Essential Philip K. Dick - A nuclear-strength imagination powered his stupendous output. Here's where to start" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2022 . Retrieved October 26, 2022 .

^ Kimbell, Keith.

"Ranked: Movies Based on Philip K. Dick Stories" . Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013 . Retrieved November 20, 2013 .

^ a b c O'Reilly, Seamus (October 7, 2017).

"Just because you're paranoid ... Philip K Dick's troubled life" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2019 . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ Dancey-Downs, Katie (July 23, 2022).

"8 facts about Philip K. Dick" .

Salon.com .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2022 . Retrieved July 23, 2022 .

^ "Philip K. Dick" .

Museum of Pop Culture . Archived from the original on July 14, 2023 . Retrieved October 31, 2023 .

^ Liukkonen, Petri.

"Philip K. Dick" .

Books and Writers (kirjasto.sci.fi) . Finland: Kuusankoski Public Library. Archived from the original on April 25, 2007.

^ a b c "1963 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ a b c d "1975 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ Behrens, Richard; Allen B. Ruch (March 21, 2003).

"Philip K. Dick" .

The Scriptorium . The Modern Word. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Boucher, Geoff (September 15, 2007).

"The future keepers" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

^ "Philip K. Dick - Biography, Books, & Facts" .

Britannica .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2021 . Retrieved November 14, 2021 .

^ Chi Hyun Park, Jane (2010).

Yellow Future: Oriental Style in Hollywood Cinema . University of Minnesota Press. p. 54.

^ a b Grossman, Lev (October 16, 2005).

"ALL-TIME 100 Novels" .

Time .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Stoffman, Judy "A milestone in literary heritage" Toronto Star (February 10, 2007) Archived October 6, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Library of America Philip K. Dick: Four Novels of the 1960s Archived April 15, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Associated Press "Library of America to issue volume of Philip K. Dick" Archived January 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine USA Today (November 28, 2006) ^ a b Kucukalic, Lejla (2008).

Philip K. Dick: canonical writer of the digital age . Taylor and Francis. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-415-96242-1 .

^ Sutin, Lawrence (2003).

"Philip K. Dick" .

Author – Official Biography . Philip K. Dick Trust. Archived from the original on April 10, 2008 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ The Search for Philip K Dick by Anne R Dick, Tachyon Publications 2010 ^ Vitale, Joe.

"Interview with Philip K. Dick" .

Philip K. Dick – Official Site . Archived from the original on April 8, 2012 . Retrieved May 6, 2012 .

^ a b Sutin p.3 ^ Sutin, p. 53 ^ a b Dick, Philip K. "An Interview With America's Most Brilliant Science-Fiction Writer" Interview by Joe Vitale. Interview With Philip K Dick. Print Interviews. Web. October 22, 2011.

^ Philip K. Dick (1978), How to Build a Universe That Doesn't Fall Apart Two Days Later , urbigenous, archived from the original on January 14, 2020 , retrieved February 10, 2019 ^ a b Philip K. Dick at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database (ISFDB). Retrieved April 23, 2013.

^ Dick, Philip K. (June 1953).

"The Preserving Machine" .

The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction . Vol. 4, no. 6. p. 73.

^ a b O'HARA, HELEN (March 3, 2011).

"Philip K. Dick: The Man And His Movies" .

Empire .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2018 . Retrieved April 17, 2020 .

^ Dick, Philip K. (December 15, 2015).

Philip K. Dick: The Last Interview: and Other Conversations . Melville House.

ISBN 9781612195278 .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Dick, Philip K. (2015).

Philip K. Dick: The Last Interview and Other Conversations . Melville House. p. 68.

ISBN 978-1-61219-526-1 .

^ Breau, Yves.

"INTERVIEW PHILIP K. DICK (6:45 min)" .

UbWeb . Retrieved January 24, 2024 .

^ Dick, Philip K (1980).

The Golden Man . Berkley Books.

ISBN 0-425-04288-X .

^ Butler, Andrew M. (May 24, 2012).

The Pocket Essential Philip K. Dick . Oldcastle Books.

ISBN 9781842439197 .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved June 26, 2015 .

^ a b c d Cameron, R. Graeme (June 20, 2014).

"Mad Flight of a Manic Phoenix, or: Philip K. Dick in Vancouver (1972)" .

Amazing Stories .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2015 . Retrieved June 26, 2015 .

^ Heer, Jeet (May 2001).

"Marxist Literary Critics Are Following Me!: How Philip K. Dick betrayed his academic admirers to the FBI" .

Lingua Franca .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2022 . Retrieved March 16, 2022 .

^ O'Neill, John (September 18, 2018).

"When Philip K. Dick Reports You to the FBI: Thomas M. Disch's Camp Concentration – Black Gate" .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2022 . Retrieved March 16, 2022 .

^ Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human ^ Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night ^ Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon ^ Purser-Hallard, Philip (August 11, 2006).

"The drugs did work" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2016 . Retrieved December 14, 2016 .

^ Admin, System (March 30, 2012).

"Philip K Dick and the Vesica Piscis " From Around The Web " Mindscape magazine" . Mindscapemagazine.com.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2013 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ "Prophets of Science Fiction: Philip K. Dick". The Science Channel. Aired Wednesday, November 17, 2011.

^ a b Platt, Charles (1980).

Dream Makers: The Uncommon People Who Write Science Fiction . Berkley Publishing.

ISBN 0-425-04668-0 .

^ Green, Ronald S. "The Gnosis of 2-3-74" Philip K. Dick and Philosophy: Do Androids Have Kindred Spirits?, edited by D. E. Wittkower, Chicago: Open Court, (2011) p. 183–192.

ISBN 9780812697346 ^ "Mike Jay - Paranoid Android" .

Literary Review .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 6, 2020 .

^ Dick, Philip K.  'The Selected Letters of Philip K. Dick: 1974', Underwood-Miller, 1991, p. 235 ^ "Philip K. Dick: Stanisław Lem is a Communist Committee" Archived September 21, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , Matt Davies, April 29, 2015 ^ a b "The Religious Affiliation of Science Fiction Writer Philip K. Dick" .

Famous Science Fiction Writers / Famous Episcopalians . Adherents.com. July 25, 2005. Archived from the original on March 30, 2008 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Tritel, Barbara (December 1, 1985).

"IN SHORT: FICTION" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on April 13, 2023 . Retrieved April 13, 2023 .

^ "Phil and Jack" . March 23, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 9, 2022 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ "Interview Anne Mini" .

Archived from the original on October 18, 2011 . Retrieved September 30, 2021 .

^ "Philip K. Dick's Estate Sues Moviemakers" . October 31, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 6, 2020 .

^ Arnold, Kyle (May 2, 2016).

The Divine Madness of Philip K. Dick . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190498313 .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved October 28, 2020 – via Google Books.

^ Brown, Karina (April 16, 2009).

"Philip K. Dick's Ex Battles Stepdaughters Over Rights" .

Courthouse News Service .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2022 . Retrieved January 27, 2022 .

^ Sutin, pp. 83–84 ^ Timberg, Scott (November 22, 2010).

"Philip K. Dick's Masterpiece Years" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 6, 2020 .

^ Arnold, Kyle (May 2, 2016).

The Divine Madness of Philip K. Dick . Oxford University Press. pp.

53– 56.

ISBN 978-0190498313 .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2020 . Retrieved June 16, 2018 .

^ Dick, Philip K.; Panter, Gary ; Panter, Nicole; Jeter, KW (May 1980).

"The Philip K. Dick / Punk Rock Connection" .

Slash . Retrieved May 30, 2023 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Writers and Editors War Tax Protest".

New York Post . January 30, 1968.

^ "IRS Property Seizures Against War Tax Resisters - National War Tax Resistance Coordinating Committee" .

nwtrcc.org . December 1, 2015.

Archived from the original on April 28, 2023 . Retrieved April 13, 2023 .

^ Pottle, Adam (2013).

"Segregating the Chickenheads: Philip Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? and the Post/humanism of the American Eugenics Movement" .

Disability Studies Quarterly .

33 (3).

doi : 10.18061/dsq.v33i3.3229 .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2023 . Retrieved January 11, 2023 .

^ Salyer, Jerry (July 20, 2019).

"Philip K. Dick's "The Pre-Persons": Abortion & Dystopia" .

The Imaginative Conservative .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2023 . Retrieved January 11, 2023 .

^ a b c d Carrère, Emmanuel (2004).

I Am Alive and You Are Dead: A Journey Into the Mind of Philp K. Dick . New York: Metropolitan Books.

ISBN 0-8050-5464-2 .

^ Sutin, pg. 289 ^ Harvilla, Rob (October 5, 2017).

" 'Blade Runner' Is Still the Truest Philip K. Dick Adaptation" .

The Ringer .

Archived from the original on June 2, 2021 . Retrieved June 2, 2021 .

^ a b "Criticism and analysis" . Gale Research. 1996. Archived from the original on March 7, 2007 . Retrieved April 20, 2007 .

^ A Conversation With Philip K. Dick Archived May 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Dick, Philip K. (1985).

I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon .

Doubleday . p. 2.

ISBN 0-385-19567-2 .

^ Dick, Philip K. (1995). Sutin, Lawrence (ed.).

The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick: Selected Literary and Philosophical Writings . Vintage. p. 212.

^ Taylor, Angus (2008). "Electric Sheep and the New Argument from Nature", in Jodey Castricano (ed.), Animal Subjects: An Ethical Reader in a Posthuman World . Wilfrid Laurier University Press. p. 188.

^ Taylor, Angus (1975).

"Philip K. Dick and the Umbrella of Light" (PDF) .

Philip K. Dick . p. 33.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 16, 2022 . Retrieved June 4, 2022 .

^ The Collected Stories Of Philip K. Dick, Volume 1, The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford , (1990), Citadel Twilight, p. xvi, ISBN 0-8065-1153-2 ^ a b Sutin, npg ^ Burt, Stephanie (July 3, 2008).

"Kick over the Scenery" .

London Review of Books .

30 (13).

Archived from the original on August 25, 2021 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ a b Williams, Paul (November 6, 1975).

"The Most Brilliant Sci-Fi Mind on Any Planet: Philip K. Dick" (PDF) .

Rolling Stone .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 26, 2014 . Retrieved November 10, 2014 .

^ a b Link, Eric Carl (2010).

Understanding Philip K. Dick .

University of South Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1-57003-855-6 .

^ Levack, Daniel (1981).

PKD: A Philip K. Dick Bibliography , Underwood/Miller , pp. 116, 126 ISBN 0-934438-33-1 ^ "Isa Hackett, Daughter of Philip K. Dick, Discusses Amazon's 'Man in the High Castle' " .

The New York Observer . November 19, 2015.

Archived from the original on August 26, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2021 .

^ ^ Sammon, Paul M. (1996). Future Noir: the Making of Blade Runner. London: Orion Media. p. 49.

ISBN 0-06-105314-7 .

^ "A Scanner Darkly. 2006. Directed by Richard Linklater | MoMA" .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2022 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ Dick, Philip K. (1997).

Philip K. Dick Reader, The . New York, NY: Citadel Press.

ISBN 0-8065-1856-1 .

^ Machover, Tod .

"Valis CD" .

MIT Media Lab . Archived from the original on March 12, 2008 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Dick, Philip K.

(1985).

Radio Free Albemuth . New York: Arbor House. Rear dust jacket.

ISBN 0877957622 .

^ Arnold, Kyle (May 2, 2016).

The Divine Madness of Philip K. Dick . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-049830-6 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2023 . Retrieved September 20, 2021 .

^ Philip K. Dick, "Self Portrait", 1968, ( The Shifting Realities of Philip K. Dick , 1995) ^ AN INTERVIEW WITH PHILIP K. DICK Archived May 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Daniel DePerez, September 10, 1976, Science Fiction Review, No. 19, Vol. 5, no. 3, August 1976 ^ Knight, Annie; John T Cullen; the staff of Deep Outside SFFH (November 2002).

"About Philip K. Dick: An interview with Tessa, Chris, and Ranea Dick" .

Deep Outside SFFH . Far Sector SFFH.

Archived from the original on February 19, 2008 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ "Philip K. Dick Films" . Philip K. Dick Trust. August 11, 2009. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010 . Retrieved September 3, 2010 .

^ Kermode, Mark (July 15, 2000).

On the Edge of Bladerunner (TV documentary). UK: Channel 4.

^ Dick, Philip K.

"Letter to Jeff Walker regarding 'Blade Runner' " . Archived from the original on December 13, 2003 . Retrieved May 31, 2016 .

^ a b c Capps, Robert (October 7, 2010).

"7 Past and Future Philip K. Dick Adaptations" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2020 . Retrieved April 5, 2020 – via www.wired.com.

^ Roberts, Randall.

"calendarlive.com" . calendarlive.com. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ "Ubik (2010) – Preview" . Sci-Fi Movie Page.

Archived from the original on July 28, 2013 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ Williams, Owen (May 6, 2014).

"Michel Gondry Abandons Ubik" .

Empire .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2021 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ Pedersen, Erik (November 8, 2021).

" 'Vulcan's Hammer': Francis Lawrence Directs Film Version Of Philip K. Dick Novel In Works From New Republic" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2021 . Retrieved April 4, 2022 .

^ Laman, Douglas (February 28, 2022).

"What happened to Disney's King of the Elves?" .

Collider . Archived from the original on April 4, 2022 . Retrieved April 4, 2022 .

^ Philip K. Dick's 'Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said' Being Adapted Archived May 15, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Alex Billington, FirstShowing.net, May 12, 2009 ^ Sweney, Mark (October 7, 2010).

"Ridley Scott to return to work of sci-fi icon for BBC mini-series: Blade Runner director to executive produce four-part BBC1 adaptation of Philip K Dick's The Man in the High Castle" .

The Observer .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2016 . Retrieved December 12, 2016 .

^ "Watch The Man in the High Castle - Season 1 | Prime Video" .

www.amazon.com .

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved September 8, 2017 .

^ "Amazon Prime for November 2019: More 'Jack Ryan,' 'The Report,' 'Man in the High Castle' " .

USA Today . October 30, 2019 . Retrieved November 16, 2019 .

^ Palmer, Katie (November 3, 2020).

"Minority Report season 2 release date: Will there be another series of Minority Report?" .

express.co.uk . Express. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021 . Retrieved September 11, 2021 .

^ Cynthia Littleton (February 14, 2017).

"Amazon Grabs U.S. Rights to Bryan Cranston's 'Philip K. Dick's Electric Dreams' Anthology Series" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on April 24, 2017 . Retrieved December 12, 2017 .

^ Lodderhose, Diana (May 10, 2016).

"Bryan Cranston to Star in Philip K. Dick Series From 'Outlander's' Ron Moore" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2016 . Retrieved May 11, 2016 .

^ "Hear VALIS, an Opera Based on Philip K. Dick's Metaphysical Novel | Open Culture" .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2021 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ "Machover's VALIS This Way Comes" .

The Boston Musical Intelligencer . August 30, 2023 . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ "evidEnce room – past productions" . Archived from the original on February 7, 2012 . Retrieved May 28, 2012 .

^ Foley, Kathleen (April 22, 1999).

" 'Flow My Tears' Has Hallucinatory Style" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2012 . Retrieved May 28, 2012 .

^ "Archived NTK email newsletter from 11 June 1999" . Ntk.net. June 11, 1999.

Archived from the original on January 20, 2013 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ Zinoman, Jason (December 3, 2010).

"A Test for Humanity in a Post-Apocalyptic World" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2012 . Retrieved December 28, 2010 .

^ The Defenders .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2020 . Retrieved August 28, 2020 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ "Przedstawienie Trzy stygmaty Palmera Eldritcha" . encyklopediateatru.pl.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2016 . Retrieved October 10, 2016 .

^ "Trzy stygmaty Palmera Eldritcha – Stary Teatr" .

Gazeta Wyborcza .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 10, 2016 .

^ "Episode 1, Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, Dangerous Visions – BBC Radio 4" .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2018 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ "MARVEL BRINGS PHILIP K DICK'S ELECTRIC ANT TO LIFE IN NEW SERIES" . philipkdick.com. July 24, 2008. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012.

^ SDCC 08: PHILIP K. DICK COMES TO MARVEL Archived October 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine www.ign.com ^ Philip K. Dick Press Release – BOOM! ANNOUNCES DO ANDROIDS DREAM OF ELECTRIC SHEEP?

Archived September 20, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Carnevale, Alex (October 6, 2008).

"Blade Runner Started, And Ended, As A Comic Book" .

io9 .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2016 . Retrieved July 15, 2017 .

^ TOTAL RECALL #1 (OF 4) Archived September 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine www.dynamite.com ^ Total Recall #1 Archived September 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine www.comicvine.com ^ The Selected Letters of Philip K. Dick, 1975–1976. Novato, California : Underwood-Miller, 1993 (Trade edition) ISBN 0-88733-111-4 p. 240 ^ "Home Page of the National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS)" . Loc.gov. October 28, 2013.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2013 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ O'Hagen, Sean (June 12, 2005).

"What a clever Dick" .

The Observer . UK.

Archived from the original on May 22, 2008 . Retrieved April 15, 2008 .

^ Taylor, Charles (June 20, 2004).

"Just Imagine Philip K. Dick" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2008 . Retrieved April 15, 2008 .

^ Berry, Michael (July 4, 2004).

"The dead no longer lie in grave silence" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on May 22, 2008 . Retrieved April 15, 2008 .

^ You Don't Know Dick by Jonathan Lethem, Bookforum "Bookforum | summer 2002" . Archived from the original on January 16, 2013 . Retrieved August 23, 2023 .

(Summer 2002) ^ Fredric Jameson, Archaeologies of the Future: The Desire Called Utopia and Other Science Fictions , London and New York: Verso, 2005, p. 345; p. 347.

^ Biography and Memoir Reviews.

"Between Parentheses by Roberto Bolaño: review" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2013 . Retrieved November 12, 2013 .

^ a b c d e "Scriptorium – Philip K. Dick" . Themodernword.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008 . Retrieved July 28, 2008 .

^ a b c d e f g How Hollywood woke up to a dark genius [ dead link ] , The Daily Telegraph "Culture, Arts and Entertainment - Telegraph" . Archived from the original on November 11, 2014 . Retrieved July 26, 2017 .

^ Sal Cinquemani (September 25, 2004).

"Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" .

Slant Magazine .

Archived from the original on July 4, 2018 . Retrieved April 17, 2020 .

^ Peter Bradshaw (April 30, 2004).

"Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2017 . Retrieved December 12, 2016 .

^ "SDCC TRAILER: Timberlake and Seyfried on the run in IN TIME" . Archived from the original on April 5, 2012 . Retrieved July 22, 2011 .

^ "Alejandro Amenábar Fernando Cantos" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2012 . Retrieved January 9, 2011 .

^ Philip K. Dick's Future Is Now , The Washington Post ^ Donnie Darko , Salon Archived July 3, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Kelly's Revelations: Defending Southland Tales.

, Cinema Scope Archived September 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Bryan Bishop (August 30, 2012).

"Noir to near-future: 'Looper' director Rian Johnson talks sci-fi, Twitter, and the fate of film" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2017 . Retrieved September 8, 2017 .

^ Frank Rose (December 1, 2003).

"The Second Coming of Philip K. Dick" .

WIRED .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2014 . Retrieved March 11, 2017 .

^ Could Inception trigger a new wave of sci-fi cinema?

Archived May 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , Den of Geek ^ "R.I.P. Paul Williams, pioneering music journalist and Philip K. Dick's literary executor" .

io9 . March 28, 2013.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 6, 2020 .

^ Wallace Harris, James (April 15, 2016).

"The Biographies of Philip K. Dick" .

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 6, 2021 .

^ "Boom! to Collect 'Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?' " .

Publishers Weekly . July 7, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2015 . Retrieved November 28, 2015 .

^ "Amazon's 'Man in the High Castle' TV series has made Philip K. Dick's original book a bestseller" .

Business Insider . November 20, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 23, 2015 . Retrieved November 28, 2015 .

^ "Dee Rees To Adapt Philip K. Dick's 'Martian Time-Slip' " . Deadline Hollywood. October 17, 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015 . Retrieved November 28, 2015 .

^ "About The Philip K. Dick Android Project: A Note from Laura and Isa" (Press release). Philip K. Dick Trust. June 24, 2005. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Nova ScienceNow , "Next Big Thing" Archived June 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ "PKD Android" . Archived from the original on October 1, 2009 . Retrieved June 11, 2014 .

^ Waxman, Sharon (June 24, 2006).

"A Strange Loss of Face, More Than Embarrassing" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2012 . Retrieved April 14, 2008 .

^ Lamar, Cyriaque (January 12, 2011).

"The Lost Robotic Head of Philip K Dick Has Been Rebuilt" .

io9 .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2011 . Retrieved January 12, 2011 .

^ timotheyido (April 9, 1994).

" "Arena" Philip K Dick: A Day in the Afterlife (TV Episode 1994)" . IMDb.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2017 . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ "The Gospel According to Philip K. Dick" .

IMDb .

^ "The Penultimate Truth About Philip K. Dick" .

IMDb .

^ "The Trouble With Dick" .

IMDb .

^ Próxima (2007) , archived from the original on June 5, 2021 , retrieved April 6, 2021 ^ Koehler, Robert (July 7, 2008).

"Review: 'Your Name Here' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2014 . Retrieved April 3, 2014 .

^ Fischer, Martha (August 8, 2006).

"Another Dick Biopic!" .

Moviefone . Archived from the original on April 7, 2014 . Retrieved April 3, 2014 .

^ Buchanan, Jason.

"Your Name Here (2008)" .

AllMovie .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2014 . Retrieved April 2, 2014 .

^ Kemp, Cal (June 17, 2008).

"CineVegas X: Matthew Wilder Interview – 'Your Name Here' " .

Collider . Archived from the original on April 1, 2014 . Retrieved April 2, 2014 .

^ IMDb "Full credits" Archived January 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ " "Prophets of Science Fiction" Philip K. Dick (TV Episode 2011)" . IMDb. November 23, 2011.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2017 . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ Disch, Thomas M.

The Word of God . San Francisco:Tachyon, 2008 ^ Crumb, Robert. "The Religious Experience of Philip K. Dick," Weirdo #17 ( Last Gasp , Summer 1986).

^ "What if? Alternative history's butterfly moments reach lift-off" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2017 . Retrieved September 13, 2017 .

^ "Código 7" . IMDb. February 8, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2017 . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ "Stuart Hamm "Radio Free Albemuth" | Guitar Nine" .

www.guitar9.com .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved April 10, 2020 .

^ "The Dowland Shores of Philip K. Dick's Universe" .

CD and digital download album release .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2016 . Retrieved July 23, 2016 .

^ "Interviews" .

Pitchfork . August 2002. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015 . Retrieved April 17, 2020 .

^ "Hugh Cornwell – Interview" .

pennyblackmusic.co.uk . Archived from the original on September 4, 2015 . Retrieved April 25, 2015 .

^ Foege, Alec (1994).

Confusion Is Next: The Sonic Youth Story . St. Martin's Griffin. p. 163.

^ Bengal, Rebecca.

"Albums Sister Sonic Youth 1987" .

Pitchfork . Condé Nast.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2022 . Retrieved February 24, 2023 .

Reviewed: May 9, 2019 The band was also reading the cultishly metaphysical science fiction writer Philip K. Dick, whose mordant, visionary works and traumatic life experiences were very much in the air during Sister's creation.

^ "Blind Guardian Interview" .

blindguardian.fisek.com.tr .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2011 . Retrieved October 6, 2017 .

^ "X-Ray Visions by Clutch" .

Songfacts . Retrieved January 22, 2025 .

^ "Stephen Keyworth – The Two Georges – BBC Radio 4 Extra" . BBC.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2018 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ "Core Member Profile Victoria Stewart" . The Playwrights' Center. May 20, 2008. Archived from the original on May 20, 2008 . Retrieved March 4, 2010 .

^ Myriam Díaz-Diocaretz, Stefan Herbrechter (2006).

The Matrix in theory . Rodopi. p. 136.

ISBN 978-90-420-1639-2 .

^ Baudrillard, Jean.

"Simulacra and Science Fiction" .

Science Fiction Studies .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2007 . Retrieved May 26, 2007 .

^ Killjoy, Margaret (2009).

Mythmakers and Lawbreakers . Stirling: AK Press . p. 209.

ISBN 978-1-84935-002-0 .

OCLC 318877243 .

^ "Stellaris' upcoming espionage systems are changing ahead of the 3.0 'Dick' patch" .

PCGamesN . March 18, 2021.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2021 . Retrieved March 28, 2021 .

^ Kraw, Cassandra (November 13, 2015).

"Californium: A game about the many (sur)realities of Philip K. Dick" .

Ars Technica .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2016 . Retrieved May 12, 2016 .

^ "It's Official! Inductees Named for 2005 Hall of Fame Class" . Archived from the original on March 26, 2005 . Retrieved August 19, 2016 .

. Press release March 24, 2005. Science Fiction Museum ( sfhomeworld.org ). Archived March 26, 2005. Retrieved March 22, 2013.

^ "Philip K. Dick" Archived March 27, 2015, at the Wayback Machine .

The Locus Index to SF Awards: Index of Literary Nominees .

Locus Publications . Retrieved March 22, 2013.

^ a b "1965 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ "1968 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2009 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ "1974 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2019 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ "1982 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2016 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ "1978 Award Winners & Nominees" .

Worlds Without End .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2009 . Retrieved June 26, 2009 .

^ a b "Philip K. Dick Award" .

The Locus Index to SF Awards: About the Awards . Locus Publications. Archived from the original on April 12, 2009 . Retrieved March 22, 2013 .

^ Hartwell, David G. (March 6, 2003).

"The Origin of the Philip K. Dick Award" .

Philip K. Dick Award . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] For secondary bibliography, see Philip K. Dick bibliography § Book-length critical studies .

Robinson, Kim Stanley (1989).

The Novels of Philip K. Dick (Dissertation) (Reprint ed.). UMI Research Press.

ISBN 9780835720144 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Philip K. Dick at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Works by Philip K. Dick in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Philip K. Dick at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Philip K. Dick at the Internet Archive Works by Philip K. Dick at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Philip K. Dick at Open Library Philip K. Dick at IMDb Philip K. Dick at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Philip K. Dick at the Internet Book List "Philip K. Dick biography" .

Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame .

Philip K. Dick discography at Discogs Philip K. Dick at Find a Grave Ebooks by Philip K. Dick - Standard Ebooks Dark Roasted Blend: Science Fiction and Fantasy Reading Experience: Philip K. Dick Philip K. Dick at Library of Congress , with 164 library catalog records 1977 interview with Philip K. Dick on YouTube v t e Philip K. Dick Bibliography Lost works Novels Gather Yourselves Together (1950) Voices from the Street (1952) Solar Lottery (1954) Mary and the Giant (1954) The World Jones Made (1954) Eye in the Sky (1955) The Man Who Japed (1955) A Time for George Stavros (1956) Pilgrim on the Hill (1956) The Broken Bubble (1956) The Cosmic Puppets (1957) Puttering About in a Small Land (1957) Nicholas and the Higs (1958) Time Out of Joint (1958) In Milton Lumky Territory (1958) Confessions of a Crap Artist (1959) The Man Whose Teeth Were All Exactly Alike (1960) Humpty Dumpty in Oakland (1960) Vulcan's Hammer (1960) Dr. Futurity (1960) The Man in the High Castle (1961) We Can Build You (1962) Martian Time-Slip (1962) Dr. Bloodmoney, or How We Got Along After the Bomb (1963) The Game-Players of Titan (1963) The Simulacra (1963) The Crack in Space (1963) Clans of the Alphane Moon (1964) The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch (1964) The Zap Gun (1964) The Penultimate Truth (1964) The Unteleported Man (1964) The Ganymede Takeover (1965) Counter-Clock World (1965) Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

(1966) Nick and the Glimmung (1966) Now Wait for Last Year (1966) Ubik (1966) Galactic Pot-Healer (1968) A Maze of Death (1968) Our Friends from Frolix 8 (1969) Flow My Tears, the Policeman Said (1974) Deus Irae (1976) Radio Free Albemuth (1976; published 1985) A Scanner Darkly (1977) Valis (1981) The Divine Invasion (1981) The Transmigration of Timothy Archer (1982) The Owl in Daylight (unfinished) Collections A Handful of Darkness (1955) The Variable Man (1956) The Preserving Machine (1969) The Book of Philip K. Dick (1973) The Best of Philip K. Dick (1977) The Golden Man (1980) Robots, Androids, and Mechanical Oddities (1984) I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon (1985) The Collected Stories of Philip K. Dick (1987) Beyond Lies the Wub (1988) The Dark Haired Girl (1989) The Father-Thing (1989) Second Variety (1989) The Days of Perky Pat (1990) The Little Black Box (1990) The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford (1990) We Can Remember It for You Wholesale (1990) The Minority Report (1991) Second Variety (1991) The Eye of the Sibyl (1992) The Philip K. Dick Reader (1997) Minority Report (2002) Selected Stories of Philip K. Dick (2002) Paycheck (2004) Vintage PKD (2006) The Exegesis of Philip K. Dick (2011) Short stories " Beyond Lies the Wub " (1952) " The Gun " (1952) " The Skull " (1952) " The Little Movement " (1952) " The Defenders " (1953) " Mr. Spaceship " (1953) " Piper in the Woods " (1953) " Roog " (1953) " The Infinites " (1953) " Second Variety " (1953) " Colony " (1953) " The Cookie Lady " (1953) " Impostor " (1953) " Paycheck " (1953) " The Preserving Machine " (1953) " Expendable " (1953) " The Indefatigable Frog " (1953) " The Commuter " (1953) " Out in the Garden " (1953) " The Great C " (1953) " The King of the Elves " (1953) " The Trouble with Bubbles " (1953) " The Variable Man " (1953) " The Impossible Planet " (1953) " Planet for Transients " (1953) " The Builder " (1953) " Tony and the Beetles " (1953) " The Hanging Stranger " (1953) " Prize Ship " (1954) " Beyond the Door " (1954) " The Crystal Crypt " (1954) " The Short Happy Life of the Brown Oxford " (1954) " The Golden Man " (1954) " Sales Pitch " (1954) " Breakfast at Twilight " (1954) " The Crawlers " (1954) " Exhibit Piece " (1954) " Adjustment Team " (1954) " Shell Game " (1954) " Meddler " (1954) " A World of Talent " (1954) " The Last of the Masters " (1954) " Upon the Dull Earth " (1954) " The Father-thing " (1954) " Strange Eden " (1954) " The Turning Wheel " (1954) " Foster, You're Dead!

" (1955) " Human Is " (1955) " War Veteran " (1955) " Captive Market " (1955) " Nanny " (1955) " The Chromium Fence " (1955) " Service Call " (1955) " The Mold of Yancy " (1955) " Autofac " (1955) " Psi-man Heal My Child!

" (1955) " The Hood Maker " (1955) " The Minority Report " (1956) " Pay for the Printer " (1956) " A Glass of Darkness (The Cosmic Puppets) " (1956) " The Unreconstructed M " (1957) " Null-O " (1958) " Explorers We " (1959) " Recall Mechanism " (1959) " Fair Game " (1959) " War Game " (1959) " All We Marsmen " (1963) " What'll We Do with Ragland Park?

" (1963) " The Days of Perky Pat " (1963) " If There Were No Benny Cemoli " (1963) " Waterspider " (1964) " Novelty Act " (1964) " Oh, to Be a Blobel!

" (1964) " The War with the Fnools " (1964) " What the Dead Men Say " (1964) " Orpheus with Clay Feet " (1964) " Cantata 140 " (1964) " The Unteleported Man " (1964) " The Little Black Box " (1964) " Retreat Syndrome " (1965) " Project Plowshare (later "The Zap Gun") " (1965) " We Can Remember It for You Wholesale " (1966) " Holy Quarrel " (1966) " Faith of Our Fathers " (1967) " Not by Its Cover " (1968) " The Electric Ant " (1969) " A. Lincoln, Simulacrum " (1969) " The Pre-persons " (1974) " A Little Something for Us Tempunauts " (1974) " The Exit Door Leads In " (1979) " Rautavaara's Case " (1980) " I Hope I Shall Arrive Soon " (1980) " The Eye of the Sibyl " (1987) " Stability " (1987) Speeches " The Android and the Human " (1972) " If You Find This World Bad, You Should See Some of the Others " (1977) Adaptations Films Blade Runner (1982) Total Recall (1990) Barjo (1992) Screamers (1995) Impostor (2001) Minority Report (2002) Paycheck (2003) A Scanner Darkly (2006) Next (2007) Screamers: The Hunting (2009) Radio Free Albemuth (2010) The Adjustment Bureau (2011) Total Recall (2012) Blade Runner 2049 (2017) Short films 2036: Nexus Dawn (2017) 2048: Nowhere to Run (2017) Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017) TV series Total Recall 2070 (1999) The Man in the High Castle (2015–2019) Minority Report (2015) Electric Dreams (2017–2018) Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–2022) Blade Runner 2099 (upcoming) Franchise Blade Runner franchise Works about Only Apparently Real (1986 biography) I Am Alive and You Are Dead (1993 biography) Your Name Here (2008 drama film) Related Isa Dick Hackett (daughter) Philip K. Dick Award Category v t e Philip K. Dick 's " The Minority Report " Film Minority Report (2002) themes technologies Lexus 2054 soundtrack TV Minority Report (2015 series) " Law and Oracle " (2011 Futurama episode) Other Minority Report: Everybody Runs (2002 video game) v t e Blade Runner Based on Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

(1968) by Philip K. Dick Films Blade Runner (1982) themes versions soundtrack Tears in rain monologue Blade Runner 2049 (2017) accolades soundtrack K. W. Jeter novels Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human (1995) Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night (1996) Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon (2000) Short films 2036: Nexus Dawn (2017) 2048: Nowhere to Run (2017) Blade Runner Black Out 2022 (2017) Television series Blade Runner: Black Lotus (2021–22) Blade Runner 2099 (TBA) Characters Rick Deckard Video games Blade Runner (1985) Blade Runner (1997) Blade Runner 2033: Labyrinth (upcoming) Comics A Marvel Comics Super Special Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

Dust to Dust Universe Penfield mood organ Replicant Spinner Related Soldier (1998) Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philip_K._Dick&oldid=1305883042 " Categories : Philip K. Dick 1928 births 1982 deaths 20th-century American Episcopalians 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American short story writers 20th-century mystics American alternate history writers American epistemologists American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American male novelists American male short story writers American metaphysicians American philosophers of art American philosophers of culture American philosophers of education American philosophers of mind American philosophers of religion American philosophers of social science American philosophers of technology American political philosophers American postmodern writers American psychological fiction writers American science fiction critics American science fiction writers American tax resisters American twins American writers of Irish descent Berkeley High School (Berkeley, California) alumni Counterculture of the 1960s Counterculture of the 1970s Cyberpunk writers Episcopalians from California Episcopalians from Illinois Hugo Award–winning writers Hyperreality theorists Novelists from California Novelists from Chicago Ontologists Panentheists People from Fullerton, California Writers from Marin County, California People from Santa Ana, California Philosophers from California Philosophers from Illinois Philosophers of history Philosophers of literature Philosophers of nihilism Philosophers of sexuality Platonists Pulp fiction writers Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees University of California, Berkeley alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2017 Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2021 Articles containing Polish-language text Articles with trivia sections from October 2019 Articles containing French-language text Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Open Library links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philip K. Dick 73 languages Add topic

