Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location and construction 2 History and usage Toggle History and usage subsection 2.1 Graduation ceremony 2.2 University's 800th anniversary 3 Traditions and legends Toggle Traditions and legends subsection 3.1 Mathematical Tripos results 3.2 Austin Seven 4 BBC Election Debate 2017 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Senate House, Cambridge 3 languages Español Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′20″N 0°07′03″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.205586°N 0.117378°E ﻿ / 52.205586; 0.117378 ﻿ ( Senate House (University of Cambridge) ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building at the University of Cambridge Senate House The Senate House viewed from the Great St Mary's tower.

General information Type Academic Architectural style Neoclassical Location King's Parade , Cambridge Construction started 1722 Completed 1730 Owner University of Cambridge Design and construction Architect(s) James Gibbs The Senate House is a 1720s building of the University of Cambridge in England, used formerly for meetings of its senate and now mainly for graduation ceremonies .

Location and construction [ edit ] Senate House interior looking towards the east end The building, which is situated in the centre of the city between King's and Gonville and Caius Colleges, was designed by architect James Gibbs , based to an unclear extent on designs by the gentleman-architect Sir James Burrough , [ 1 ] and built in 1722–1730 by Gibbs in a neo-classical style using Portland stone .

[ 2 ] The ceremony to lay the first stone was performed by Thomas Crosse , then Vice-Chancellor , on 22 June 1722.

[ 3 ] The site was previously used for houses, which were purchased by an act of Parliament , [ which?

] dated 11 June 1720. It was officially opened in July 1730, although the western end was not completed until 1768.

The Senate House was originally intended to be one side of a quadrangle, however the rest of the structure was never completed.

[ 4 ] It forms part of the Old Schools Site . It is a Grade I listed building.

[ 5 ] History and usage [ edit ] Graduation ceremony [ edit ] Graduands enter the Senate House at a graduation ceremony Lord Eatwell , in academic dress , leaving the Senate House Graduates receiving an undergraduate degree wear the academic dress that they were entitled to before graduating: for example, most students becoming Bachelors of Arts wear undergraduate gowns and not BA gowns. Graduates are presented in the Senate House college by college, in order of foundation or recognition by the university, except for the royal colleges.

The 31 colleges process to the Senate House in the following order: [ 6 ] King's Trinity St John's Peterhouse Clare Pembroke Gonville & Caius Trinity Hall Corpus Christi Queens' St Catharine's Jesus Christ's Magdalene Emmanuel Sidney Sussex Downing Girton Newnham Selwyn Fitzwilliam Churchill Murray Edwards Darwin Wolfson Clare Hall Robinson Lucy Cavendish St Edmund's Hughes Hall Homerton During the congregation, graduands are brought forth by the Praelector of their college, who takes them by the right hand, and presents them to the vice-chancellor for the degree they are about to take. The Praelector presents graduands with the following Latin statement, substituting the name of the degree for "____": " Dignissima domina, Domina Procancellaria et tota Academia praesento vobis hunc virum quem scio tam moribus quam doctrina esse idoneum ad gradum assequendum _____; idque tibi fide mea praesto totique Academiae.

(Most worthy Vice-Chancellor and the whole University, I present to you this man whom I know to be suitable as much by character as by learning to proceed to the degree of ____; for which I pledge my faith to you and to the whole University.)" and female graduands with the following: " Dignissima domina, Domina Procancellaria et tota Academia praesento vobis hanc mulierem quam scio tam moribus quam doctrina esse idoneam ad gradum assequendum ____; idque tibi fide mea praesto totique Academiae.

(Most worthy Vice-Chancellor and the whole University, I present to you this woman whom I know to be suitable as much by character as by learning to proceed to the degree of ____; for which I pledge my faith to you and to the whole University.)" After presentation, the graduand is called by name and kneels before the vice-chancellor and proffers their hands to the vice-chancellor, who clasps them and then confers the degree through the following Latin statement—the Trinitarian formula ( in nomine Patris ...) may be omitted at the request of the graduand: " Auctoritate mihi commissa admitto te ad gradum ____, in nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti.

(By the authority committed to me, I admit you to the degree of ____, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost.)" The now-graduate then rises, bows and leaves the Senate House through the Doctor's door, where he or she receives his or her certificate, into Senate House passage .

At the University of Cambridge, each graduation is a separate act of the university's governing body, the Regent House , and must be voted on as with any other act. A formal meeting of the Regent House, known as a Congregation , is held for this purpose.

[ 7 ] University's 800th anniversary [ edit ] Light show on the Senate House, for the 800th anniversary of the foundation of the university.

As part of the university's 800th anniversary celebrations in 2008, the side of the Senate House was illuminated with a light show, illustrating aspects of the history of the university.

[ 8 ] Traditions and legends [ edit ] Class lists for Part III of the Mathematical Tripos , June 2005 Mathematical Tripos results [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( June 2023 ) At the end of the academic year, class-lists for most degrees are posted up on the outer wall of the building. The results of Part II and Part III of the Mathematical Tripos , however, are read out to the waiting students from the balcony of the Senate House, after which piles of class-lists are thrown to the ground from the balcony like confetti in a time-honored manner.

Austin Seven [ edit ] A battered Austin Seven van was found on the apex of the Senate House roof on the morning of 8 June 1958. The van had been placed there the night before by a party of engineering students from Gonville & Caius College . They found the derelict Austin Seven in Harston and towed it into Cambridge. They removed the engine and rear axle to make it light enough to winch up to the roof, and hauled it up using cables and scaffolding they'd stolen from King's College . It took the university a week to get the van down and the prank received much media attention at the time.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] A variety of similar student pranks have been carried out on the roof of the building since. Most notably, a fully-decorated Christmas tree was placed on the corner of the Senate House roof in November 2022, assumed to be the work of night climbers .

[ 11 ] BBC Election Debate 2017 [ edit ] On 31 May 2017, Senate House hosted the BBC Election Debate ahead of the UK General Election eight days later.

Mishal Husain chaired audience questions for Jeremy Corbyn , Tim Farron , Caroline Lucas , Paul Nuttall , Angus Robertson , Amber Rudd , and Leanne Wood .

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ Howard Colvin , A Biographical Dictionary of British Architects, 1600 - 1850 , 3rd ed. 1995, s.v.

"Burrough, Sir James".

^ John Britton ; Edward Wedlake Brayley ; Joseph Nightingale ; James Norris Brewer ; John Evans; John Hodgson; Francis Charles Laird ; Frederic Shoberl ; John Bigland ; Thomas Rees; Thomas Hood; John Harris (1809).

The Beauties of England and Wales, or, Delineations, topographical, historical, and descriptive, of each county . Printed by Thomas Maiden, for Vernor and Hood [and 6 others]. p.

97 . Retrieved 7 April 2011 .

^ Cooper, Charles Henry (1866) "Memorials of Cambridge (Volume 3)", Cambridge: Wm Metcalfe.

^ "Images of Senate House, Cambridge, by James Gibbs" . Bluffton.edu . Retrieved 7 April 2011 .

^ Historic England .

"THE SENATE HOUSE (1322818)" .

National Heritage List for England . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .

^ "Statutes and Ordinances 2011: Admission to Degrees" (PDF) . University of Cambridge. 21 May 2011 . Retrieved 3 September 2012 .

^ "Graduation: The Ceremony" . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 3 September 2012 .

^ "Bells sound around the world as light show launches 800th Anniversary" . Admin.cam.ac.uk. 16 January 2009 . Retrieved 7 April 2011 .

^ Nigel Balchin; Peter Davy.

"A van that went up in the world" . Archived from the original on 11 August 2007 . Retrieved 5 September 2007 .

^ Patrick Sawer, Cambridge University's 1958 car on roof prank secrets revealed , The Daily Telegraph , 28 June 2008.

^ Joanna Taylor (27 November 2022).

"Christmas tree mysteriously appears on top of Cambridge University's Senate House" . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ " BBC Election Debate from Senate House" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Senate House, Cambridge .

Geographic coordinates : 52°12′20″N 0°07′03″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.205586°N 0.117378°E ﻿ / 52.205586; 0.117378 ﻿ ( Senate House (University of Cambridge) ) v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Senate_House,_Cambridge&oldid=1302323226 " Categories : School buildings completed in 1730 Buildings and structures of the University of Cambridge James Gibbs buildings Grade I listed buildings in Cambridge Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2017 Use British English from February 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2023 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Senate House, Cambridge 3 languages Add topic

