Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Legal consequences 3 Crime 4 By country Toggle By country subsection 4.1 Germany 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Natural person 58 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu Polski Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Real human being as opposed to a non-human legal person In jurisprudence , a natural person (also physical person in some Commonwealth countries , or natural entity ) is a person (in legal meaning, i.e., one who has its own legal personality ) that is an individual human being , distinguished from the broader category of a legal person , which may be a private (i.e., business entity or non-governmental organization ) or public (i.e., government ) organization. Historically, a human being was not necessarily considered a natural person in some jurisdictions where slavery existed (subject of a property right) rather than a person.

Definitions [ edit ] According to Maria Helena Diniz , an individual or natural person "is the human being considered as a subject of rights and obligations". Every human being is endowed with legal personality and, therefore, is a subject of law.

[ 1 ] According to Sílvio de Salvo Venosa, "legal personality is a projection of the intimate, psychic personality of each person; it is a social projection of the psychic personality, with legal consequences".

[ 2 ] However, and in addition, the law also gives personality to other entities, formed by groups of people or assets: these are called legal person .

A non-citizen is a natural person Legal consequences [ edit ] In many cases, fundamental human rights are implicitly granted only to natural  persons. For example, the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , which states a person cannot be denied the right to vote based on their sex, or Section 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , which guarantees equality rights, apply to natural persons only. Another example of the distinction between natural and legal persons is that a natural person can hold public office, but a corporation cannot.

A corporation or non-governmental organization can, however, file a lawsuit or own property as a legal person.

Crime [ edit ] Usually a natural person perpetrates a crime , but legal persons may also commit crimes .

[ 3 ] In the U.S., animals that are not persons under U.S. law cannot commit crimes.

[ 4 ] By country [ edit ] Germany [ edit ] In Germany, legal entities ( Rechtssubjekt ) such as natural persons ( Natürliche Person ) have the capacity to be bearers of rights and obligations; they possess legal capacity . The point in time at which this legal capacity begins and ends is disputed in German case law [ de ] and jurisprudence [ de ] .

According to section 1 of the German Civil Code (BGB), a person acquires legal capacity on completion of their birth.

[ 5 ] : § 1 However, in certain conditions, fetuses also have certain legal rights, for example, that of becoming an heir .

[ 5 ] : § 1923 (2) The question of whether a fetus may have legal capacity as well has been left open by the Federal Court of Justice , although there are indications of a positive response.

[ 6 ] The German Civil Code grants the fetus, which does not have full legal capacity, essential rights, which are subject to the condition of subsequent live birth.

[ 5 ] : § 1 The question of whether the fetus can have rights before birth and possibly from the beginning of pregnancy, in particular a right to life, is highly controversial.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Legal person Personality rights Juridical person Natural person in French law Person (Catholic canon law) Great ape personhood References [ edit ] ^ "Existence of the right of the personality of the dead in the Brazilian legal order" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2021.

^ VENOSA, Sílvio de Salvo. Direito Civil: Parte Geral. 5. ed. São Paulo: Atlas, 2005, p. 149.

^ Simpson, Sally S (2002).

Corporate Crime, Law, and Social Control . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-58083-8 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 November 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ People v. Frazier , 173 Cal. App. 4th 613 Archived 29 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine (2009). In this case, the California Court of Appeal explained: "Despite the physical ability to commit vicious and violent acts, dogs do not possess the legal ability to commit crimes." ^ a b c "German Civil Code BGB" . Translated by Langenscheidt Translation Service; Neil Mussett. Bonn: Bundesamt für Justiz. 2022.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

§ 1: The legal capacity of a human being begins on the completion of birth.

§ 1923: (1) Only a person who is alive at the time of the devolution of an inheritance may be an heir.

(2) A person who is not yet alive at the time of the devolution of an inheritance, but has already been conceived, is deemed to have been born before the devolution of an inheritance.

^ Zeising, Michael: Der Nasciturus im Zivilverfahren Archived 7 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine [The fetus in civil proceedings] (2004) p. 18; with further sources. (in German) Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_person&oldid=1303696049 " Categories : Civil law legal terminology Legal entities Personhood Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 14:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Natural person 58 languages Add topic

