Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Borders 1.2 Development 1.3 Postnatal development 2 Clinical significance Toggle Clinical significance subsection 2.1 Trauma 3 Other animals 4 Etymology 5 Additional images 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Temporal bone 54 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bone of the neurocranium This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article uses anatomical terminology .

Temporal bone Position of temporal bone (shown in green) Animation of the temporal bone Details Articulations Occipital , parietal , sphenoid , mandible and zygomatic Identifiers Latin os temporale MeSH D013701 TA98 A02.1.06.001 TA2 641 FMA 52737 Anatomical terms of bone [ edit on Wikidata ] The temporal bone is a paired bone situated at the sides and base of the skull , lateral to the temporal lobe of the cerebral cortex .

The temporal bones are overlaid by the sides of the head known as the temples where four of the cranial bones fuse. Each temple is covered by a temporal muscle . The temporal bones house the structures of the ears . The lower seven cranial nerves and the major vessels to and from the brain traverse the temporal bone.

Structure [ edit ] The temporal bone consists of four parts—the squamous , mastoid , petrous and tympanic parts.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The squamous part is the largest and most superiorly positioned relative to the rest of the bone. The zygomatic process is a long, arched process projecting from the lower region of the squamous part and it articulates with the zygomatic bone . Posteroinferior to the squamous is the mastoid part. Fused with the squamous and mastoid parts and between the sphenoid and occipital bones lies the petrous part , which is shaped like a pyramid. The tympanic part is relatively small and lies inferior to the squamous part, anterior to the mastoid part, and superior to the styloid process . The styloid, from the Greek stylos , is a phallic shaped pillar directed inferiorly and anteromedially between the parotid gland and internal jugular vein .

[ 3 ] Borders [ edit ] Occipitomastoid suture . It separates occipital bone and mastoid portion of temporal bone.

Squamosal suture . It separates parietal bone and squama portion of temporal bone.

Sphenosquamosal suture . It separates sphenoid bone and squama portion of temporal bone.

Zygomaticotemporal suture . It separates zygomatic bone and zygomatic process of temporal bone .

Development [ edit ] The temporal bone is ossified from eight centers, exclusive of those for the internal ear and the tympanic ossicles : one for the squama including the zygomatic process, one for the tympanic part, four for the petrous and mastoid parts, and two for the styloid process. Just before the end of prenatal development [Fig. 6] the temporal bone consists of three principal parts: The squama is ossified in membrane from a single nucleus, which appears near the root of the zygomatic process about the second month.

The petromastoid part is developed from four centers, which make their appearance in the cartilaginous ear capsule about the fifth or sixth month. One (proötic) appears in the neighborhood of the eminentia arcuata, spreads in front and above the internal auditory meatus and extends to the apex of the bone; it forms part of the cochlea, vestibule, superior semicircular canal, and medial wall of the tympanic cavity. A second (opisthotic) appears at the promontory on the medial wall of the tympanic cavity and surrounds the fenestra cochleæ; it forms the floor of the tympanic cavity and vestibule, surrounds the carotid canal, invests the lateral and lower part of the cochlea, and spreads medially below the internal auditory meatus. A third (pterotic) roofs in the tympanic cavity and antrum; while the fourth (epiotic) appears near the posterior semicircular canal and extends to form the mastoid process (Vrolik).

The tympanic ring is an incomplete circle, in the concavity of which is a groove, the tympanic sulcus, for the attachment of the circumference of the eardrum (tympanic membrane). This ring expands to form the tympanic part, and is ossified in membrane from a single center which appears about the third month. The styloid process is developed from the proximal part of the cartilage of the second branchial or hyoid arch by two centers: one for the proximal part, the tympanohyal, appears before birth; the other, comprising the rest of the process, is named the stylohyal, and does not appear until after birth. The tympanic ring unites with the squama shortly before birth; the petromastoid part and squama join during the first year, and the tympanohyal portion of the styloid process about the same time [Fig. 7, 8]. The stylohyal does not unite with the rest of the bone until after puberty , and in some skulls never at all.

Postnatal development [ edit ] Apart from size increase, the chief changes from birth through puberty in the temporal bone are as follows: The tympanic ring extends outward and backward to form the tympanic part. This extension does not, however, take place at an equal rate all around the circumference of the ring, but occurs more at its anterior and posterior portions. As these outgrowths meet, they create a foramen in the floor of the meatus, the foramen of Huschke. This foramen is usually closed about the fifth year, but may persist throughout life.

The mandibular fossa is at first extremely shallow, and looks lateral and inferior; it deepens and directs more inferiorly over time. The part of the squama which forms the fossa lies at first below the level of the zygomatic process. As, the base of the skull thickens, this part of the squama is directed horizontal and inwards to contribute to the middle cranial fossa , and its surfaces look upward and downward; the attached portion of the zygomatic process everts and projects like a shelf at a right angle to the squama.

The mastoid portion is at first flat, with the stylomastoid foramen and rudimentary styloid immediately behind the tympanic ring. With air cell development, the outer part of the mastoid component grows anteroinferiorly to form the mastoid process, with the styloid and stylomastoid foramen now on the under surface. The descent of the foramen is accompanied by a requisite lengthening of the facial canal.

The downward and forward growth of the mastoid process also pushes forward the tympanic part; as a result, its portion that formed the original floor of the meatus, and contained the foramen of Huschke , rotates to become the anterior wall.

The subarcuate fossa is nearly effaced.

1. Outer surface of petromastoid part. 2. Outer surface of tympanic ring. 3. Inner surface of squama.

Temporal bone at birth. Outer aspect.

Temporal bone at birth. Inner aspect.

Clinical significance [ edit ] Glomus jugulare tumor: A glomus jugulare tumor is a tumor of the part of the temporal bone in the skull that involves the middle and inner ear structures. This tumor can affect the ear, upper neck, base of the skull, and the surrounding blood vessels and nerves.

A glomus jugulare tumor grows in the temporal bone of the skull, in an area called the jugular foramen. The jugular foramen is also where the jugular vein and several important nerves exit the skull.

This area contains nerve fibers, called glomus bodies. Normally, these nerves respond to changes in body temperature or blood pressure.

These tumors most often occur later in life, around age 60 or 70, but they can appear at any age. The cause of a glomus jugulare tumor is unknown. In most cases, there are no known risk factors. Glomus tumors have been associated with changes (mutations) in a gene responsible for the enzyme succinate dehydrogenase (SDHD).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Trauma [ edit ] Temporal bone fractures were historically divided into three main categories, longitudinal , in which the vertical axis of the fracture paralleled the petrous ridge, horizontal , in which the axis of the fracture was perpendicular to the petrous ridge, and oblique , a mixed type with both longitudinal and horizontal components. Horizontal fractures were thought to be associated with injuries to the facial nerve , and longitudinal with injuries to the middle ear ossicles .

[ 6 ] More recently, delineation based on disruption of the otic capsule has been found as more reliable in predicting complications such as facial nerve injury, sensorineural hearing loss , intracerebral hemorrhage , and cerebrospinal fluid otorrhea .

[ 7 ] Other animals [ edit ] In many animals some of these parts stay separate through life: Squamosal : the squama including the zygomatic process Tympanic bone : the tympanic part: this is derived from the angular bone of the reptilian lower jaw Periotic bone : the petrous and mastoid parts Two parts of the hyoid arch: the styloid process. In the dog these small bones are called tympanohyal (upper) and stylohyal (lower).

In evolutionary terms, the temporal bone is derived from the fusion of many bones that are often separate in non-human mammals: The squamosal bone, which is homologous with the squama, and forms the side of the cranium in many bony fish and tetrapods . Primitively, it is a flattened plate-like bone, but in many animals it is narrower in form, for example, where it forms the boundary between the two temporal fenestrae of diapsid reptiles.

[ 8 ] The petrous and mastoid parts of the temporal bone, which derive from the periotic bone , formed from the fusion of a number of bones surrounding the ear of reptiles. The delicate structure of the middle ear , unique to mammals, is generally not protected in marsupials , but in placentals , it is usually enclosed within a bony sheath called the auditory bulla . In many mammals this is a separate tympanic bone derived from the angular bone of the reptilian lower jaw, and, in some cases, it has an additional entotympanic bone . The auditory bulla is homologous with the tympanic part of the temporal bone.

[ 8 ] Two parts of the hyoid arch: the styloid process. In the dog the styloid process is represented by a series of four articulating bones, from top down tympanohyal , stylohyal , epihyal , ceratohyal ; the first two represent the styloid process, and the ceratohyal represents the anterior horns of the hyoid bone and articulates with the basihyal which represents the body of the hyoid bone.

Etymology [ edit ] Its exact etymology is unknown.

[ 9 ] It is thought to be from the Old French temporal meaning "earthly", which is directly from the Latin tempus meaning "time, proper time or season." Temporal bones are situated on the sides of the skull, where grey hairs usually appear early on. Or it may relate to the pulsations of the underlying superficial temporal artery, marking the time we have left here. There is also a probable connection with the Greek verb temnion , to wound in battle. The skull is thin in this area and presents a vulnerable area for a blow from a battle axe.

[ 10 ] Another possible etymology is described at Temple (anatomy) .

Additional images [ edit ] Position of temporal bone (green). Animation.

Shape of temporal bone (left) Cranial bones Sphenoid and temporal bones See also [ edit ] Chorda tympani Cholesteatoma Koerner's septum Temporal muscle Temporomandibular joint References [ edit ] This article incorporates text in the public domain from page 138 of the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) ^ "SKULL ANATOMY - TEMPORAL BONE" . 28 June 2017.

^ Temporal bone anatomy on CT 2012-12-22 ^ Chaurasia, BD (31 January 2013).

Human Anatomy Volume 3 (Sixth ed.). CBS Publishers and Distributors Pvt Ltd. pp.

41– 43.

ISBN 9788123923321 .

^ "Glomus jugulare tumor: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" .

medlineplus.gov . Retrieved 2017-05-02 .

^ Sanei Taheri, Morteza; Zare Mehrjardi, Mohammad (2016-07-21).

"Imaging of temporal bone lesions: developmental and inflammatory conditions" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Brodie, HA; Thompson, TC (March 1997). "Management of complications from 820 temporal bone fractures".

The American Journal of Otology .

18 (2): 188– 97.

PMID 9093676 .

^ Little, SC; Kesser, BW (December 2006).

"Radiographic classification of temporal bone fractures: clinical predictability using a new system" .

Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery .

132 (12): 1300– 4.

doi : 10.1001/archotol.132.12.1300 .

PMID 17178939 .

^ a b Romer, Alfred Sherwood; Parsons, Thomas S. (1977).

The Vertebrate Body . Colorado, PA: Holt-Saunders International. pp. XXX.

ISBN 0-03-910284-X .

^ "Temporal | Search Online Etymology Dictionary" .

^ "Etymology of Head Terms" .

www.dartmouth.edu . Archived from the original on 2008-05-09.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Temporal bone .

"Anatomy diagram: 34256.000-1" .

Roche Lexicon - illustrated navigator . Elsevier. Archived from the original on 2012-12-27.

v t e Neurocranium of the skull Occipital Squamous part external Inion / External occipital protuberance Occipital bun External occipital crest Nuchal lines Suprainiac fossa planes Occipital Nuchal internal Cruciform eminence Internal occipital protuberance Internal occipital crest Groove for transverse sinus Lateral parts Condyle Condyloid fossa Condylar canal Hypoglossal canal jugular Jugular process Jugular tubercle Basilar part Pharyngeal tubercle Clivus Other Foramen magnum Basion Opisthion Parietal Parietal eminence Temporal line Parietal foramen Sagittal sulcus Sagittal keel Sagittal crest Frontal Squamous part Frontal suture Frontal eminence external Superciliary arches Glabella foramina Supraorbital foramen Brow ridge Foramen cecum Zygomatic process internal Sagittal sulcus Frontal crest Orbital part Ethmoidal notch Fossa for lacrimal gland Trochlear fovea Frontal sinus Frontonasal duct Temporal Squamous part Articular tubercle Suprameatal triangle Mandibular fossa Petrotympanic fissure Zygomatic process Mastoid part Mastoid foramen Mastoid process ( Mastoid cells ) Mastoid notch Occipital groove Sigmoid sulcus Mastoid antrum ( Aditus ) Petrous part Carotid canal Facial canal Hiatus Internal auditory meatus Cochlear aqueduct Stylomastoid foramen fossae Subarcuate fossa Jugular fossa canaliculi Inferior tympanic Mastoid Styloid process Petrosquamous suture (note: ossicles in petrous part, but not part of temporal bone) Tympanic part Suprameatal spine Sphenoid Surfaces Superior surface: Sella turcica Dorsum sellae Tuberculum sellae Hypophysial fossa Posterior clinoid processes Ethmoidal spine Chiasmatic groove Middle clinoid process Petrosal process Clivus Lateral surface: Carotid groove Sphenoidal lingula Anterior surface: Sphenoidal sinuses Great wings foramina Rotundum Ovale Vesalii Spinosum Spine Infratemporal crest Sulcus of auditory tube Small wings Superior orbital fissure Anterior clinoid process Optic canal Pterygoid processes fossae Pterygoid Scaphoid pterygoid plates Lateral Medial Pterygoid canal Hamulus Other Body Sphenoidal conchae Ethmoid Plates Cribriform plate Crista galli Olfactory foramina Perpendicular plate Surfaces Lateral surface Orbital lamina Uncinate process Medial surface Supreme nasal concha Superior nasal concha Superior meatus Middle nasal concha Middle meatus Labyrinth Ethmoid sinus ethmoidal foramina Posterior Anterior Portal : Anatomy Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Terminologia Anatomica Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Temporal_bone&oldid=1279868025 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Otorhinolaryngology Human head and neck Skull bones Otology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from January 2024 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 01:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Temporal bone 54 languages Add topic

