Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Assumptions 2 Responses Toggle Responses subsection 2.1 Herbert Spencer's critique 2.2 William James' defence 2.3 Other responses 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Great man theory 20 languages العربية Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Great Man" redirects here. For other uses, see Great Man (disambiguation) .

Theory that history is shaped primarily by extraordinary individuals Napoleon , a typical great man, said to have created the "Napoleonic" era through his military and political genius The great man theory is an approach to the study of history popularised in the 19th century according to which history can be largely explained by the impact of great men , or heroes : highly influential and unique individuals who, due to their natural attributes, such as superior intellect, heroic courage, extraordinary leadership abilities, or divine inspiration, have a decisive historical effect. The theory is primarily attributed to the Scottish essayist, historian, and philosopher Thomas Carlyle , who gave a series of lectures on heroism in 1840, later published as On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History , in which he states: Universal History, the history of what man has accomplished in this world, is at bottom the History of the Great Men who have worked here. They were the leaders of men, these great ones; the modellers, patterns, and in a wide sense creators, of whatsoever the general mass of men contrived to do or to attain; all things that we see standing accomplished in the world are properly the outer material result, the practical realisation and embodiment, of Thoughts that dwelt in the Great Men sent into the world: the soul of the whole world's history, it may justly be considered, were the history of these.

[ 1 ] This theory is usually contrasted with people's history , which emphasizes the life of the masses creating overwhelming waves of smaller events which carry leaders along with them. Another contrasting school is historical materialism .

Overview [ edit ] Bust of Thomas Carlyle by Thomas Woolner Carlyle stated that "The History of the world is but the Biography of great men", reflecting his belief that heroes shape history through both their personal attributes and divine inspiration.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In his book Heroes and Hero-Worship , Carlyle saw history as having turned on the decisions, works, ideas, and characters of "heroes", giving detailed analysis of six types: The hero as divinity (such as Odin ), prophet (such as Muhammad ), poet (such as Shakespeare ), priest (such as Martin Luther ), man of letters (such as Rousseau ), and king (such as Napoleon ). Carlyle also argued that the study of great men was "profitable" to one's own heroic side; that by examining the lives led by such heroes, one could not help but uncover something about one's own true nature.

[ 4 ] As Sidney Hook notes, a common misinterpretation of the theory is that "all factors in history, save great men, were inconsequential", [ 5 ] whereas Carlyle is instead claiming that great men are the decisive factor, owing to their unique genius. Hook then goes on to emphasize this uniqueness to illustrate the point: " Genius is not the result of compounding talent. How many battalions are the equivalent of a Napoleon? How many minor poets will give us a Shakespeare? How many run of the mine scientists will do the work of an Einstein ?" [ 6 ] American scholar Frederick Adams Woods supported the great man theory in his work The Influence of Monarchs: Steps in a New Science of History .

[ 7 ] Woods investigated 386 rulers in Western Europe from the 12th century until the French Revolution in the late 18th century and their influence on the course of historical events.

The Great Man approach to history was most fashionable with professional historians in the 19th century; a popular work of this school is the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition (1911) which contains lengthy and detailed biographies about the great men of history, but very few general or social histories. For example, all information on the post-Roman " Migrations Period " of European History is compiled under the biography of Attila the Hun . This heroic view of history was also strongly endorsed by some philosophers, such as Léon Bloy , Søren Kierkegaard , Oswald Spengler and Max Weber .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , proceeding from providentialist theory, argued that "what is real is reasonable" and World-Historical individuals are World-Spirit's agents. Hegel wrote: "Such are great historical men—whose own particular aims involve those large issues which are the will of the World-Spirit." [ 11 ] Thus, according to Hegel, a great man does not create historical reality himself but only uncovers the inevitable future.

In Untimely Meditations , Friedrich Nietzsche writes that "the goal of humanity lies in its highest specimens".

[ 12 ] Although Nietzsche's body of work shows some overlap with Carlyle's line of thought, Nietzsche expressly rejected Carlyle's hero cult in Ecce Homo .

[ 13 ] [ page needed ] Assumptions [ edit ] This theory rests on two main assumptions, as pointed out by Villanova University : [ 14 ] Every great leader is born already possessing certain traits that will enable them to rise and lead on instinct.

The need for them has to be great for these traits to then arise, allowing them to lead.

This theory, and history, claims these great leaders as heroes that were able to rise against the odds to defeat rivals while inspiring followers along the way. Theorists say that these leaders were then born with a specific set of traits and attributes that make them ideal candidates for leadership and roles of authority and power. This theory relies then heavily on born rather than made, nature rather than nurture and cultivates the idea that those in power deserve to lead and shouldn't be questioned because they have the unique traits that make them suited for the position.

[ 14 ] Responses [ edit ] Herbert Spencer was a contemporary critic of Carlyle's great man theory.

Herbert Spencer's critique [ edit ] One of the most forceful critics of Carlyle's formulation of the great man theory was Herbert Spencer , who believed that attributing historical events to the decisions of individuals was an unscientific position.

[ 15 ] He believed that the men Carlyle supposed "great men" are merely products of their social environment: You must admit that the genesis of a great man depends on the long series of complex influences which has produced the race in which he appears, and the social state into which that race has slowly grown. ... Before he can remake his society, his society must make him.

— Herbert Spencer, The Study of Sociology [ 16 ] William James' defence [ edit ] William James , in his 1880 lecture "Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment", [ 17 ] published in the Atlantic Monthly , forcefully defended Carlyle and refuted Spencer, condemning what James viewed as an "impudent", "vague", and "dogmatic" argument.

[ 18 ] William James was a 19th-century philosopher and psychologist.

James' defence of the great man theory can be summarized as follows: The unique physiological nature of the individual is the deciding factor in making the great man, who, in turn, is the deciding factor in changing his environment in a unique way, without which the new environment would not have come to be, wherein the extent and nature of this change is also dependent on the reception of the environment to this new stimulus. To begin his argument, he first sardonically claims that these inherent physiological qualities have as much to do with "social, political, geographical [and] anthropological conditions" as the "conditions of the crater of Vesuvius has to do with the flickering of this gas by which I write".

[ 18 ] James argues that genetic anomalies in the brains of these great men are the decisive factor by introducing an original influence into their environment. They might therefore offer original ideas, discoveries, inventions and perspectives which "would not, in the mind of another individual, have engendered just that conclusion ... It flashes out of one brain, and no other, because the instability of that brain is such as to tip and upset itself in just that particular direction." [ 18 ] James then argues that these spontaneous variations of genius, i.e. the great men , which are causally independent of their social environment, subsequently influence that environment which in turn will either preserve or destroy the newly encountered variations in a form of evolutionary selection. If the great man is preserved then the environment is changed by his influence in "an entirely original and peculiar way. He acts as a ferment, and changes its constitution, just as the advent of a new zoological species changes the faunal and floral equilibrium of the region in which it appears." Each ferment, each great man, exerts a new influence on their environment which is either embraced or rejected and if embraced will in turn shape the crucible for the selection process of future geniuses.

[ 18 ] In the words of William James, "If we were to remove these geniuses or alter their idiosyncrasies, what increasing uniformities would the environment exhibit?" James challenges Mr. Spencer or anyone else to provide a reply. According to James, there are two distinct factors driving social evolution: personal agents and the impact of their unique qualities on the overall course of events.

[ 18 ] He thus concludes: "Both factors are essential to change. The community stagnates without the impulse of the individual. The impulse dies away without the sympathy of the community." [ 18 ] Other responses [ edit ] Before the 19th century, Blaise Pascal begins his Three Discourses on the Condition of the Great (written it seems for a young duke) by telling the story of a castaway on an island whose inhabitants take him for their missing king. He defends in his parable of the shipwrecked king, that the legitimacy of the greatness of great men is fundamentally custom and chance. A coincidence that gives birth to him in the right place with noble parents and arbitrary custom deciding, for example, on an unequal distribution of wealth in favor of the nobles.

[ 19 ] Leo Tolstoy 's War and Peace features criticism of great-man theories as a recurring theme in the philosophical digressions. According to Tolstoy, the significance of great individuals is imaginary; as a matter of fact they are only "history's slaves," realizing the decree of Providence.

[ 20 ] Jacob Burckhardt affirmed the historical existence of great men in politics, even excusing the rarity among them to possess "greatness of soul", or magnanimity : "Contemporaries believe that if people will only mind their own business political morality will improve of itself and history will be purged of the crimes of the 'great men.' These optimists forget that the common people too are greedy and envious and when resisted tend to turn to collective violence." Burckhardt predicted that the belittling of great men would lead to a lowering of standards and rise in mediocrity generally.

[ 21 ] Mark Twain suggests in his essay " The United States of Lyncherdom " that "moral cowardice" is "the commanding feature of the make-up of 9,999 men in the 10,000" and that "from the beginning of the world no revolt against a public infamy or oppression has ever been begun but by the one daring man in the 10,000, the rest timidly waiting, and slowly and reluctantly joining, under the influence of that man and his fellows from the other ten thousands." [ 22 ] In 1926, William Fielding Ogburn noted that Great Men history was being challenged by newer interpretations that focused on wider social forces. While not seeking to deny that individuals could have a role or show exceptional qualities, he saw Great Men as inevitable products of productive cultures. He noted for example that if Isaac Newton had not lived, calculus would have still been discovered by Gottfried Leibniz , and suspected that if neither man had lived, it would have been discovered by someone else.

[ 23 ] Among modern critics of the theory, Sidney Hook is supportive of the idea; he gives credit to those who shape events through their actions, and his book The Hero in History is devoted to the role of the hero and in history and influence of the outstanding persons.

[ 24 ] In the introduction to a new edition of Heroes and Hero-Worship , David R. Sorensen notes the modern decline in support for Carlyle's theory in particular but also for "heroic distinction" in general.

[ 25 ] He cites Robert K. Faulkner as an exception, a proponent of Aristotelian magnanimity who in his book The Case for Greatness: Honorable Ambition and Its Critics , criticizes the political bias in discussions on greatness and heroism, stating: "the new liberalism’s antipathy to superior statesmen and to human excellence is peculiarly zealous, parochial, and antiphilosophic." [ 26 ] Ian Kershaw wrote in 1998 that "The figure of Hitler , whose personal attributes – distinguished from his political aura and impact – were scarcely noble, elevating or enriching, posed self-evident problems for such a tradition." Some historians like Joachim Fest responded by arguing that Hitler had a "negative greatness". By contrast, Kershaw rejects the Great Men theory and argues that it is more important to study wider political and social factors to explain the history of Nazi Germany . Kershaw argues that Hitler was an unremarkable person, but his importance came from how people viewed him, an example of Max Weber 's concept of charismatic leadership .

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] History portal Philosophy portal Cult of personality Elite theory Folk hero Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Knight of faith Nouvelle histoire Paradigm shift People's history Philosophy of history Polymath Prosopography Protagonist Revolutionary Structure and agency Timeline of scientific discoveries Übermensch Whig history Bibliography [ edit ] Bentley, Eric (1944).

A Century of Hero-Worship: A study of the idea of heroism in Carlyle and Nietzsche, with notes on Wagner, Spengler, Stefan George, and D.H. Lawrence (Second, revised and reset ed.). Boston: Beacon Press (published 1957).

Harrold, Charles Frederick (1934).

"Carlyle and Heroes" .

Carlyle and German Thought, 1819–1834 . New Haven: Yale University Press. pp.

180– 196.

Lehman, B. H. (1928).

Carlyle's Theory of the Hero: Its Sources, Development, History, and Influence on Carlyle's Work . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

hdl : 2027/mdp.39015008382213 .

References [ edit ] ^ Carlyle, Thomas (1841). "Lecture I: The Hero as Divinity. Odin. Paganism: Scandinavian Mythology.".

On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History: Six Lectures . London: James Fraser. pp.

1– 2.

^ Thomas Carlyle, "The Hero as Divinity" in: Heroes and Hero-Worship (1840).

^ Hirsch, E.D.

The New Dictionary of Cultural Literacy (Third Edition) , Houghton Mifflin Company , Boston, 2002.

^ Carlyle, Thomas.

On Heroes, Hero-Worship and the Heroic in History Archived 3 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Fredrick A. Stokes & Brother, New York, 1888. p. 2.

^ Sidney Hook (1955) The Hero in History , Boston: Beacon Press , p. 14 ^ Sidney Hook (1955) The Hero in History , Boston: Beacon Press, p. 22.

^ Woods, F. A. 1913. The Influence of Monarchs: Steps in a New Science of History. New York, NY: Macmillan.

^ As to Hegel and Nietzsche: Edelstein, Alan (1996) Everybody is Sitting on the Curb: How and why America's Heroes Disappeared Greenwood.

ISBN 9780275953645 ^ As to Kierkegaard: Evjen, John Oluf (1938) The Life of J. H. W. Stuckenberg: Theologian, Philosopher, Sociologist, Friend of Humanity Luther Free Church Publishing.

^ As to Spengler, Nietzsche, Bloy and Weber: Saul, John Ralston (2012) The Doubter's Companion: A Dictionary of Aggressive Common Sense New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 58 ISBN 9781476718941 ^ Hegel, G. W. F. [1837].  Philosophy of History, trans. J. Sibree (New York: Dover, 1956), 30.

^ Bishop, P. (2004).

Nietzsche and Antiquity: His Reaction and Response to the Classical Tradition . Camden House. p. 94.

ISBN 9781571132826 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm (17 July 2017).

Ecce homo . Delphi Classics.

ISBN 978-1-78877-874-9 .

OCLC 1005922656 .

^ a b "What is the Great Man Theory?" .

www.villanovau.com . 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Segal, Robert A.

Hero Myths , Wiley-Blackwell, 2000, p. 3.

^ Spencer, Herbert.

The Study of Sociology Archived 15 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Appleton, 1896, p. 31.

^ James, William (1880), "Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment" Archived 2019-03-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e f "William James: Great Men, Great Thoughts, and the Environment" .

brocku.ca .

^ "Pascal, Blaise | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . iv. Discourses on the Condition of the Great in c. Minor Works (Opuscules) . Retrieved 8 August 2020 .

^ Tolstoy, L. 2010. War and Peace. Oxford, MA: Oxford University Press Bk. IX, ch. 1 ^ Salomon, Albert (1945).

"Jacob Burckhardt: Transcending History" .

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

6 (2): 240– 1.

doi : 10.2307/2102884 .

ISSN 0031-8205 .

JSTOR 2102884 .

^ Twain, Mark (1901, pub. 1923) 'The United States of Lyncherdom' https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_United_States_of_Lyncherdom ^ Ogburn, William Fielding (December 1926).

"The Great Man versus Social Forces" .

Social Forces .

5 (2): 225– 231.

doi : 10.2307/3004769 .

JSTOR 3004769 . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ Hook, S. 1943. The Hero in History. A Study in Limitation and Possibility. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. p. 116 ^ On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and The Heroic in History, Edited by David R. Sorensen and Brent E. Kinser , Yale University Press , 2013, pp. 2-3.

^ Faulkner, Robert (2007), The Case for Greatness: Honorable Ambition and Its Critics , Yale University Press, p. 210.

^ Kershaw, Ian Hitler 1889–1936: Hubris , W. W. Norton, New York, 1998, p. xii-xiii & xx External links [ edit ] "Twilight of the Idols" , by Peter Dizikes, from The New York Times , November 5, 2006. "Do changes in science mean the traditional great-man science biography is going the way of the dodo?" v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Thomas Carlyle Allusions Philosophy Prose style People William Allingham Jane Welsh Carlyle Ralph Waldo Emerson Francis Espinasse John Forster James Anthony Froude Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Leigh Hunt Edward Irving Kitty Kirkpatrick John Stuart Mill John Ruskin John Sterling Places Arched House Scotsbrig 21 Comely Bank Craigenputtock 5 Cheyne Row London Library Statue Works Sartor Resartus (1831) The French Revolution: A History (1837) On Heroes, Hero-Worship, & the Heroic in History (1841) Past and Present (1843) Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) The Life of John Sterling (1851) History of Friedrich II. of Prussia, Called Frederick the Great (1858–1865) Critical and Miscellaneous Essays " Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question " (1849) Reminiscences (1881) Correspondence with Emerson Ideas Captain of Industry Carlyle circle Condition-of-England Question Dismal Science Great Man theory Natural Supernaturalism Sage writing Related Arrangement in Grey and Black, No. 2: Portrait of Thomas Carlyle by James McNeill Whistler Dryasdust Laborare est Orare Phoenix Smelfungus Thomas Carlyle (Millais) " Thomas Carlyle and His Works " by Henry David Thoreau Vates Yggdrasil NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qq8j6
Cached time: 20250814220949
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.758 seconds
Real time usage: 0.995 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7190/1000000
Revision size: 21638/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 347461/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12282/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 46/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78640/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.367/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20073300/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  755.695      1 -total
 33.68%  254.534      1 Template:Historiography
 33.28%  251.472      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 30.15%  227.805     17 Template:Navbox
 14.63%  110.570      1 Template:Columns-list
 14.10%  106.564      1 Template:Reflist
 13.74%  103.848     36 Template:Ill
 13.47%  101.813      6 Template:Cite_book
 13.08%   98.836      2 Template:Lang
  6.91%   52.232      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12223:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220949 and revision id 1296060696. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_man_theory&oldid=1296060696 " Categories : 1840 introductions Whig history Thomas Carlyle Philosophy of history Theories of history Heroes Men in history Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Use British English from August 2020 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2022 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Great man theory 20 languages Add topic

