Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions of the self 2 Concepts of self Toggle Concepts of self subsection 2.1 Self as an activity 2.2 Self independent of the senses 2.3 Bundle theory of self 2.4 Self as a narrative center of gravity 2.5 Self as merely syntactic 2.6 Self as perspective 2.7 Self as nonexistent 3 Self in Eastern spirituality and philosophy Toggle Self in Eastern spirituality and philosophy subsection 3.1 Buddhism 4 Self-knowledge 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of self 15 languages العربية বাংলা Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar മലയാളം Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in philosophy Part of a series on The Self Constructs Self-knowledge (psychology) Self-image Self-concept Self-schema Personality Theories Neural basis of self Self-categorization theory Processes Self-perception theory Self-awareness Self-reflection Self-consciousness Value judgment Self-esteem True self and false self As applied to activities Self-assessment Self-efficacy Interpersonal Self-disclosure Self-concealment Social Personal identity (philosophy) Identity (social science) Collective identity Social identity theory In-group and out-group Social identity threat Politics Identity politics / Respectability politics Political identity Right to personal identity v t e Philosophy of self examines the idea of the self at a conceptual level. Many different ideas on what constitutes self have been proposed, including the self being an activity, the self being independent of the senses, the bundle theory of the self, the self as a narrative center of gravity, and the self as a linguistic or social construct rather than a physical entity. The self (or its non-existence) is also an important concept in Eastern philosophy , including Buddhist philosophy .

Definitions of the self [ edit ] Most philosophical definitions of self—per Descartes , Locke , Hume , and William James —are expressed in the first person .

[ 1 ] A third person definition does not refer to specific mental qualia but instead strives for objectivity and operationalism .

[ citation needed ] To another person, the way an individual behaves and speaks reflects their true inner self and can be used to gain insight into who they really are. Therefore, the intentions of another individual can only be inferred from something that emanates from that individual. The particular characteristics of the self determine its identity .

[ citation needed ] Concepts of self [ edit ] Self as an activity [ edit ] Aristotle , following Plato , defined the psyche as the core essence of a living being, and while claiming that it did not exist apart from the body, [ 2 ] he considered its so-called " intellect " part to be immortal and perpetual, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] in contrast to its organism-dependent vegetative/nutritive and perceptual functions. In his theory of causes and of act and potency , Aristotle emphasizes beings in relation to their actual manifestation, and in turn the soul was also defined by its actual effects. For instance, if a knife had a soul, the act of cutting would be that soul, because 'cutting' is part of the essence of what it is to be a knife. More precisely, the soul is the "first activity" of a living body. This is a state, or a potential for actual, or 'second', activity. "The axe has an edge for cutting" was, for Aristotle, analogous to "humans have bodies for rational activity," and the potential for rational activity thus constituted the essence of a human soul. He states: "Soul is an actuality or formulable essence of something that possesses a potentiality of being besouled", [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and also "When mind is set free from its present conditions it appears as just what it is and nothing more: this alone is immortal and eternal".

[ 7 ] Aristotle used his concept of the soul in many of his works; his main work on the subject is De Anima (On the Soul).

[ 8 ] [ 6 ] Aristotle also believed that there were four sections of the soul: the calculative and scientific parts on the rational side used for making decisions, and the desiderative and vegetative parts on the irrational side responsible for identifying our needs. A division of the soul's functions and activities is also found in Plato's tripartite theory . The problem of one in many is also remembered by Aristotle, nonetheless: If then the soul is of its very nature divisible, what holds it together? Not the body, certainly: much rather the contrary seems to be true, that the soul holds the body together; for when it departs, the body expires and decomposes. If there is some other thing which makes it one, this other is rather the soul. One would then have to ask, concerning this other, whether it be one or of many parts. If it is one, why not call it the soul straightway? But if it is divisible, reason again demands, what it is that holds this together? And so on ad infinitum .

[ 9 ] Self independent of the senses [ edit ] Main article: Avicennism While he was imprisoned in a castle, Avicenna wrote his famous " floating man " thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantiality of the soul . His thought experiment tells its readers to imagine themselves suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations, which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies. He argues that, in this scenario, one would still have self-consciousness . He thus concludes that the idea of the self is not dependent on any physical thing , and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms , but as a primary given , a substance . This argument was later refined and simplified by René Descartes in epistemic terms when he stated: "I can abstract from the supposition of all external things, but not from the supposition of my own consciousness." [ 10 ] Bundle theory of self [ edit ] Further information: Bundle theory David Hume pointed out that we tend to think that we are the same person we were five years ago. Although we have changed in many respects, the same person appears present as was present then. We might start thinking about which features can be changed without changing the underlying self. Hume, however, denies that there is a distinction between the various features of a person and the mysterious self that supposedly bears those features. When we start introspecting, "we are never intimately conscious of anything but a particular perception; man is a bundle or collection of different perceptions which succeed one another with an inconceivable rapidity and are in perpetual flux and movement".

[ 11 ] It is plain, that in the course of our thinking, and in the constant revolution of our ideas, our imagination runs easily from one idea to any other that resembles it, and that this quality alone is to the fancy a sufficient bond and association. It is likewise evident that as the senses, in changing their objects, are necessitated to change them regularly, and take them as they lie contiguous to each other, the imagination must by long custom acquire the same method of thinking, and run along the parts of space and time in conceiving its objects." [ 12 ] In Hume's view, these perceptions do not belong to anything. Rather, Hume compares the soul to a commonwealth, which retains its identity not by virtue of some enduring core substance, but by being composed of many different, related, and yet constantly changing elements. The question of personal identity then becomes a matter of characterizing the loose cohesion of one's personal experience. (Note that in the Appendix to the Treatise , Hume said without elaboration that he was dissatisfied with his account of the self, yet he never returned to the issue.) The paradox of the Ship of Theseus can be used as an analogy of the self as a bundle of parts in flux.

Self as a narrative center of gravity [ edit ] Daniel Dennett has a deflationary theory of the "self". Selves are not physically detectable. Instead, they are a kind of convenient fiction , like a center of gravity , which is convenient as a way of solving physics problems, although they need not correspond to anything tangible — the center of gravity of a hoop is a point in thin air. People constantly tell themselves stories to make sense of their world, and they feature in the stories as a character, and that convenient but fictional character is the self.

[ 13 ] Self as merely syntactic [ edit ] Aaron Sloman has proposed that words like self , selves , herself , itself , themselves , myself , etc. do not refer to a special type of entity, but provide powerful syntactical mechanisms for constructing utterances that repeatedly refer to the same thing without tedious and obscure repetition of names or other referring expressions.

[ 14 ] Self as perspective [ edit ] One conception of the self arises from the observation of one existing as oneself and not as someone else. Benj Hellie coined the phrase "the vertiginous question " to refer to the question of why I am me and not someone else. The question asks why, of all the subjects of experience out there, this one—the one corresponding to the human being referred to as Benj Hellie—is the one whose experiences are live ? (The reader is supposed to substitute their own case for Hellie's.) [ 15 ] In other words: Why am I me and not someone else? A common response to the question is that it reduces to "Why are Hellie's experiences live from Hellie's perspective," and thus the entire question is a tautology. However, Hellie argues, through a parable, that this response leaves something out. His parable describes two situations, one reflecting a broad global constellation view of the world and everyone's phenomenal features, and one describing an embedded view from the perspective of a single subject. Other philosophers have asked the same question using different terminology. Tim S. Roberts refers to the question of why a particular organism out of all the organisms that happen to exist happens to be you as the "Even Harder Problem of Consciousness".

[ 16 ] Herbert Spiegelberg has referred to it as the "I-am-me experience", and it has been called the "Ich-Erlebnis" by German psychologists.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Thomas Nagel has extensively discussed the question of personal identity and first-person perspectives in The View from Nowhere . It contrasts passive and active points of view in how humanity interacts with the world, relying either on a subjective perspective that reflects a point of view or an objective perspective that takes a more detached perspective.

[ 19 ] Nagel describes the objective perspective as the "view from nowhere", one where the only valuable ideas are ones derived independently.

[ 20 ] Christian List argues that the existence of first-personal facts has metaphysical implications. List argues that the existence of first-personal facts is evidence against physicalism , and evidence against other third-personal metaphysical pictures, including standard versions of dualism .

[ 21 ] List also argues that there exists a "quadrilemma" for theories of consciousness. He claims that at most three of the following metaphysical claims can be true: 'first-person realism ', 'non- solipsism ', 'non-fragmentation', and 'one world' – and thus at least one of these four must be false.

[ 22 ] List has proposed a model he calls the "many-worlds theory of consciousness" in order to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism.

[ 23 ] Some philosophers have argued that there exists a connection between the nature of the self and the nature of time . Vincent Conitzer argues that the self is related to A series and B series theories of time, and that arguments in favor of the A-theory of time are more effective as arguments for the combined position of both A-theory being true and the "I" being metaphysically privileged from other perspectives.

[ 24 ] Caspar Hare has made similar arguments with the theories of egocentric presentism , a form of solipsism introduces by Hare that argues that the experiences of other individuals are not present in the way that one's current perspective is.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] and perspectival realism , in which things within perceptual awareness have a defining intrinsic property that exists absolutely and not relative to anything.

[ 27 ] Several other philosophers have written reviews of Caspar Hare's theories.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Other philosophers have discussed various other related ideas. Similar questions are also asked by J. J. Valberg in justifying his horizonal view of the self.

[ 30 ] Japanese philosopher Hitoshi Nagai has used the concept of first person perspectives as a way of defining the self, defining the self as the "one who directly experiences the consciousness of oneself".

[ 31 ] It has also been argued that the self is an "idiomodific" concept.

[ 32 ] Self as nonexistent [ edit ] In the book I am You: The Metaphysical Foundations for Global Ethics , Daniel Kolak argues that the entire concept of the self is incoherent.

[ 33 ] Kolak describes three opposing philosophical views of personal identity: closed individualism, empty individualism, and open individualism .

[ 33 ] : xxii Closed individualism is considered to be the default view of personal identity, which is that one's personal identity consists of a ray or line traveling through time, and that one has a future self . Empty individualism is another view, which is that personal identity exists, but one's "identity" only persists for an infinitesimally small amount of time, and the "you" that will exist in the future is an ontologically different being from the "you" that exists now. Kolak argues in favor of open individualism, which is the idea that individual personal identity in reality does not exist at all, and all conscious beings are in reality the same being. Similar ideas have been discussed by Derek Parfit in the book Reasons and Persons with thought experiments such as the teletransportation paradox .

[ 34 ] Self in Eastern spirituality and philosophy [ edit ] The spiritual goal of many traditions involves the dissolving of the ego , in contrast to the essential Self, [ 35 ] allowing self-knowledge of one's own true nature to become experienced and enacted in the world. This is variously known as enlightenment , nirvana , presence, and the "here and now".

[ citation needed ] Buddhism [ edit ] Main article: Anatta Hume's position is similar to Indian Buddhists’ theories and debates about the self, which generally considers a bundle theory to describe the mind phenomena grouped in aggregates ( skandhas ), such as sense-perceptions , intellective discrimination ( saṃjñā ), emotions and volition . Since the beginning of Buddhist philosophy , several schools of interpretation assumed that a self cannot be identified with the transient aggregates, as they are non-self, but some traditions questioned further whether there can be an unchanging ground which defines a real and permanent individual identity, sustaining the impermanent phenomena; concepts such as Buddha-nature are found in the Mahayana lineage, and of an ultimate reality in dzogchen tradition, for instance in Dolpopa [ 36 ] and Longchenpa .

[ 37 ] Although Buddhists criticize the immutable ātman of Hinduism , some Buddhist schools problematized the notion of an individual personhood; even among early ones, such as the Pudgala view, it was approached implicitly in questions such as "who is the bearer of the bundle?", "what carries the aggregates?",  "what transmigrates from one rebirth to another?" or "what is the subject of self-improvement and enlightenment?".

[ 38 ] The Buddha in particular attacked all attempts to conceive of a fixed self, while stating that holding the view "I have no self" is also mistaken. This is an example of the Middle Way charted by the Buddha and the Madhyamaka school of Buddhism. That absence of a self definition is directed to avoid clinging to the "I", seek reality and attain detachment , [ 39 ] and it is found in many passages of the oldest Buddha sutras , recorded in the Pali Canon , such as this: "Bhikkhus, form is not-self. Were form self, then this form would not lead to affliction, and one could have it of form: 'Let my form be thus, let my form be not thus.' And since form is not-self, so it leads to affliction, and none can have it of form: 'Let my form be thus, let my form be not thus.'... Bhikkhus, feeling is not-self... Bhikkhus, perception is not-self... Bhikkhus, determinations are not-self... Bhikkhus, consciousness ( vijñāna ) is not self.... is form permanent or impermanent?..." [ 40 ] Self-knowledge [ edit ] Main articles: Self-knowledge (psychology) and Self-knowledge (Vedanta) Both Western and Eastern civilizations have been occupied with self-knowledge and underscored its importance particularly citing the paradoxical combination of immediate availability and profound obscurity involved in its pursuit.

[ 41 ] For Socrates , the goal of philosophy was to " know thyself ".

Lao Tzu , in his Tao Te Ching , says "Knowing others is wisdom. Knowing the self is enlightenment. Mastering others requires force. Mastering the self requires strength." [ 42 ] The case is the same for the seers of Upanishads , who maintained that the ultimate real knowledge involves an understanding of the essence of the self and the nature of God.

[ 43 ] Adi Shankaracharya , in his commentary on Bhagavad Gita says " Self-knowledge alone eradicates misery".

[ 44 ] "Self-knowledge alone is the means to the highest bliss." [ 45 ] Absolute perfection is the consummation of Self-knowledge." [ 46 ] A theory about self-knowledge describes the concept as the capacity to detect that the sensations, thoughts, mental states, and attitudes as one's own.

[ 47 ] It is linked to other concepts such as self-awareness and self-conception. The rationalist theory, which Immanuel Kant has inspired, also claims that our ability to achieve self-knowledge through rational reflection is partly derived from the fact that we view ourselves as rational agents .

[ 47 ] This school rejects that self-knowledge is merely derived from observation as it acknowledges the subject as authoritative on account of his ability as an agent to shape his own states.

[ 48 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Self (philosophy) .

Main article: Outline of self Ātman (Buddhism) – Buddhist concept of self Being and Time – 1927 book by Martin Heidegger Centered world – Metaphysical concept Gnosis – Common Greek noun for knowledge John Locke's view of the self Mirror stage – Psychoanalytic concept Open individualism – Philosophical view that a single subject embodies all individuals Other (philosophy) – Concept in philosophy and psychology Personal horizon – Philosophical concept by J. J. Valberg Psychology of self – Study of the representation of one's identity Religious views on the self Self-realization – Fulfillment of one's character or personality Self-schema – Set of memories for a person Subject (philosophy) – Philosophy terms referring to an observer versus the thing observed Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Vertiginous question – Philosophical argument by Benj Hellie Notes [ edit ] ^ Gaynesford, M. de I: The Meaning of the First Person Term , Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2006.

^ De Anima 414a20ff ^ "For whereas the sensitive faculty is not found apart from the body, the intellect is separate." Aristotle, De Anima III, 4, 429b3 ^ De Anima III, 4 ^ De Anima 414a27 ^ a b Olshewsky, Thomas M. (1976).

"On the Relations of Soul to Body in Plato and Aristotle" (PDF) .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

14 (4): 391– 404.

doi : 10.1353/hph.2008.0163 .

S2CID 170184114 .

^ De Anima , III, 5, 430a22 ^ Shields, Christopher (2016). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

"Aristotle's Psychology" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Archive . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ De Anima I, 5 ^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver Leaman (1996), History of Islamic Philosophy , p. 315, Routledge , ISBN 0-415-13159-6 .

^ Hume, David.

A Treatise of Human Nature .

I, IV, vi ^ Hume, David.

A Treatise of Human Nature .

4.1, 2 ^ Dennett, Daniel (1986).

"The Self as a Center of Narrative Gravity" . Retrieved 2015-09-02 .

^ Sloman, Aaron.

" 'The Self' -- A bogus concept? Yes and no!" . School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham, UK . Retrieved 2019-06-16 .

^ Hellie, Benj (2013). "Against egalitarianism".

Analysis .

73 (2): 304– 320.

doi : 10.1093/analys/ans101 .

^ Roberts, Tim S. (September 2007).

" The Even Harder Problem of Consciousness by Roberts. Tim S." NeuroQuantology .

5 (2): 214– 221.

doi : 10.14704/nq.2007.5.2.129 .

^ Watanabe, Tsuneo (1 June 2009), "From Spiegelberg's "I-am-me" experience to the solipsistic experience", IHSRC 2009 (The 28th International Human Science Research Conference) , Molde, Norway , retrieved 2 February 2025 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Watanabe, Tsuneo, "Enigma of the private self and studies of the "I-am-me experience": Towards a phenomenological approach to the development of the subjective self", ISTP (International Society for Theoretical Psychology) 2017 Conference (Tokyo, Japan) ^ McGinn, Colin (1997).

Minds and Bodies: Philosophers and Their Ideas . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-511355-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Thomas, Alan (2015).

Thomas Nagel . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-49418-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ List, Christian (2023).

"The first-personal argument against physicalism" . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ List, Christian (2023).

"A quadrilemma for theories of consciousness" . The Philosophical Quarterly . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ List, Christian (2023).

"The many-worlds theory of consciousness" . The Philosophical Quarterly . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ Conitzer, Vincent (30 Aug 2020). "The Personalized A-Theory of Time and Perspective".

arXiv : 2008.13207v1 [ physics.hist-ph ].

^ Hare, Caspar (July 2007).

"Self-Bias, Time-Bias, and the Metaphysics of Self and Time" (PDF) .

The Journal of Philosophy .

104 (7): 350– 373.

doi : 10.5840/jphil2007104717 .

^ Hare, Caspar (2009).

On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691135311 .

^ Hare, Caspar (September 2010).

"Realism About Tense and Perspective" (PDF) .

Philosophy Compass .

5 (9): 760– 769.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-9991.2010.00325.x .

hdl : 1721.1/115229 .

^ McDaniel, Kris (January 2012).

" On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects by Hare, Caspar - Review" (PDF) .

Ethics .

122 (2): 403– 410.

doi : 10.1086/663578 .

^ Markosian, Ned.

"Are You Special? A Review of Caspar Hare's On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects " (PDF) .

The Philosophical Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ Valberg, J. J. (2007).

Dream, Death, and the Self . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691128597 .

^ * Why Isn’t Consciousness Real? (1) Philosophia Osaka No. 6, 2011:41-61 PDF ^ Watanabe, Tsuneo (2009).

"Eastern Epistemology and the Psychology of the Subjective Self" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

^ a b Kolak, Daniel (2007-11-03).

I Am You: The Metaphysical Foundations for Global Ethics (PDF) . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4020-3014-7 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-09-06.

^ Parfit, Derek (1984).

Reasons and persons . Oxford [Oxfordshire].

ISBN 0-19-824615-3 .

OCLC 9827659 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Cottingham, Jenny.

From the self to the Self: an exploration of the process of Self-realisation in the context of Indian psychology . Auckland, New Zealand: Auckland University of Technology. 2015.

^ Schaeffer, Kurtis R.; Kapstein, Matthew T.; Tuttle, Gray (2013-03-26).

Sources of Tibetan Tradition . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231509787 . p. 410 ^ Germano, David Francis. Poetic thought, the intelligent Universe, and the mystery of self: The Tantric synthesis of rDzogs Chen in fourteenth century Tibet. Madison: The University of Wisconsin. 1992.

^ Priestley, Leonard C. D. C. (1999) Pudgalavada Buddhism : The Reality of the Indeterminate Self . South Asian Studies Papers, 12, monograph 1. University of Toronto: Centre for South Asian Studies.

^ Shiah, Yung-Jong (2016-02-04).

"From Self to Nonself: The Nonself Theory" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

7 : 124.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00124 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 4740732 .

PMID 26869984 .

^ Anatta-lakkhana Sutta ( Pali Canon ).

Translation by Ñanamoli Thera (1993).

^ Lambert, Richard (2007).

Self Knowledge in Thomas Aquinas: The Angelic Doctor on the Soul's Knowledge of Itself . Bloomington, IN: Author House. p. 1.

ISBN 9781420889659 .

^ Laozi, Lao Tsu (1989).

Tao Te Ching . Vintage Books. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-679-72434-6 .

^ Mohapatra, Amulya; Mohapatra, Bijaya (1993).

Hinduism: Analytical Study . New Delhi: Mittal Publications. p. 8.

ISBN 8170993881 .

^ Alladi, Mahadeva Sastry (1992).

The Bhagavad Gita with the commentary of Sri Sankaracharya . Samata Books. p. 22.

^ Alladi, Mahadeva Sastry (1992).

The Bhagavad Gita with the commentary of Sri Sankaracharya . Samata Books. p. 500.

^ Alladi, Mahadeva Sastry (1992).

The Bhagavad Gita with the commentary of Sri Sankaracharya . Samata Books. p. 484.

^ a b Gertler, Brie (2011).

Self-Knowledge . Oxon: Routledge. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0203835678 .

^ Gorgione, Luca (2018).

Kant and the Problem of Self-Knowledge . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138385467 .

References [ edit ] Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Self-knowledge" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Carsten Korfmacher, 'Personal Identity' , The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Links to related articles v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xp7hf
Cached time: 20250817072840
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.972 seconds
Real time usage: 1.203 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7042/1000000
Revision size: 29664/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 316828/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 70668/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 178376/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.623/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18067580/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1004.610      1 -total
 36.21%  363.766      1 Template:Reflist
 18.22%  183.083     14 Template:Annotated_link
 12.98%  130.375      9 Template:Cite_journal
 12.57%  126.272      1 Template:Navboxes
 10.08%  101.228     16 Template:Cite_book
  8.75%   87.953      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  8.53%   85.729      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.19%   82.288      1 Template:Self_sidebar
  7.76%   78.001      1 Template:Sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20492361:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817072840 and revision id 1303791516. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_self&oldid=1303791516 " Categories : Self Conceptions of self Concepts in metaphysics Consciousness Identity (philosophy) Subjective experience Theory of mind Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent page Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of self 15 languages Add topic

