Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 1.1 Preface to the French edition 1.2 Body of the work 2 Copies and modern editions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Principles of Philosophy 17 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Latina Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Principia Philosophiae ) Book by Descartes Not to be confused with Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Principles of Philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Principles of Philosophy Principia Philosophiæ , 1656 Author René Descartes Original title Principia Philosophiæ Translator Abbot Claude Picot (French) Language Latin Genre Philosophy, scientific law Published 1644 Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e The illustration of movement of objects from the Principles Principles of Philosophy ( Latin : Principia Philosophiae ) is a book by René Descartes . In essence, it is a synthesis of the Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy .

[ 1 ] It was written in Latin , published in 1644 and dedicated to Elisabeth of Bohemia , with whom Descartes had a long-standing friendship. A French version ( Les Principes de la Philosophie ) followed in 1647.

The book sets forth the principles of nature—the laws of physics —as Descartes viewed them. Most notably, it set forth the principle that in the absence of external forces, an object's motion will be uniform and in a straight line.

Newton borrowed this principle from Descartes and included it in his own Principia ; to this day, it is still generally referred to as Newton's first law of motion .

[ 2 ] The book was primarily intended to replace the Aristotelian curriculum then used in French and British universities. The work provides a systematic statement of his metaphysics and natural philosophy , and represents the first truly comprehensive, mechanistic account of the universe.

Contents [ edit ] Preface to the French edition [ edit ] Descartes asked Abbot Claude Picot to translate his Latin Principia Philosophiae into French. For this edition, he wrote a preface disguised as a letter to the translator, whose title is " Letter of the author to the translator of the book, that may be used as a preface ." This was published in 1647, when he was 51 years old and in the mature, final period of his life. In this writing, Descartes provides some reflections on his ideas of wisdom and philosophy. Its content may be summarized as follows: [ 3 ] Concept of philosophy Philosophy is the study of wisdom , understood as the ability to conduct the human activities; and also as the perfect knowledge of all the things that a man can know for the direction of his life, maintenance of his health, and knowledge of the arts. Only God is perfectly wise, and the man is more or less wise, in proportion to the knowledge he has of the most important truths.

The degrees of knowledge Descartes identifies four degrees of knowledge which he names common , and a fifth degree he designates higher . The first degree consists of clear and evident notions that can be acquired without the need for any meditation. The second degree is all that is learned by means of the senses. The third comprises what we learn when talking with others. The fourth consists of what we can learn from the writings of those capable of giving good instructions.

Higher wisdom There have been great people throughout history who have pursued a better and more secure wisdom, a fifth degree of knowledge. This has consisted of the search for the first causes , and those that have followed this pursuit have been named philosophers , but he thinks that none have yet been successful.

Doubt and certainty Since Plato and Aristotle , there has been discussion on doubt and certainty. Those that have favoured doubt have arrived at extremes of doubting even the most evident things, and those that have sought certainty have relied excessively on the senses. Though it has been accepted that the senses may mislead us, according to Descartes, nobody had yet expressed that the truth can not be based on the senses, but in the understanding , when it is founded on evident perceptions .

Meditations on first philosophy The search for the first causes, or basic truths, as undertaken by Descartes is contained in this work. It explains the metaphysical principles on which to build the rest of knowledge.

The tree of philosophy Descartes describes philosophy as like a tree, whose roots are metaphysics , its trunk physics , and the branches are the rest of the sciences, mainly medicine , mechanics , and morals that is the last level of wisdom. In the same way that trees have fruits in their outer parts, the usefulness of philosophy is also contained in the areas that stem from its foundation.

Body of the work [ edit ] There are four parts: Part I. - of the Principles of Human Existence Part II. - of the Principles of Material Things Part III. - of the Visible World Part IV. - of the Earth.

[ 4 ] Copies and modern editions [ edit ] René Descartes' Principia Philosophiae . This copy was printed in 1656, and is owned by Southwest Research Institute rare book collection at the Tom Slick Memorial Library in San Antonio, Texas.

A copy of Descartes' Principia philosophiae dated 1656 is owned by the Tom Slick rare book collection at the Southwest Research Institute in Texas. The book was translated into Italian in 1722 by Giuseppa Eleonora Barbapiccola [ it ] . (Cf. C. Landolfi, Giuseppa Eleonora Barbapiccola: Opere scelte , Mirista-moderna, Salerno 2024) D. Reidel , a Dutch publisher, released an English edition of Principia philosophiae in 1983 ( ISBN 90-277-1451-7 ), translated by Valentine Rodger and Reese P. Miller with explanatory notes. Though a translation of the original 1644 Latin work, this edition by Rodger and Miller includes additional material from the 1647 French translation.

See also [ edit ] Bucket argument Conservation of momentum Related works The World (Descartes) Principia philosophiae cartesianae by Baruch Spinoza References [ edit ] ^ Guy Durandin, Les Principes de la Philosophie. Introduction et notes , Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, Paris, 1970.

^ D. T. Whiteside, "The prehistory of the Principia", Notes Rec. R. Soc. Lond.

45/13 (1991).

^ René Descartes.

"Letter of the Author to the French Translator of the Principles of Philosophy serving for a preface" . John Veitch (trans.) . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ René Descartes.

"Selections from the Principles of Philosophy of Rene Decartes (1596-1650)" . John Veitch (trans.) . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Works related to Selections from the Principles of Philosophy at Wikisource Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: Principia philosophiae Descartes' 1644 Principia philosophiae (free Google eBook) Selections from the Principles of Philosophy at Project Gutenberg Principles of Philosophy , modified for easier reading Principia philosophiae . Amstelodami, apud Ludovicum Elzevirium, 1644. From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States France BnF data Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principles_of_Philosophy&oldid=1283507600 " Categories : 1644 books Physics books Works by René Descartes Natural philosophy 17th-century books in Latin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 22:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principles of Philosophy 17 languages Add topic

