Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Early days 2.2 NPS 2.3 The Golden Gate National Recreation Area and NPS 2.4 Maritime preservation 2.5 The Vancouver Maritime Museum and The Sea Hunters 2.6 The Institute of Nautical Archaeology (INA) 2.7 NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries 2.8 Maritime archaeology 2.9 SEARCH, Inc.

2.10 Public service and fellowships 2.11 In the media 3 Personal life 4 Awards and honors 5 Selected bibliography Toggle Selected bibliography subsection 5.1 Books 5.2 Edited books 5.3 Selected papers 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents James P. Delgado 3 languages العربية Deutsch مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American maritime archaeologist, explorer and author James Preston Delgado FRGS , FRCGS Delgado delivering a lecture in 2015 Born James Preston Delgado ( 1958-01-11 ) January 11, 1958 (age 67) San Jose, California , U.S.

Occupation(s) Maritime archaeologist, explorer, author, TV host, historian Spouse Ann Goodhart Awards Officer of the Order of Civil Merit (Spain) Stefansson Medal ( Explorers Club ) John Lyman Book Awards James L. Deetz Award NOAA Administrator's Awards Department of Commerce Bronze Medal Known for His work on underwater exploration and shipwreck investigations Academic background Education B.A. in American History M.A. in Maritime History and Underwater Research Ph.D. in Archeology Alma mater Simon Fraser University Influences Theodore "Ted" C. Hinckley, Constance B. "Connie" Perham, Edwin C. Bearss Academic work Discipline Archaeology, history, journalism Sub-discipline Maritime archaeology, maritime history, underwater research Main interests Maritime archaeology, shipwreck investigations, and the preservation and documentation of maritime heritage Website jamesdelgado .com James Preston Delgado FRGS , FRCGS (born January 11, 1958) is an American maritime archaeologist , historian , maritime preservation expert, author , television host , and explorer . Delgado is a maritime archaeologist with over four decades of experience in underwater exploration. He has participated in over 100 shipwreck investigations worldwide, including notable sites such as the RMS Titanic , USS Independence (CVL-22) , USS Conestoga (AT-54) , USS Monitor , USS Arizona (BB-39) , USS Nevada (BB-36) , Sub Marine Explorer , the buried Gold Rush ships of San Francisco, the atomic bomb test fleet at Bikini Atoll , the slave ship Clotilda , [ 1 ] and Kublai Khan 's lost fleet from the Mongol invasions of Japan .

Delgado has held significant positions in maritime museums, the U.S. National Park Service , and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's (NOAA) maritime heritage programs. He has also been involved in academic and public presentations, university teaching, and has appeared in numerous television documentaries. He has developed standards and guidelines for the U.S. National Park Service's National Historic Landmark Studies to preserve maritime shipwrecks and maritime cultural sites.

Delgado has authored over 200 academic articles and more than 35 books, and he edited the first encyclopedia of underwater and maritime archaeology. He was named a Fellow of the Explorers Club in 1997 and is also a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society , the Royal Canadian Geographical Society , and an Officer in Spain's Order of Civil Merit .

Early life and education [ edit ] Delgado was born on January 11, 1958, in San Jose, California . He grew up in Blossom Valley and at the age of ten, Delgado was influenced by lessons on ancient Egypt , Greece , and Rome from his teachers. During high school, Delgado worked alongside Bay Area archaeologists Chester King, Linda King, and Rob Edwards. He also interacted with graduate students from an archaeology class at San Jose State University. As an undergraduate at San Jose State, and influenced by Theodore "Ted" C. Hinckley, he studied history and later transferred to San Francisco State University as a cooperative education student with the National Park Service. He graduated with a B.A. in American history in 1981.

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Early days [ edit ] By fourteen, Delgado's curiosity led him to a construction site near his home in the Santa Teresa Hills , where the remains of the Ohlone people were discovered. This site, which later became the Rancho de Santa Teresa , was being destroyed despite the presence of archaeologists. Delgado, initially volunteering alone, began mapping, photographing, and recovering artifacts from the site, [ 3 ] continuing his efforts through high school. He later assisted in an excavation in 1980. The experience had a significant impact on Delgado, leading him to prepare the nomination papers for the site, which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 as site #75002184 . His research notes and materials are archived in the San Jose Public Library , documenting his early explorations of the nearby foothills.

[ 4 ] In 1972, Delgado met with San Jose Mayor Norman Y. Mineta to advocate for changes in laws to protect archaeological sites. Mineta appointed him the San Jose Youth Commission's Liaison to the city's Historical Landmarks Commission. After serving for three years, Mayor Janet Gray Hayes appointed Delgado as a commissioner in 1976. He also served on the San Jose Bicentennial Commission and participated in the first inventory of historical and architectural heritage in 1977 and the Santa Clara County Heritage Inventory.

[ 2 ] He began working at the New Almaden Museum in 1972 and was mentored by museum founder Constance B. "Connie" Perham.

While at the Vancouver Maritime Museum , Delgado returned to university to obtain his Ph.D. in archaeology, receiving the degree in 2006 from Simon Fraser University .

Delgado's early work notably included documenting shipwreck remains and the surrounding environmental conditions exposed by beach erosion . He was a pioneer in this area of archaeology in the United States, starting with the wrecks of the schooner Neptune and those within the Golden Gate National Recreation Area .

[ 5 ] Delgado also examined the steamer Pomo at Point Reyes National Seashore and, in 1985, conducted an extensive survey of shipwreck remains at Cape Hatteras and Cape Lookout National Seashores in North Carolina.

NPS [ edit ] Delgado first served for a year as the assistant to NPS Western Regional Historian Gordon S. Chappell, where he completed a series of National Register of Historic Places nominations for sites as diverse as U.S. Highway 1 on the Northern California coast and the historic ships at San Francisco's Hyde Street Pier. Delgado worked with archaeologist Allen Pastron on several excavations beginning in 1979. Among the buried ships from 1849 to 1851 that he would help excavate or analyze are the storeships Niantic and General Harrison, the ships William Gray and Candace, and others.

Delgado remained with the NPS as the first Park Historian for Golden Gate National Recreation Area (GGNRA) serving from 1979 to 1986. He co-directed the archaeological excavation of Civil War Black Point battery at Fort Mason with Martin T. Mayer.

[ 6 ] He also led the park's early efforts to survey, characterize, and restore elements of the Adolph Sutro Historic District, which included Sutro Heights , the grounds of the estate of Adolph Joseph Heinrich Sutro , developer of much of San Francisco's "Outside Lands," and onetime Mayor, as well as Sutro's Cliff House, San Francisco and the ruins of the Sutro Baths . It was part of the relatively new park's initial assessment of cultural resources within its boundaries and determining what was significant. As the first historian for the park, he, along with the park's first archaeologist, Martin T. Mayer, and its first historic architect, J. Patrick Christopher, completed the initial inventory and the first cultural resources management plan for the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.

The Golden Gate National Recreation Area and NPS [ edit ] He was also interested and learned to scuba dive during his NPS tenure. Delgado worked closely with the Park Service's Submerged Cultural Resources Unit after the NPS sent him to the Presidio of San Francisco to attend an Army dive class. He was involved in wreck surveys both inside and outside NPS jurisdiction, including the first NPS surveys off Point Reyes National Seashore , Channel Islands National Park , and Cape Cod National Seashore , Pearl Harbor , where he studied the USS Arizona and USS Utah , and at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific, where he worked with the team on the atomic-bombed ships of Operation Crossroads , the world's first nuclear tests (1946). He was the principal author of the final National Park Service study on the Bikini Atoll wrecks. Those shipwrecks include the aircraft carrier USS Saratoga , Japanese battleship Nagato , the battleship USS Arkansas , the destroyer USS Lamson , the attack transport USS Gilliam , the attack transport USS Carlisle , and the submarines USS Pilotfish and USS Apogon .

Maritime preservation [ edit ] In 1987, Delgado became the first Maritime Historian of the National Park Service and the founding chief of the NPS maritime preservation program, the National Maritime Initiative (NMI).

[ 7 ] The NMI at that time functioned as the maritime preservation program for the entire federal government. The Initiative later became known as the NPS Maritime Heritage Program In this role, [ 8 ] Delgado oversaw the creation of classification standards and guidelines for preservation and documentation. Delgado was the principal author of the National Register of Historic Places' guidelines [ 9 ] for nominating historic ships and shipwrecks and co-authored the National Register Bulletin for nominating historic aids to navigation.

[ 10 ] As a guiding principle of the National Maritime Initiative, Delgado, based on his experience at Golden Gate National Recreation Area, insisted on a physical inspection of the nation's large historic vessels as part of the creation of a comprehensive national inventory of those vessels. That meant extensive travel throughout the United States, visiting ships, sailing, steaming, and motoring on them, inspecting them during shipyard haulouts and repairs, climbing masts, crawling through engine rooms, and not just conducting a desk-top survey from afar. The first inventory of the large historic ships in the United States, led by Delgado, was completed and published in 1990 in conjunction with J. Candace Clifford. It remains the basis for the National Park Service's ongoing, now digital inventory .

Working from the inventory, Delgado applied the criterion of the National Register of Historic Places and the National Historic Landmarks Program to determine which of some 330 large historic vessels were of national significance. He led the resulting effort, which studied study 142 ships for designation as national landmarks. He prepared the studies for 54 properties, including several lightships, fireboats, tugboats, submarines, and other warships. Delgado's work led to the largest group of maritime resources being designated as National Historic Landmarks since the creation of the NHL Program. Among the ships and sites he personally studied and nominated are the schooner Adventuress, [ 11 ] USS Albacore , the fireboat Firefighter , the schooner Governor Stone , the U.S. Navy tug USS Hoga , the aircraft carriers USS Lexington and USS Hornet , schooner American Eagle, [ 12 ] the tugboat Arthur Foss , the fireboat Duwamish , the destroyer USS Edson , the Victory Ship SS Lane Victory , the Ambrose Lightship , the river steamboat Nenana , the four-masted ship Falls of Clyde , the arctic schooner Bowdoin , the bark Elissa, the nuclear ship Savannah , and the excursion steamer Virginia V. Delgado also conducted the NHL study for Lowell's Boat Shop in Amesbury, Massachusetts, as well as the home of former First Lady Lou Henry Hoover at Stanford University.

As part of his duties, and with his degree in maritime archaeology, Delgado closely interacted with the National Park Service's Submerged Cultural Resources Center as well as the Chief Archaeologist of the NPS during his tenure with the National Maritime Initiative. This included co-authoring the guidelines for the implementation of the Abandoned Shipwreck Act of 1987 [ 13 ] following a series of national public meetings, [ 14 ] several of which Delgado personally led.

Delgado also joined the Submerged Cultural Resources Unit (SCRU) in their fieldwork in various parks, including his former assignment, Golden Gate National Recreation Area, Cape Cod National Seashore, Fort Jefferson National Monument, the USS Arizona Memorial, and outside the park system, notably at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific. Delgado spent his final field season with NPS in 1990, working again at Bikini, and then leading a team to Mexico to jointly study the remains of the 1846 USS Somers, the setting for the navy's only mutiny and the inspiration for Herman Melville's Billy Budd. One of his final assignments was co-authoring the first submerged cultural resources assessment for the region where he first worked, [ 15 ] the Golden Gate National Recreation Area , Point Reyes National Seashore , and the Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary .

The Vancouver Maritime Museum and The Sea Hunters [ edit ] In 1991, he moved to Vancouver, British Columbia where he took on the role of Executive Director of the Vancouver Maritime Museum for the next 15 years. His work included organizing a $3-million reenactment of the historic Northwest Passage and North America-circumnavigating voyages of the museum's centerpiece exhibit, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police motor schooner, St. Roch.

He led the crew that restored Ben Franklin (PX-15) , a 130-ton oceanographic research submersible originally built in Switzerland for famed undersea explorer and scientist Jacques Piccard and most famously used on a historic 30-day "drift mission" along the eastern seaboard of the United States in 1969. He spearheaded a major initiative to relocate the museum from its original, crowded and outdated facilities and to create a National Maritime Center for Canada from 2004 to 2006, but despite gaining federal and provincial support, the effort faltered when the City of Vancouver, despite initial encouragement, ultimately decided not to support moving the museum. His final project at the museum, an illustrated maritime history of Vancouver, Waterfront , won the City of Vancouver Book Award and a British Columbia BC Book Award in 2006.

View of Sub Marine Explorer at Low Tide, 2006. (James P. Delgado).

The Institute of Nautical Archaeology (INA) [ edit ] In 2006, he remained in Vancouver but joined the Institute of Nautical Archaeology (INA) as its Executive Director. In April 2008, he was elected President and CEO of this worldwide nautical archaeology organization. Among his achievements were a new strategic plan, a new website and publications, new partnerships, and several international projects undertaken by INA scholars. Among those were the excavation of a Phoenician wreck in Spain, the study of a riverine naval battle of 1288 in Vietnam, the excavation of Byzantine wrecks in Istanbul, and the study of abandoned and wrecked river steamers in Canada's Yukon. During this period, Delgado continued his own archaeological work, the documentation of a U.S. Civil War-era submersible, Sub Marine Explorer .

NOAA's Office of National Marine Sanctuaries [ edit ] After a one-year sabbatical from the NPS, from 1984 to 1985, to attend East Carolina University , Delgado graduated with a master's degree in Maritime History and Underwater Research. His thesis focused on the Gold Rush steamer Tennessee, located in Tennessee Cove within the Golden Gate National Recreation Area. He was subsequently assigned by NPS Chief Historian Edwin C. Bearss to work as a project historian on the USS Monitor project with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). That work led to a series of historical and archaeological context studies, and Delgado personally completed the successful nomination for Monitor's designation as one of the first National Historic Landmark shipwrecks in the United States. He subsequently completed the National Historic Landmark studies for the wrecks of USS Arizona [ 16 ] and USS Utah [ 17 ] at Pearl Harbor. As of 2018, there are only nine National Historic Landmark shipwrecks or hulks that have been designated by the Secretary of the Interior .

[ 18 ] In October 2010, he left INA to become the Director of Maritime Heritage in the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries for the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration [ 19 ] in Washington, D.C. He coordinated and supervised all maritime heritage activities in the 14 units in the NMS system, and provided maritime heritage support to all other parts of NOAA.

Maritime archaeology [ edit ] Following his doctoral graduation in 2006, he was named and remains an Adjunct Member of the Faculty of the Department of Archaeology at Simon Fraser University . From 2001 to 2006, he hosted and was the team archaeologist on, the popular Canadian-made National Geographic international documentary series, [ 20 ] which drew an audience of over 200 million people in over 172 countries for its six seasons. He worked with famous novelist, raconteur, and shipwreck hunter Clive Cussler , the series presenter, master divers Mike and Warren Fletcher, and John Davis from Eco-Nova Productions.

During his years with NOAA, he was involved in the Titanic mapping expedition in 2010 as chief scientist, continued his years of study on the Civil War-era, pearl-diving submersible Sub Marine Explorer, participated in fieldwork while reorganizing and focusing the maritime heritage program, and mentored five high school students from Saginaw, Michigan, for Project Shiphunt.

He led the excavation of the Civil War-era blockade-running steamer Mary Celestia in Bermuda, and either led or co-led maritime heritage expeditions in the Alaskan Arctic, in the waters of Greater Farallones National Marine Sanctuary, where the wrecks of SS City of Rio de Janeiro , SS City of Chester , SS Ituna , SS Selja , and USS Conestoga , among others, were discovered, a survey of coastal communities and the maritime cultural landscape north of San Francisco, the sonar survey of the wreck of USS Hatteras , and deep water submersible expeditions off Hawaii that led to the discovery of the Japanese super-submarine I-400 and the former cable-laying ship USS Kailua , ex-SS Dickensen . Delgado worked closely with NOAA's Office of Ocean Exploration in telepresence-enabled missions that relied on remotely operated vehicles linked to shore-based exploration and command centers and the public through the Internet. He also worked with and continues to work with Dr, Robert Ballard's Ocean Exploration Trust on telepresence missions. These have included the first telepresence-assisted maritime archaeological excavation in deep water, with an early 19th-century shipwreck in the Gulf of Mexico in 2013, the archaeological reconnaissance of the wrecks of the SS Coast Trader and SS Dorothy Wintermote , and the first archaeological documentation of the wrecks of USS Independence and USS Bugara .

[ 21 ] Delgado created a NOAA maritime heritage publication series, instituted the use of maritime cultural landscapes as a principle for characterizing and managing maritime cultural resources in the National Marine Sanctuary System, and led NOAA's ongoing role in the U.S. Government's activities related to the wreck of Titanic . He also was key in the successful negotiation and signing of international agreements between the United States, the Kingdom of Spain, and the Republic of France on shared underwater and maritime cultural heritage, and represented the United States in international meetings with the United Nationals Educational and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Delgado also co-chaired the interagency working group on underwater cultural heritage in Washington, D.C. during his NOAA tenure.

SEARCH, Inc.

[ edit ] In 2017, Delgado retired from public service and became the Senior Vice President of SEARCH, Inc., a major American cultural resources and archaeological firm.

[ 22 ] He led the analysis of a wreck thought to be Clotilda , the last American ship to bring slaves to the United States. The analysis by Delgado and his colleagues determined the wreck was not Clotilda . He then led a survey which analyzed over a dozen possible targets that culminated in a year-long excavation and analysis that identified one of the targets as Clotilda . He subsequently was the lead author for the listing of the wreck in the National Register of Historic Places. The results were revealed by the Alabama Historical Commission in May 2019. Subsequent projects focused on Clotilda culminated in the 2024 announcement that the wreck, while intact as an archaeological site, cannot be raised and preserved ashore as it is fragile and cost tens of millions of dollars to try to preserve it once out of the water. Delgado's other projects at SEARCH have included other maritime projects, notably serving as the Series Senior Advisor for the ongoing National Geographic Television Series Drain the Oceans , in which he also frequently appears. In May 2020, Delgado was the lead archaeologist in the search for, discovery, and exploration of the battleship USS Nevada (BB-36) , discovered by Ocean Infinity and SEARCH, Inc. in three miles of water off Oahu.

[ 23 ] [ 1 ] Public service and fellowships [ edit ] In addition to 20 years of public service in the National Park Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Delgado has held a series of appointed civic political positions and has served as an officer in professional associations, including a term as President of the Council of American Maritime Museums . He is a Registered Professional Archaeologist (RPA), and is an elected Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society , the Royal Canadian Geographical Society , and The Explorers Club . He is a longstanding member of the Society for Historical Archaeology , the Archaeological Institute of America , and the Society for American Archaeology . He has served on the editorial board for professional journals and is on the editorial advisory board of Archaeology Magazine .

He has been the recipient of several professional and public service awards, including special achievement awards for sustained superior performance from the National Park Service, the Department of Commerce Bronze medal , NOAA Administrator's Awards, [ 24 ] book awards including twice receiving the Society for Historical Archaeology 's James Deetz Award , the North American Society for Oceanic History's John Lyman Award, Choice's Academic Title of the Year, and was also named Naval History Magazine's Author of the Year. In 2012, he received the Stefansson Medal for Outstanding Contributions to the cause of exploration and/or field sciences in Canada or internationally by exceptionally meritorious Canadian members of the Explorers Club. In 2014, he was named an Officer of the Order of Civil Merit , Knight's Cross by His Majesty Juan Carlos I , King of Spain, for services rendered to Spain for the protection of Spanish underwater cultural heritage while President and CEO of the Institute of Nautical Archaeology in the matter of the wreck of the frigate Nuestra Señora de las Mercedes (2014).

In the media [ edit ] Delgado's minor as an undergraduate was journalism. He has applied this emphasis to a number of the articles and books he has written, to connect to the public. He has written for the Vancouver Sun , the Washington Post , the Boston Globe , and popular magazines, including Archaeology , American History Illustrated , Naval History , and Wreck Diver . Beginning with his tenure with the National Park Service in San Francisco, he regularly appeared on local, regional, and national news, again emphasizing people's stories and common aspects of history that connect communities. He has appeared in documentary films since the 1990s and continues to actively promote archaeology and history on film and the Internet, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] including a series of short takes on maritime archaeology and history for CuriosityStream .

Delgado has appeared as a guest speaker at the TED-inspired EG series in Monterey, [ 28 ] and at IdeaCity in Toronto.

[ 29 ] He actively lectures worldwide, including as a regular lecturer for the Archaeological Institute of America, lectured onboard small adventure cruise vessels for Lindblad and Zegrahm Expeditions for nearly three decades, and regularly speaks to his favorite audience, school classes ranging from kindergarten to college. One of his favorite activities in this regard was Project Shiphunt .

[ 30 ] In his role as Director of NOAA's Maritime Heritage Program, Delgado mentored a group of five Saginaw, Michigan high school students on a shipwreck research expedition in Lake Huron . The mission was sponsored by Sony and the Intel Corp and resulted in a positive, life-changing experience for the students and a documentary film.

Personal life [ edit ] Delgado is married and lives with his wife Ann Goodhart in Rockville, Maryland . He moved there in 2017 when he became senior vice president of Search Inc. Delgado has two children from his marriage.

[ 2 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] 1999: John Lyman Book Awards 2011 and 2021: Society for Historical Archaeology 's James L. Deetz Award [ 31 ] 2006: City of Vancouver Book Award Officer of the Order of Civil Merit (Spain) [ 32 ] NOAA's Administrator Awards The Department of Commerce Bronze medal Selected bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Delgado, James P. (27 June 2019).

War at Sea: A Shipwrecked History from Antiquity to the Twentieth Century . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190888022 .

Delgado, James P. (2012).

Misadventures of a civil war submarine: Iron, guns, and pearls . Texas A&M University Press.

Silent Killers: Submarines and Underwater Warfare . Osprey Publishing. 2011.

ISBN 978-1-84908-365-2 .

Nuclear Dawn: The Atomic Bomb from the Manhattan Project to the Cold War . Osprey Publishing. 2009.

ISBN 978-1-84603-396-4 .

Khubilai Khan's Lost Fleet: In Search of a Legendary Armada . University of California Press. 2009.

ISBN 978-0-520-25976-8 .

Gold Rush Port: The Maritime Archaeology of San Francisco's Waterfront . University of California Press. 2009.

ISBN 978-0-520-25580-7 .

Adventures of a Sea Hunter: In Search of Famous Shipwrecks . Douglas & McIntyre. 2004.

ISBN 978-1-55365-071-3 .

Joy Waldron Jasper; James P. Delgado; Jim Adams (2001).

The USS Arizona: the ship, the men, the Pearl Harbor attack, and the symbol that aroused America . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-312-28690-3 .

Edited books [ edit ] Delgado, J. P., Marx, D. E., Lent, K., Grinnan, J., & DeCaro, A. (2023).

Clotilda: The history and archaeology of the last slave ship . University of Alabama Press.

Delgado, J. P., & Nagiewicz, S. D. (2020).

Robert J. Walker: the history and archaeology of a US coast survey steamship . University Press of Florida.

Carol Ruppé; Jan Barstad, eds. (2002).

"Marine and Underwater Archaeology on the Pacific Coast" .

International handbook of underwater archaeology . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-306-46345-7 .

Delgado, J. P., Mendizábal, T., Hanselmann, F. H., & Rissolo, D. (2016). The maritime landscape of the Isthmus of Panamá. University Press of Florida Selected papers [ edit ] Delgado, J. P. (2024). The Blake Ridge Wreck: A Deepwater Antebellum American Fishing Craft.

Journal of Maritime Archaeology , 1-36.

Brennan, M. L., Delgado, J. P., Jozsef, A., Marx, D. E., & Bierwagen, M. (2023). Site formation processes and pollution risk mitigation of World War II oil tanker shipwrecks: Coimbra and Munger T. Ball.

Journal of Maritime Archaeology , 18 (2), 321-335.

Delgado, J. P., Brennan, M. L., Haoa, S. A. R., Leong, J. H. R., Gaymer, C. F., Carabias, D., ... & Wagner, D. (2022). The hidden landscape: maritime cultural heritage of the Salas y Gómez and Nazca ridges with implications for conservation on the high seas.

Marine Policy , 136 , 104877.

Delgado, J. P., Brennan, M. L., Elliott, K., Matthews, R. E., Lickliter-Mundon, M., Lambert, J. G., ... & Schwemmer, R. V. (2018). Archaeological survey of the ex-USS Independence (CVL22).

Journal of Maritime Archaeology , 13 , 123-144.

Brennan, M. L., Cantelas, F., Elliott, K., Delgado, J. P., Bell, K. L., Coleman, D., ... & Ballard, R. D. (2018). Telepresence-enabled maritime archaeological exploration in the deep.

Journal of Maritime Archaeology , 13 , 97-121.

Brennan, M. L., Davis, D., Ballard, R. D., Trembanis, A. C., Vaughn, J. I., Krumholz, J. S., ... & DuVal, C. (2016). Quantification of bottom trawl fishing damage to ancient shipwreck sites.

Marine Geology , 371 , 82-88.

Delgado, J. P. (2000). Underwater archaeology at the dawn of the 21st century.

Historical Archaeology , 34 (4), 9-13.

See also [ edit ] Institute of Nautical Archaeology National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAO) References [ edit ] ^ a b "CERF 2019: The Slave Schooner Clotilda: Hidden but Not Forgotten" .

www.cerf.science .

^ a b c "James Delgado Fonds MsC 123" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 October 2015.

James Preston (Jim) Delgado was born on January 11, 1958 in San Jose, California, USA. He showed an early interest in history and archaeology and at age 14 joined his first dig when he noticed human remains at a construction site. The graduate students from an archaeology class from San Jose State took Delgado under their wing; most of the finds were turned over to the university except the human remains Delgado had found, which were repatriated to their descendents and reburied. Delgado met with the mayor of San Jose to voice his concerns regarding the desecration of the past and was appointed, at age 14, to the City of San Jose Historic Landmarks Commission. Throughout high school Delgado joined local archaeologists in exploring sites and also worked as a guide at the New Almaden (mining) Museum.

^ "The Temporal Dating and Analysis of the Archaeological Assemblage Recovered from a Portion of Prehistoric Site, "'Arma 'Ayttakiš Rúmmey-tak" (Place of the Spirit Woman Spring) CA-SCL-125" (PDF) .

State University and PG&E, PG&E revoked permission, which was never renewed, during the summer of 1972 (Delgado 1980). By Fall, three San Jose State University students (William Cecil, David Wallace, and Susan Grant) and one high school student (James Delgado) who had worked on the earlier excavations, continued working on Trench 3 under the direction of Instructor John White, without PG&E approval (Delgado 1980). White ordered that the work be abandoned in early 1973, though White occasionally still visited the site to collect surface finds (Delgado 1980).

^ "csj_BF-078" .

digitalcollections.sjlibrary.org .

^ Delgado, James P. (1986).

"Documentation and Identification of the Two-Masted Schooner "Neptune" " .

Historical Archaeology .

20 (1): 95– 108.

doi : 10.1007/BF03374063 .

ISSN 0440-9213 .

JSTOR 25615571 .

^ Delgado, James P. (1985).

"The Rumble of Distant Thunder" .

Archaeology .

38 (6): 58– 76.

ISSN 0003-8113 .

JSTOR 41730274 .

^ Delgado, James P. (1991).

"cannot be reached" .

tph.ucpress.edu .

13 (3): 75– 84.

doi : 10.2307/3378553 .

JSTOR 3378553 . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Maritime Heritage Program | National Park Service" .

www.nps.gov . Archived from the original on June 12, 2007.

^ A., Quaide, Rustin (2001-11-30).

"Nominating Historic Vessels and Shipwrecks to the National Register of Historic Places Bulletin (Nrb 20)" .

www.nps.gov . Archived from the original on 2017-08-10 . Retrieved 2025-04-23 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jeff, Joeckel; Bell, Shannon (2001-12-27).

"Guidelines for Evaluating and Documenting Historic Aids to Navigation to the National Register of Historic Places (Bulletin 34)" .

www.nps.gov . Archived from the original on 2019-07-05 . Retrieved 2025-04-23 .

^ "National Register of Historic Places Registration Form for the Adventuress" (PDF) .

npgallery.nps.gov . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "American Eagle (schooner)" (PDF) .

npgallery.nps.gov . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Archeology (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov .

^ "Archeology (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov .

^ Delgado, James P.; Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary (Calif.); Golden Gate National Recreation Area (Calif.); Haller, Stephen A. (1989).

Submerged cultural resources assessment : Golden Gate National Recreation Area, Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary, and Point Reyes National Seashore . Prelinger Library. Santa Fe, N.M. : [Submerged Cultural Resources Unit].

^ "National Register of Historic Places Registration Form for the USS Arizona wreck" (PDF) .

npgallery.nps.gov . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "National Register of Historic Places Registration Form for the USS Utah wreck" (PDF) .

npgallery.nps.gov . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ "Shipwrecks and Hulks (National Historic Landmarks) | Maritime Heritage Program" .

www.nps.gov .

^ "Office of National Marine Sanctuaries for the National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration" .

sanctuaries.noaa.gov .

^ "The Sea Hunters" . Archived from the original on October 4, 2016 . Retrieved 2012-08-23 .

^ "Rediscovering SS Coast Trader | Nautilus Live" .

nautiluslive.org . 2016-06-12 . Retrieved 2025-04-23 .

^ Soergel, Matt.

"For renowned maritime archaeologist in Jacksonville, his work is 'almost time travel' " .

The Florida Times-Union .

^ "Dr. James Delgado Joins SEARCH, Inc. As Vice President | Ocean News & Technology" .

oceannews.com . 2017-04-03.

^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"NOAA's National Ocean Service" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov .

^ Insider (2023-02-07), Shipwreck Expert Rates 11 Shipwrecks In Movies And TV | How Real Is It? | Insider ^ AMP (2013-04-25), Maritime Heritage: Your Sanctuary Episode 9 ^ Your Sanctuary TV (2015-05-19), Exploring the Shipwrecks of USS Macon & USS Independence: "Your Sanctuary" Episode 14 ^ "James Delgado, Archaeology & Exploration (EG9)" .

EG Conference . 2019-10-30.

^ "James Delgado – Archaeology in the Final Frontier: The Ocean | ideacity" .

^ "Project Shiphunt" . Retrieved 2012-08-23 .

^ "Call for Nominations: The SHA James Deetz Book Award" .

Society for Historical Archaeology . Retrieved 2024-08-23 .

^ "James Delgado" .

Archaeological Institute of America .

External links [ edit ] Delgado's Professional Bio Records of James P. Delgado are held by Simon Fraser University's Special Collections and Rare Books Portals : Marine life Underwater diving Biography United States History v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Archaeology Data Service DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_P._Delgado&oldid=1293698449 " Categories : 1958 births Living people American archaeologists 21st-century American historians American underwater divers American male non-fiction writers East Carolina University alumni Simon Fraser University alumni Underwater archaeologists Santa Teresa High School alumni Historians from California Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 05:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James P. Delgado 3 languages Add topic

