Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Law of rent 6 languages 한국어 ಕನ್ನಡ Suomi Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic principle regarding the value of rented land This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Law of rent" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The law of rent states that the rent of a land site is equal to the economic advantage obtained by using the site in its most productive use, relative to the advantage obtained by using marginal (i.e., the best rent-free) land for the same purpose, given the same inputs of labor and capital .

Description [ edit ] The law of rent was formulated by David Ricardo around 1809, and presented in its most developed form in his magnum opus, On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . This is the origin of the term "Ricardian rent". Ricardo's formulation of the law was the first clear exposition of the source and magnitude of rent .

[ citation needed ] John Stuart Mill called it the " pons asinorum " of economics.

[ 1 ] Ricardo formulated this law based on the principles put forth by Adam Smith in Wealth of Nations .

"The rent of land, therefore, considered as the price paid for the use of the land, is naturally a monopoly price. It is not at all proportioned to what the landlord may have laid out upon the improvement of the land, or to what he can afford to take; but to what the farmer can afford to give." — Adam Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Book I, Chapter XI "Of the Rent of Land" Ricardian rent should not be confused with contract rent , which is the "actual payments tenants make for use of the properties of others." (Barlow 1986).  Rather, the law of rent refers to the economic return that land should accrue for its use in production.

David Ricardo elaborates on the significance of land on relative prices through his Theory of Rent. The Theory of Rent applies when the individual who possesses the land is distinct from the individual cultivating the land.

#1 The producer must pay the landlord for the employment of their land to produce their desired commodity (Ricardo 1911, p. 42).

[ 2 ] #2 If the land is more productive than other lands, the person renting the land pays more. In contrast, the renter pays a lower price if the land is less sustainable. However, the profit the producer obtains from their production from the land accounts for the price difference in rent (Kishtainy 2018, p. 39).

[ 3 ] Ricardo asserts that “corn is not high because a rent is paid, but rent is paid because corn is high” (Ricardo 1911, p. 74).

[ 4 ] He explains that the price of the land is elevated because the price of the goods produced is high. Inevitably, the landlords are the individuals who benefit from more productive land, not the individuals cultivating the land (Sandmo 2019, p. 76).

[ 5 ] Ricardo's theory of rent illustrates the effect of the third factor of production, land, on the prices of goods. Agnar Sandmo, an economist at the Norwegian School of Economics, notions that the Ricardian theory of rent explained the missing 6-7 percent deviation in Ricardo's labor theory of value (Sandmo 2019, p. 77).

[ 6 ] Ricardo's theory implies that a higher rent does not lead to a higher price because the cultivator requires less effort to cultivate production on more abundant land (Ricardo 1911, p. 44).

[ 7 ] Being a political economist , Ricardo was not simply referring to land in terms of soil. He was primarily interested in the economic rent and locational value associated with private appropriation of any natural factor of production . The law of rent applies equally well to urban land and rural land, as it is a fundamental principle of economics.

Ricardo noticed that the bargaining power of laborers can never dip below the produce obtainable on the best available rent-free land, because whenever rent leaves them with less than they could get on that free land, they can simply move to the new location. The produce obtainable on the best available rent-free land is known as the margin of production . Since landlords have a monopoly over a given location, the only limiting factor for rent is the margin of production. Thus, rent is a differential between the productive capacity of the land and the margin of production.

[ citation needed ] Note that Ricardo's original formulation assumes that the best quality land would be the first to be used in production, and that goods are sold in a competitive, single price market.

In Ricardo's theory of rent, Ricardo supposes that there are different grades of land, all the same size but with different qualities. Land grades 1, 2, and 3.

On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation , Ricardo supposes that the land generates profits of 100, 90, and 80 units of corn, depending on quality. If there is plenty of land in proportion to the population, farmers only need to cultivate land number 1 (the highest quality), so there will be no rent (100 units of corn). However, as the population increases, it will be necessary to cultivate land number 2. Therefore, land number 1 will have a rent of 10 units. Land number 1 will generate a profit of 100 units of corn, while land number 2 will only generate 90 units of corn. Finally, whenever land number 3 must be cultivated, the rent for land number 1 will be a rent of 20 units, and for land number 2, the rent will be 10. The profit will equal 80 units (profit made by the lowest quality). Eventually, all land is used except for the lowest quality land because workers will not work for a low wage. (Ricardo, 1817). Due to competition, farmers will bid up to 10 units to use the land. As the population grows and lower quality land is cultivated, the rent will be calculated as the profit difference between the low-quality and high-quality land. Farmers who make a low profit are willing to choose between high-quality land and their own (Ricardo,1817).

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Differential and absolute ground rent Economic rent Georgism Henry George Iron law of wages Rack-rent Schumpeterian rent Von Thünen rent Notes [ edit ] ^ Macleod, H.D.

(1886).

The Elements of Economics . Vol. 2. D. Appleton. p. 96.

^ Ricardo, David (1911).

On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . London: New York: JM Dent. p. 42.

^ Kishtainy, Niall (March 7, 2017).

A Little History of Economics . Yale University Press. p. 39.

^ Ricardo, David (1911).

On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . London: New York: JM Dent. p. 74.

^ Sandmo, Agnar (2011).

Economics evolving : a history of economic thought . Princeton University Press. p. 76.

^ Sandmo, Agnar (2011).

Economics evolving : a history of economic thought . Princeton University Press. p. 77.

^ Ricardo, David (1911).

On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation . London: New York: JM Dent. p. 44.

^ Ricardo, David (2004).

The principles of political economy and taxation . F. W. Kolthammer. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-43461-3 .

OCLC 54034704 .

Further reading [ edit ] David Ricardo , An Essay on the influence of a low price of corn on the profits of stock v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_rent&oldid=1301502025 " Categories : 1809 in economic history Economics laws Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from February 2019 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from February 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law of rent 6 languages Add topic

