Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Diving procedures Toggle Diving procedures subsection 1.1 Navigation 1.2 Searches 1.3 Operation of special equipment 2 Exploration 3 Underwater work Toggle Underwater work subsection 3.1 Commercial diving 3.1.1 Offshore diving 3.1.2 Salvage diving 3.1.3 Hazmat diving 3.1.4 Underwater inspection 3.1.5 Potable water diving 3.1.6 Ships husbandry 3.1.7 Underwater construction 3.1.8 Underwater mining and mineral extraction 3.2 Military diving 3.3 Public service 3.4 Scientific 3.5 Media and entertainment 3.6 Tourism 3.7 Diver training 3.8 Aquaculture, fishing and harvesting of organisms underwater 4 Recreational activities Toggle Recreational activities subsection 4.1 Scuba activities 4.2 Freediving activities 5 Training and skills development 6 Familiarisation with equipment 7 Response to an emergency 8 Emergency recompression 9 Classification of underwater diving activities by occupational field 10 References Toggle the table of contents Diving activities Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Things people do while diving underwater Diving activities Ship repair work may involve underwater welding Underwater photography is done by recreational and professional divers.

Diving activities are the things people do while diving underwater . People may dive for various reasons, both personal and professional. While a newly qualified recreational diver may dive purely for the experience of diving, most divers have some additional reason for being underwater.

Recreational diving is purely for enjoyment and has several specialisations and technical disciplines to provide more scope for varied activities for which specialist training can be offered, such as cave diving , wreck diving , ice diving and deep diving .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Several underwater sports are available for exercise and competition.

[ 3 ] There are various aspects of professional diving that range from part-time work to lifelong careers. Professionals in the recreational diving industry include instructor trainers, diving instructors, assistant instructors, divemasters , dive guides, and scuba technicians. A scuba diving tourism industry has developed to service recreational diving in regions with popular dive sites. Commercial diving is industry related and includes civil engineering tasks such as in oil exploration , offshore construction , dam maintenance and harbour works. Commercial divers may also be employed to perform tasks related to marine activities, such as naval diving , ships husbandry , marine salvage or aquaculture .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Other specialist areas of diving include military diving , with a long history of military frogmen in various roles. They can perform roles including direct combat, reconnaissance, infiltration behind enemy lines, placing mines, bomb disposal or engineering operations.

[ 7 ] In civilian operations, police diving units perform search and rescue operations, and recover evidence. In some cases diver rescue teams may also be part of a fire department , paramedical service , sea rescue or lifeguard unit, and this may be classed as public safety diving .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] There are also professional media divers such as underwater photographers and videographers , who record the underwater world, and scientific divers in fields of study which involve the underwater environment, including marine biologists , geologists , hydrologists , oceanographers and underwater archaeologists .

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] [ 11 ] The choice between scuba and surface-supplied diving equipment is based on both legal and logistical constraints. Where the diver requires mobility and a large range of movement, scuba is usually the choice if safety and legal constraints allow. Higher risk work, particularly commercial diving, may be restricted to surface-supplied equipment by legislation and codes of practice.

[ 12 ] [ 11 ] [ 13 ] Diving procedures [ edit ] See also: Freediving , Scuba skills , Surface-supplied diving skills , and Saturation diving The standard procedures and activities essential to safe diving in the chosen diving mode , using the chosen diving equipment , and in the chosen diving environment are inherently part of the activities of a dive. Monitoring the dive profile, gas supplies, decompression status, relative positions of the divers and communication associated with these are all standard operating procedures. Contingency procedures associated with the diving mode, equipment and foreseeable diversions from the dive plan may also be necessary. These activities may be considered as occurring in the background, as in most cases they are not the reason for the dive.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Navigation [ edit ] Shearwater Perdix and Ratio iX3M GPS dive computers in compass mode with Suunto SK7 magnetic compass in close proximity Main article: Diver navigation Navigation is a common activity during dives. Diver navigation, termed "underwater navigation" by scuba divers, [ 16 ] is a set of techniques—including observing natural features, the use of a compass, and surface observations—that divers use to navigate underwater .

Free-divers do not spend enough time underwater for navigation to be important, and surface supplied divers are limited in the distance they can travel by the length of their umbilicals and are usually directed from the surface control point. On those occasions when they need to navigate they can use the same methods used by scuba divers. When it is critical for safety to return to a specific place, a distance line is generally used. This may be laid and left in place for other divers, or recovered on the return leg. Use of distance lines is standard in penetration diving , where the divers cannot ascend directly to the surface at all times, and it is possible to lose track of the route out to open water .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Searches [ edit ] Main article: Underwater searches Searches are a fairly common diving activity, and may be the primary purpose of the dive, part of a more complex activity plan, or incidental. Underwater searches are procedures to find a known or suspected target object or objects in a specified search area under water. A search method attempts to provide full coverage of the search area, by using a search pattern, which should completely cover the search area without excessive redundancy or missed areas.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Operation of special equipment [ edit ] Two divers scootering with heavy duty DPVs A diver propulsion vehicle is a type of diving equipment sometimes used by scuba divers to increase range underwater. Range is restricted by the amount of breathing gas that can be carried, the rate at which that breathing gas is consumed, and the battery power of the DPV. Time limits imposed on the diver by decompression requirements may also limit safe range in practice. DPVs have recreational, scientific and military applications.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Exploration [ edit ] See also: Underwater exploration and Recreational diving § Reasons to dive There is often an element of exploration in diving activity, as it is common to dive in an unfamiliar place. This exploration may be casual or focused on gathering information which can be shared or recorded and published for use by others. A large part of the waters accessible to divers remains virtually unknown, and has not been surveyed or mapped in detail, and in many cases, has not yet been visited by divers. Exploration has been identified as one of the major motivations for recreational diving, but it is mostly casual and seldom results in recorded reports which can be of use to others.

Underwater work [ edit ] A US Navy diver diversat work. The umbilical supplying air from the surface is clearly visible.

Main article: Underwater work See also: Professional diving Underwater work is usually done by professional divers who are paid for their work. The procedures are often regulated by legislation and codes of practice as it is an inherently hazardous occupation and the diver works as a member of a team . Due to the dangerous nature of some professional diving operations, specialized equipment such as an on-site hyperbaric chamber and diver-to-surface communication system is often required by law, and the mode of diving for some applications may be regulated.

[ 13 ] [ 26 ] There are several branches of professional diving, the best known of which is probably commercial diving and its specialised applications. There are also applications in scientific research , marine archaeology , fishing and aquaculture , public service , law enforcement , military service , media work and diver training . Specialist training may be required for some aspects of this work.

Commercial diving [ edit ] Main article: Commercial diving Surface supplied commercial diving equipment on display at a trade show Commercial diving may be considered an application of professional diving where the diver engages in underwater work for industrial, construction, engineering, maintenance or other commercial purposes which are similar to work done out of the water, and where the diving is usually secondary to the work.

Offshore diving [ edit ] Main article: Commercial offshore diving Commercial offshore diving, sometimes shortened to just offshore diving, generally refers to the branch of commercial diving , with divers working in support of the exploration and production sector of the oil and gas industry . The work in this area of the industry includes maintenance of oil platforms and the building of underwater structures. In this context " offshore " implies that the diving work is done outside of national boundaries . Technically it also refers to any diving done in the international offshore waters outside of the territorial waters of a state, where national legislation does not apply. Most commercial offshore diving is in the exclusive economic zone of a state, and much of it is outside the territorial waters. The type of work includes tasks such as wellhead completion, submarine pipeline monitoring and inspection, assembly of manifolds and work on moorings , including rigging , lifting , and assembly of components.

[ 27 ] Salvage diving [ edit ] Main article: Salvage diving Salvage diving is the diving work associated with marine salvage , the recovery of all or part of ships, their cargoes , aircraft, and other vehicles and structures which have sunk or fallen into water. In the case of ships it may also refer to repair work done to make an abandoned or distressed but still floating vessel more suitable for towing or propulsion under its own power. The recreational/technical activity known as wreck diving is generally not considered salvage work, though some recovery of artifacts may be done by recreational divers.

Most salvage diving is commercial or military work, depending on the diving contractor and the purpose for the salvage operation, Similar underwater work may be done by divers as part of forensic investigations into accidents, in which case the procedures may be more closely allied with underwater archaeology than the more basic procedures of advantageous cost/benefit expected in commercial and military operations.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Hazmat diving [ edit ] Main article: Hazmat diving Hazmat diving generally refers to the presence of hazardous materials in the diving environment, but some classes of underwater work are inherently in a hazardous materials environment, including nuclear diving and sewer diving .

[ 30 ] Underwater inspection [ edit ] See also: Underwater inspection Inspection of underwater structures, installations, and sites is a common professional diving activity, applicable to planning, installation, and maintenance phases, but the required skills are often specific to the application. Much use is made of video and still photographic evidence, and live video to allow direction of the inspection work by the supervisor and topside specialists. Inspections may also involve surface preparation, often by cleaning, and non-destructive testing.

[ 31 ] Potable water diving [ edit ] Inspection of the interior of a municipal water tower requires specialized training and safety equipment.

Main article: Potable water diving Potable water diving is diving inside a tank that is used for potable water. This is usually done for inspection and cleaning tasks. A person who is trained to do this work may be described as a potable water diver. The risks to the diver associated with potable water diving are related to the access, confined spaces and outlets for the water. The risk of contamination of the water is managed by isolating the diver in a clean dry-suit and helmet or full-face mask which are decontaminated before the dive.

[ 30 ] Ships husbandry [ edit ] Main article: Ships husbandry Ships husbandry is all aspects of maintenance, cleaning, [ 32 ] and general upkeep of the hull , rigging , and equipment of a ship. It may also be used to refer to aspects of maintenance which are not specifically covered by the technical departments.

[ 33 ] The term is used in both naval and merchant shipping, [ 34 ] but 'naval vessel husbandry' may also be used for specific reference to naval vessels.

[ 35 ] Underwater ships husbandry includes hull cleaning, inspection, and some kinds of repair work.

[ 36 ] Underwater construction [ edit ] Main article: Underwater construction Underwater construction is industrial construction in an underwater environment . There is often, but not necessarily, a significant component of commercial diving involved.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] It is a part of the marine construction industry.

[ 39 ] Concrete work is a common component of underwater construction, and may involve site clearing and preparation by suction dredging , airlifting , high pressure and abrasive waterjetting , in-water surface cleaning using brushcarts , shuttering and formwork , bagwork, and setup of reinforcement . Underwater concrete placement may be by tremie , pumped concrete , skip placement , or toggle bags .
Concrete repair, and assembly of pre-cast components often involves grouting . Other work may include fitting fixing bolts by drilling and core drilling , pipe installation (outfalls), pipeline support and protection, using mattresses for ballast and scour protection, and underwater welding .

Underwater mining and mineral extraction [ edit ] Underwater mining Diamonds off the Orange River mouth Amber in the Baltic sea (historical) Gold in rivers This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2022 ) Military diving [ edit ] Main article: Military diving Underwater divers may be employed in any branch of an armed force, including the navy, army, marines, air force and coast guard.
Scope of operations includes: search and recovery , search and rescue , hydrographic survey , explosive ordnance disposal , demolition , underwater engineering, salvage , ships husbandry , reconnaissance, infiltration, sabotage, counterinfiltration, underwater combat and security .

[ 40 ] Clearance diving , the removal of obstructions and hazards to navigation, is closely related to salvage diving, but has a different purpose, in that the objects to be removed are not intended to be recovered, just removed or reduced to a condition where they no longer constitute a hazard or obstruction. Many of the techniques and procedures used in clearance diving are also used in salvage work.

Submarine rescue is the process of locating a sunk submarine with survivors on board, and bringing the survivors to safety.

[ 41 ] This may be done by recovering the vessel to the surface first, or by transferring the trapped personnel to a rescue bell or deep-submergence rescue vehicle to bring them to the surface. Submarine rescue may be done at pressures between ambient at depth, and sea level atmospheric pressure, depending on the condition of the disabled vessel and the equipment used for the rescue.

[ 41 ] Associated diving work may include preparing the submarine for access by a rescue bell or rescue submersible, if the depth allows human intervention. Recent developments tend to favour the use of remotely operated vehicles dedicated to this application.

Public service [ edit ] Nesconset fire department scuba rescue team on training exercise Police divers in a river in Berlin Main articles: Police diving and Public safety diving Public safety diving is underwater diving conducted as part of law enforcement and search and rescue . Their work includes underwater rescue, underwater recovery and underwater investigation conducted by divers working for or under the authority of municipal, state or federal agencies. These divers are typically members of police departments, sheriff's offices, fire rescue agencies, search and rescue teams or providers of emergency medical services. Public safety divers differ from recreational, scientific and commercial divers who can generally plan the date, time, and location of a dive, and dive only if the conditions are conducive to the task. Public safety divers respond to emergencies 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and may be required to dive in the middle of the night, during inclement weather, in zero visibility "black water," or in waters polluted by chemicals and biohazards. Much of their work involves Underwater searches .

[ 8 ] Police diving is a branch of professional diving carried out by police services. Police divers are usually sworn police officers, and may either be employed full-time as divers or as general water police officers, or be volunteers who usually serve in other units but are called in if their diving services are required. The duties carried out by police divers include rescue diving for underwater casualties and search and recovery diving for evidence and bodies.

[ 42 ] Scientific [ edit ] Main articles: Scientific diving and Underwater archaeology A scientific diver at work Scientific diving is the use of underwater diving techniques by scientists to perform work underwater in the direct pursuit of scientific knowledge.

[ 11 ] Scientific divers are normally qualified scientists first and divers second, who use diving equipment and techniques as their way to get to the location of their fieldwork. The direct observation and manipulation of marine habitats afforded to scuba-equipped scientists have transformed the marine sciences generally, and marine biology and marine chemistry in particular.

[ 43 ] Underwater archeology and geology are other examples of sciences pursued underwater. Some scientific diving is carried out by universities in support of undergraduate or postgraduate research programs, and government bodies such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the UK Environment Agency carry out scientific diving to recover samples of water, marine organisms and sea, lake or riverbed material to examine for signs of pollution.

Activities are widely varied and may include visual counts and measurements of organisms in situ, collection of samples, underwater surveys , photography, videography, video mosaicing, benthic coring, coral coring, and deployment, maintenance and retrieval of scientific equipment .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Surveys include site surveys, geological surveys, baseline and monitoring ecological surveys, which may involve the use of transect and quadrat methodology. A bibliographic analysis of papers published between 1995 and 2006 that have been supported by scientific diving shows that diving supports scientific research through efficient and targeted sampling. Activities include collection of specimen organisms and biological samples, observing and recording animal behaviour, quantitative surveys, in situ measurements, impact studies, ecological analyses, evaluation of techniques, mapping underwater areas, profiling geology, and deploying and retrieving underwater equipment.

[ 47 ] Media and entertainment [ edit ] Main article: Media diving Underwater photographer documenting a surface supplied dive.

Media diving is underwater diving in support of the media industries, including the practice of underwater photography and underwater cinematography and underwater videography outside of normal recreational interests.

[ 48 ] Media diving is often carried out in support of television documentaries featuring underwater photography or footage. Media divers are normally highly skilled camera operators who use diving as a method to reach their workplace, although some underwater photographers start as recreational divers and move on to make a living from their hobby. Equipment in this field is varied with scuba and surface supplied equipment used, depending on requirements, but rebreathers are often used for wildlife related work as they are normally quiet, release few or no bubbles and allow the diver a lengthy bottom time with a reduced risk of frightening off the subject.

[ 49 ] Tourism [ edit ] Main article: Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving tourism is the industry based on servicing the requirements of recreational divers at destinations other than where they live. It includes aspects of training, equipment sales, rental and service, guided experiences and environmental tourism .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The diving activity most associated with work in the diving tourism industry is leading dives.

Dive leader is the title of an internationally recognised recreational diving certification for the occupation of "dive guide", which is a specialist underwater application of " tour guide ".

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Several other titles are also used, including " Divemaster ". This is a role that includes organising and leading recreational dives, particularly in a professional capacity, Diver training [ edit ] Instructor and learner divers practicing scuba skills in confined water Main articles: Diver training and Diving instructor Diver training is the set of processes through which a person learns the necessary and desirable skills to safely dive underwater within the scope of the diver training standard relevant to the specific training programme. Most diver training follows procedures and schedules laid down in the associated training standard, in a formal training programme, and includes practical skills training in the safe use of the associated equipment in the specified underwater environment, and assessment of the required skills and knowledge deemed necessary by the certification agency to allow the newly certified diver to dive within the specified range of conditions at an acceptable level of risk . Practical training and assessment of skills largely occurs underwater, in the presence of a diving instructor , who is responsible for the safety of the trainee while under instruction or assessment.

Aquaculture, fishing and harvesting of organisms underwater [ edit ] Aquaculture is the controlled cultivation ("farming") of aquatic organisms such as fish , crustaceans , mollusks , algae and other organisms of value such as aquatic plants (e.g.

lotus ).

Aquaculture involves cultivating freshwater , brackish water and saltwater populations under controlled or semi-natural conditions, and can be contrasted with commercial fishing , which is the harvesting of wild fish . There are many underwater activities associated with aquaculture which can be done by divers, including monitoring stock health and fish pen maintenance.

[ 54 ] Spearfishing is a method of fishing that involves impaling the fish with a straight pointed object such as a spear , gig or harpoon . It has been deployed in artisanal fishing throughout the world for millennia. Modern spearfishing usually involves the use of underwater swimming gear and slingshot -like elastic powered spearguns or compressed gas powered pneumatic spearguns, which launch a tethered underwater projectile to strike the target fish. Specialised techniques and equipment have been developed for various types of aquatic environments and target fish. Spearfishing may be done using free-diving , snorkelling or scuba diving techniques.

[ 55 ] Abalone, lobster, sea urchins and various other marine invertebrates can be collected by hand or with the assistance of hand tools while diving.

Pearl hunting is the activity of recovering pearls from wild molluscs , usually oysters or mussels , in the sea or freshwater. Pearl hunting was prevalent in the Persian Gulf region and Japan for thousands of years. On the northern and north-western coast of Western Australia pearl diving began in the 1850s, where the term also covers diving for nacre or mother of pearl found in what were known as pearl shells . In most cases the pearl-bearing molluscs live at depths where they are not manually accessible from the surface. Historically the molluscs were retrieved by freediving , When the standard diving suit became available it was applied to pearl hunting.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Sponge diving , is diving to collect soft natural sponges for human use as personal cleaning tools. It is one of the oldest known underwater diving activities, dating back to classical times, and was also originally a freediving activity which later made use of the standard diving helmet.

[ 58 ] Recreational activities [ edit ] Shark cage diving Further information: Scuba diving tourism , Underwater sports , and Freediving Professional diving is done where the job is, but recreational divers have the freedom to choose where they dive, based on convenience, cost, their chosen underwater activities, and the characteristics of the environment at the available dive sites. Many recreational divers dive mainly in their home waters, but others will travel to sites where their preferences are more likely to be available.

Scuba diving tourism is the industry based on servicing the requirements of recreational divers at destinations other than where they live. It includes aspects of training, equipment sales, rental and service, guided experiences and environmental tourism .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Motivations to travel for scuba diving are complex and may vary considerably during the diver's development and experience. Participation can vary from once off to multiple dedicated trips per year over several decades. The popular destinations fall into several groups, including tropical reefs, shipwrecks and cave systems, each frequented by its own group of enthusiasts, with some overlap. Temperate and inland open water reef sites are generally dived by people who live relatively nearby.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Shark tourism is a form of eco-tourism that allows people to dive with sharks in their natural environment. This benefits local shark populations by educating tourists and through funds raised by the shark tourism industry. People can get close to the sharks by freediving or scuba diving or by entering the water in a protective cage for more aggressive species.

Scuba activities [ edit ] See also: Recreational diving § Activities A cave diver running a reel with guide line into the overhead environment Diver returning from a 600 ft (183 m) dive Divers at the wreck of the SS Carnatic There are many recreational diving activities, and several equipment and environmental specialties which require skills additional to those provided by the entry level courses, These skills were originally developed by trial and error, but training programmes are offered by most diver training agencies for the convenience of the diver, and profit for the agency, or in the case of club oriented systems, for the overall benefit of the club community: Cave and cavern diving is underwater diving in water-filled caves . It may be done as an extreme sport, a way of exploring flooded caves for scientific investigation, or for the search for and recovery of divers lost as a result of one of these activities. The equipment used varies depending on the circumstances, but almost all cave diving is done using scuba equipment , often in specialised configurations with redundancies. Recreational cave diving is generally considered to be a type of technical diving due to the lack of a free surface during large parts of the dive, and often involves planned decompression stops. A distinction is made by recreational diver training agencies between cave diving and cavern diving, where cavern diving is deemed to be diving in those parts of a cave where the exit to open water can be seen by natural light. An arbitrary distance limit to the open water surface may also be specified.

[ 61 ] Muck diving gets its name from the sediment that lies on the bottom at many dive sites - a frequently muddy or "mucky" environment. Other than muddy sediment, the muck dive substrate may consist of dead coral skeletons, garbage and natural detritus. The visibility is usually less than on the reef or wreck sites of the area. However, the sediment and detritus environment has a different ecology to the reef, and the "muck" substrate can be the habitat for unusual, exotic and juvenile organisms that are not found in the cleaner reef sites.

Recreational diving is diving for the purpose of leisure and enjoyment, and usually refers to scuba diving for recreational purposes, where the diver is not constrained from making a direct near-vertical ascent to the surface at any point during the dive, and risk is considered low. The equipment used for recreational diving is mostly open circuit scuba , though semi closed and fully automated electronic closed circuit rebreathers may be included in the scope of recreational diving. Risk is managed by training the diver in a range of standardised procedures and skills appropriate to the equipment the diver chooses to use and the environment in which the diver plans to dive. Further experience and development of skills by practice will improve the diver's ability to dive safely. Specialty training is made available by the recreational diver training industry and diving clubs to increase the range of environments and venues the diver can enjoy at an acceptable level of risk. Reasons to dive and preferred diving activities may vary during the personal development of a recreational diver, and may depend on their psychological profile and their level of dedication to the activity. Most divers average less than eight dives per year, but some total several thousand dives over a few decades and continue diving into their 60s and 70s, occasionally older. Recreational divers may frequent local dive sites or dive as tourists at more distant venues known for desirable underwater environments .

[ 62 ] [ 59 ] Scuba finswimming , officially named "Immersion finswimming with breathing apparatus", is underwater competitive swimming using mask, monofin and underwater breathing apparatus conducted in a swimming pool. While there are no requirements on how a breathing apparatus is carried, it cannot be exchanged or abandoned during a race.

[ 63 ] Technical diving is recreational scuba diving that exceeds the agency -specified limits of recreational diving for non- professional purposes. Technical diving may expose the diver to hazards beyond those normally associated with recreational diving, and to a greater risk of serious injury or death. The risk may be reduced by appropriate skills, knowledge and experience, and by using suitable equipment and procedures. The skills may be developed through appropriate specialised training and experience. The equipment often involves breathing gases other than air or standard nitrox mixtures, and multiple gas sources.

[ 2 ] Underwater citizen science is the scientific research and monitoring for projects for which members of the public collect, categorize, transcribe or analyze scientific data. It is an increasingly popular but underutilised collaboration between society and scientific research, [ 64 ] in which members of the recreational scuba diving community actively participate in marine data acquisition and recording, largely by way of geolocated photographic observations collected during recreational dives, but also in more structured and long term experimental work.

[ 65 ] Underwater photography is the process of taking photographs while under water. It is usually done while scuba diving, but can also be done while diving on surface supply , or freediving. Underwater photography can be categorised as an art form and a method for recording data. Successful underwater imaging is usually done with specialized equipment and techniques, and it offers unusual and rare photographic opportunities and subjects.

Underwater orienteering is a competitive underwater sport that uses recreational open circuit scuba equipment, fins, a compass and a counter meter to measure the distance covered. The competition consists of a set of individual and team events conducted in both sheltered and open water testing the competitors' speed and accuracy in underwater navigation around accurately surveyed courses marked by buoys.

[ 66 ] Underwater videography is the branch of electronic underwater photography concerned with capturing underwater moving images as a recreational diving, scientific, commercial, documentary, or filmmaking activity.

Wreck diving is recreational diving where the wreckage of ships , aircraft and other artificial structures are explored. Although most wreck dive sites are at shipwrecks, there is an increasing trend to scuttle retired ships to create artificial reef sites . The recreation of wreck diving makes no distinction as to how the vessel ended up on the bottom. Some wreck diving involves penetration of the wreckage, making a direct ascent to the surface impossible for a part of the dive.

[ 67 ] Freediving activities [ edit ] Freediver with monofin , ascending Two players competing for the puck in a game of underwater hockey Main article: Freediving Freediving is a form of underwater diving that relies on breath-holding until resurfacing rather than the use of breathing apparatus such as scuba gear . Besides the limits of breath-hold, immersion in water and exposure to high ambient pressure also have physiological effects that limit the depths and duration possible in freediving. Examples of freediving activities are traditional fishing techniques, competitive and non-competitive freediving, competitive and non-competitive spearfishing and freediving photography , synchronised swimming , underwater football , underwater rugby , underwater hockey , underwater target shooting and snorkeling . There are also a range of "competitive apnea " disciplines; in which competitors attempt to attain great depths, times, or distances on a single breath: Aquathlon , also known as underwater wrestling, is an underwater sport , where two competitors wearing masks and fins wrestle underwater in an attempt to remove a ribbon from each other's ankle band to win the bout. The "combat" takes place in a 5-metre (16 ft) square ring within a swimming pool, and is made up of three 30-second rounds, with a fourth round played in the event of a tie.

[ 68 ] Finswimming is an underwater competitive sport consisting of four techniques involving swimming with the use of fins, either on the water's surface using a snorkel and with either a monofins or bifins, or underwater with a monofin. Three of the disciplines are on breath-hold, and one on scuba. Events take place over distances similar to swimming competitions for both swimming pool and open water venues.

[ 69 ] Recreational hunting and gathering, including non-competitive spearfishing , usually for food.

Competitive spearfishing is "the hunting and capture of fish underwater without the aid of artificial breathing devices, using gear that depends entirely on the physical strength of the competitor." [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Underwater football is a two-team underwater sport is played in a swimming pool with snorkeling equipment: ( mask , snorkel , and fins ). The goal of the game is to manoeuvre (by carrying and passing ) a slightly negatively buoyant ball from one side of a pool to the other by players who are completely submerged.

Underwater hockey (also known as Octopush in the United Kingdom ) is a globally played limited-contact sport in which two teams compete to manoeuvre a puck across the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by propelling it with a hockey stick (or pusher) . A key challenge of the game is that it is played on breath-hold.

Underwater ice hockey is played upside-down underneath the ice on frozen pools or ponds. Participants wear diving masks, fins and wetsuits and use the underside of the frozen surface as the playing area for a buoyant puck. Competitors do not use breathing apparatus, and must surface for air as required.

Underwater rugby is an underwater team sport. During a match two teams try to score a negatively buoyant ball (filled with saltwater) into the opponents’ goal at the bottom of a swimming pool . It has little in common with rugby football except for the name.

Underwater target shooting is combined underwater sport and shooting sport that tests a competitors’ ability to accurately use a speargun in a set of individual and team events conducted in a swimming pool using freediving or Apnoea technique.

[ 72 ] Training and skills development [ edit ] Main article: Diver training The skills of underwater diving include some skills which are only needed in an emergency. These skills should be exercised sufficiently to ensure that if the emergency occurs, the diver is able to deal with it promptly and effectively. Skills practice can be done as part of a dive for other purposes, or in a dive dedicated to maintaining and developing the skills. Divers who do not dive sufficiently often to maintain basic skills may need to do refresher courses or checkout dive s when returning to active diving. New skills may require dedicated practice to bring them up to a reliable standard.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Familiarisation with equipment [ edit ] New equipment or a modification to equipment configuration may affect the diver's ability to operate the equipment or respond effectively to a problem. A common example is checking buoyancy control with a new diving suit, buoyancy compensator, cylinder configuration, or weighting system, or an unfamiliar model of rebreather. Buoyancy testing is done with the cylinders nearly empty, to ensure that the diver can maintain neutral buoyancy at the end of a dive during decompression, even if contingency use has depleted the reserve gas supplies. In many cases, testing new equipment does not require a special dive, as any problems will be noticed immediately, and either fixed or the dive can be safely aborted.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Response to an emergency [ edit ] See also: Diving procedures Both foreseeable and not reasonably foreseeable emergencies can occur during a dive. Dealing with them in some way is necessary, and may involve the diver in self-rescue, the buddy, in assistance to the other buddy, or the safety diver or stand-by diver in assistance to the diver or divers in difficulty. Response to an emergency happening to someone else may lead to public safety diving team involvement. Special circumstances like flooded cave rescues, entrapment in capsized vessels, and rescues from other disasters may involve larger groups.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Emergency recompression [ edit ] Main article: In-water recompression In-water recompression (IWR) is the emergency treatment of decompression sickness (DCS) by returning the diver underwater to help the gas bubbles in the tissues, which are causing the symptoms, to resolve. It is a procedure that exposes the diver to significant risk which should be compared with the risk associated with the other available options. Some authorities recommend that it is only to be used when the time to travel to the nearest recompression chamber is too long to save the victim's life, others take a more pragmatic approach, and accept that in some circumstances IWR is the best available option.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The risks may not be justified for case of mild symptoms likely to resolve spontaneously, or for cases where the diver is likely to be unsafe in the water, but in-water recompression may be justified in cases where severe outcomes are likely, if conducted by a competent and suitably equipped team.

[ 79 ] Classification of underwater diving activities by occupational field [ edit ] This is a table of underwater diving activities classified by occupational field and the diving modes usually associated with them. The mode may be dictated by the regulations or codes of practice governing the field of occupation.

Diving activity name or description Occupational classification Diving modes generally used aquarium maintenance in large public aquariums [ 80 ] commercial , scientific [ 80 ] Scuba, SSDE [ 80 ] boat and ship inspection, cleaning and maintenance [ 81 ] [ 6 ] commercial, naval [ 81 ] [ 6 ] SSDE, occasionally scuba [ 81 ] [ 12 ] cave diving [ 21 ] technical , recreational , scientific [ 21 ] Scuba, occasionally SSDE [ 21 ] civil engineering in harbours, water supply, and drainage systems [ 12 ] commercial [ 12 ] Almost exclusively SSDE [ 12 ] offshore construction and maintenance in the crude oil and other industry [ 6 ] commercial [ 6 ] SSDE, ROV, occasionally atmospheric suit demolition and salvage of shipwrecks [ 81 ] commercial, naval [ 81 ] SSDE, sometimes scuba, atmospheric suit or ROV [ 81 ] professional diver training [ 81 ] professional [ 81 ] SSDE or scuba as appropriate [ 81 ] recreational diver training [ 82 ] [ 83 ] professional , recreational [ 82 ] [ 83 ] Scuba, breathhold [ 82 ] [ 83 ] fish farm and other aquaculture maintenance [ 80 ] commercial [ 80 ] Scuba, SSDE [ 80 ] fishing/gathering, e.g. for abalones , crabs , lobsters , pearls , scallops , sea crayfish , sponges [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 56 ] commercial, recreational [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 56 ] Scuba, SSDE, breathhold [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 56 ] frogman , manned torpedo [ 81 ] military [ 81 ] Scuba [ 81 ] harbour clearance and maintenance [ 81 ] commercial, military [ 81 ] [ 12 ] Almost exclusively SSDE [ 81 ] [ 12 ] media diving: making television programs, underwater videography , underwater photography etc.

[ 21 ] [ 6 ] professional, recreational [ 21 ] [ 6 ] Scuba, ROV, occasionally SSDE [ 11 ] mine clearance and bomb disposal , disposing of unexploded ordnance [ 81 ] military, naval [ 81 ] Scuba, ROV, occasionally SSDE [ 81 ] pleasure, leisure, sport [ 2 ] recreational [ 2 ] Scuba, breathhold, occasionally SSDE (Snuba) [ 2 ] policing/security: diving to investigate or arrest unauthorized divers [ 81 ] police diving , military, naval [ 81 ] Scuba [ 81 ] search and recovery diving [ 81 ] commercial, public safety, police diving , military [ 81 ] Scuba, SSDE, ROV search and rescue diving [ 81 ] police, naval, public service [ 81 ] Scuba, occasionally SSDE [ 81 ] spear fishing [ 86 ] recreational(sometimes competitive), [ 86 ] occasionally professional, Breathhold [ 86 ] stealthy infiltration [ 81 ] military [ 81 ] Scuba [ 81 ] surveys and mapping [ 21 ] [ 11 ] scientific, recreational [ 21 ] [ 11 ] Scuba, SSDE [ 21 ] [ 11 ] scientific diving ( marine biology , oceanography , hydrology , geology , palaeontology , diving physiology and medicine [ 21 ] [ 6 ] [ 11 ] scientific [ 21 ] [ 6 ] [ 11 ] Scuba, occasionally SSDE, atmospheric suit, ROV, AUV [ 21 ] [ 11 ] underwater archaeology ( shipwrecks ; harbors, and buildings) [ 21 ] [ 11 ] scientific, recreational [ 21 ] [ 11 ] Scuba, SSDE, ROV, occasionally atmospheric suit [ 21 ] [ 11 ] underwater inspections and surveys [ 81 ] [ 6 ] commercial, military [ 81 ] [ 6 ] SSDE, sometimes scuba, ROV [ 81 ] underwater mineral extraction (gold, diamonds, oil) [ 87 ] commercial SSDE, including airline (Hookah) and saturation, ROV competitive underwater sport , including underwater hockey , aquathlon , scuba orienteering , underwater rugby and others [ 86 ] recreational [ 86 ] Snorkel, breathhold and scuba [ 86 ] underwater tour guiding [ 2 ] professional, recreational [ 2 ] Scuba [ 2 ] underwater tourism [ 2 ] recreational [ 2 ] Scuba, occasionally Snuba [ 2 ] underwater welding [ 6 ] commercial [ 6 ] Almost exclusively SSDE [ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Technical Diving" . NOAA. 2013.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2018 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Richardson, D. (1999). "A brief history of recreational diving in the United States".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (3). Melbourne, Victoria: SPUMS.

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 – via Rubicon Research Repository.

^ "Underwater sports" .

cmas.org . Archived from the original on 27 November 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ "Commercial Diving Operations (1910.401) – Scope and application" .

Occupational Safety and Health Standards subpart T . Washington, DC: United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2013 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ "Work activities" .

Job profiles: Diver . UK National Careers Service. 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "What does a Commercial Diver do?" . Sokanu. 2016.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2018 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ US Navy Diving Manual (2006) , Chapter 1 History of Diving.

^ a b Robinson, Blades (11 January 2002).

"What is "Public Safety Diving?" " . SanDiegoDiving.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2015 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ Phillips, Mark (November 2015).

"Public Safety Diving and OSHA, Are We Exempt? Final Answer" (PDF) .

PS Diver Magazine . No. 112.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2016 .

^ NOAA Diving Manual (2001) , Chapter 1 History of Diving and NOAA Contributions.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-11-09 . Retrieved 2022-09-02 .

^ a b c d e f g h Code of Practice Inshore Diving (PDF) . Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-11-09 . Retrieved 2022-09-02 .

^ a b Diving Regulations 2009 .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 (Report). Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 3 November 2016 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ Staff (1 October 2004).

"Minimum course standard for Open Water Diver training" (PDF) .

World Recreational Scuba Training Council . pp.

8– 9.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 October 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ "International Diver Training Certification: Diver Training Standards, Revision 4" (PDF) . International Diving Schools Association. 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 9 September 2013 .

^ "Underwater Navigation" .

UKDivers.net . October 16, 2007. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016 . Retrieved 2016-05-16 .

Navigation by reference to terrain features, both natural and artificial, usually with the aid of an appropriate chart.

^ Exley, Sheck (1977).

Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival . National Speleological Society Cave Diving Section.

ISBN 99946-633-7-2 .

^ Devos, Fred; Le Maillot, Chris; Riordan, Daniel (2004).

"Introduction to Guideline Procedures - Part 2: Methods" (PDF) .

DIRquest .

5 (4).

Global Underwater Explorers .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-08-04 . Retrieved 2009-04-05 .

^ Devos, Fred; Le Maillot, Chris; Riordan, Daniel (2004).

"Introduction to Guideline Procedures Part 1: Equipment" (PDF) .

DIRquest .

5 (3).

Global Underwater Explorers .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-06-09 . Retrieved 2009-04-05 .

^ Larn, Richard; Whistler, Rex (1993).

Commercial Diving Manual (3rd ed.). Newton Abbott, UK: David and Charles.

ISBN 0-7153-0100-4 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o NOAA Diving Program (U.S.) (28 Feb 2001). Joiner, James T. (ed.).

NOAA Diving Manual, Diving for Science and Technology (4th ed.). Silver Spring, Maryland: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, National Undersea Research Program.

ISBN 978-0-941332-70-5 .

CD-ROM prepared and distributed by the National Technical Information Service (NTIS)in partnership with NOAA and Best Publishing Company ^ Busuttili, Mike; Holbrook, Mike; Ridley, Gordon; Todd, Mike, eds. (1985). "Using basic equipment".

Sport diving – The British Sub-Aqua Club Diving Manual . London: Stanley Paul & Co Ltd. p. 58.

ISBN 0-09-163831-3 .

^ Rossier, Robert N.

"Redefining Performance: Diver propulsion vehicles: Manage the risks, and enjoy the ride" .

Alert Diver .

Divers Alert Network .

Archived from the original on 2014-04-07 . Retrieved 2014-03-28 .

^ Kimura, S.; Cox, G.; Carroll, J.; Pengilley, S.; Harmer, A (2012). Steller, D; Lobel, L. (eds.).

Going the Distance: Use of Diver Propulsion Units, Underwater Acoustic Navigation, and Three-Way Wireless Communication to Survey Kelp Forest Habitats .

Diving for Science 2012. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences 31st Symposium. Dauphin Island, AL .

^ Kernagis, Dawn N.; McKinlay, Casey; Kincaid, Todd R. (2008). Brueggeman, P; Pollock, Neal W. (eds.).

Dive Logistics of the Turner to Wakulla Cave Traverse .

Diving for Science 2008. Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences 27th Symposium . Dauphin Island, AL: AAUS.

^ Commercial diving projects offshore Diving at Work Regulations 1997 - Approved Code of Practice and guidance (PDF) (L103 (Second edition) ed.). Health and Safety Executive. 2014.

ISBN 978-0-7176-6592-1 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 August 2024 . Retrieved 1 March 2017 .

^ Bevan, John (2005).

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Alverstoke / Gosport, Hampshire: Submex Ltd.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ U.S. Navy Salvage Manual (PDF) . Vol. 4: Deep Ocean Operations S0300-A6-MAN-040 0910-LP-252-3200. United States. Navy Department. Supervisor of Salvage and Diving. 1 August 1993.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ U.S. Navy Salvage Manual (PDF) . Vol. 1: Strandings, Harbor Clearance and Afloat Salvage S0300-A6-MAN-010. United States. Navy Department. Supervisor of Salvage and Diving. 31 May 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Barsky, Steven (2007).

Diving in High-Risk Environments (4th ed.). Ventura, California: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-7-7 .

^ Bayliss, Mel; Short, David; Bax, Mary (17 March 1988).

Underwater Inspection . Taylor and Francis. p. 229.

ISBN 9780419135401 .

^ Nelson, Mark.

"Ship's Husbandry" .

Jackspeak of the Royal Canadian Navy . ReadyAyeReady.com.

Archived from the original on 20 March 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ Staff. "1: Hull Maintenance".

Ship Husbandry (PDF) . Royal Australian Navy Apprentice Training Establishment.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-10-29 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ Jensen, Milinda D. (3 March 2004).

"Underwater Ship Husbandry Combines Navy, Civilian Divers into Successful Team" .

Story Number: NNS040303-02 . Naval Sea Systems Command Public Affairs. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ "Naval Vessel Husbandry" . Strategy Logistics. 2014 . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ "Underwater Ship Husbandry: Nature of Discharge (EPA-842-R-99-001.)" (PDF) .

Phase I Final Rule and Technical Development Document of Uniform National Discharge Standards . United States Environmental Protection Agency. April 1999.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 February 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2017 .

^ Brown, J. Mariah (27 January 2011).

"Underwater Construction" .

buildipedia.com .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2018 . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .

^ "Civil underwater construction" .

www.ducmarinegroup.com .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 1 August 2020 .

^ "Our industry" .

imca-int.com .

International Marine Contractors Association .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 .

^ Grollimund, Tim (2014).

"Military Diving - A history of innovation" .

Alert Diver . Summer 2014. Durham, North Carolina: Divers Alert Network .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2024 . Retrieved 29 November 2018 .

^ a b Stewart, Nick (7 July 2008).

"Submarine escape and rescue: a brief history" .

Semaphore .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2024 . Retrieved 5 September 2022 .

^ Stanton, Gregg (2003). "Underwater Crime Scene Investigations (UCSI), a New Paradigm".

In: SF Norton (Ed). 2003. Diving for Science...2003 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (22nd annual Scientific Diving Symposium).

^ Witman, Jon D.; Dayton, Paul K.; Arnold, Suzanne N.; Steneck, Robert S.; Birkeland, Charles (2013).

"Scuba Revolutionizes Marine Science" (PDF) . In Lang, Michael A.; Marinelli, Roberta L.; Roberts, Susan J.; et al. (eds.).

Research and Discoveries: The Revolution of Science through Scuba (PDF) . Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press. pp.

3– 11.

Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ Talbot, Simon.

"Scientific diving - Overview" . Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme.

Archived from the original on 27 December 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ "What is Scientific Diving?" . University of Maine.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ "Scientific Diving" . UK Scientific diving Supervisory Committee. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2018 .

^ Sayer, Martin (2007). "Scientific diving: A bibliographic analysis of underwater research supported by SCUBA diving, 1995-2006".

Underwater Technology .

27 (3): 75– 94.

doi : 10.3723/175605407783360035 .

^ "Media diving" .

Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2014 . Retrieved 19 September 2013 .

^ Frink, Stephen (2005).

"The Best Reason to Recycle" . Archived from the original on 3 February 2015 . Retrieved 19 September 2013 .

^ a b Dimmock, Kay; Cummins, Terry; Musa, Ghazali (2013).

"Chapter 10: The business of Scuba diving" . In Musa, Ghazali; Dimmock, Kay (eds.).

Scuba Diving Tourism . Routledge. pp.

161– 173.

Archived from the original on 2021-07-23 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ a b Dimmock, Kay; Musa, Ghazali, eds. (2015).

Scuba diving tourism system: a framework for collaborative management and sustainability . Southern Cross University School of Business and Tourism.

Archived from the original on 2016-03-26 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ "Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers — Part 3: Level 3 — Dive leader (ISO 24801-3:2014)" .

ISO .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2015 .

^ "Competencies and qualifications of recreational scuba divers Level 1-3" .

EUF Certification . European Underwater Federation (EUF).

Archived from the original on 21 August 2017 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 .

^ "Aquaculture" .

adas.org.au . ADAS . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ Barsky, Steven M. (1997).

Spearfishing for Skin and Scuba Divers . Best Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-941332-59-0 .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-22 . Retrieved 2022-12-28 .

^ a b c d Rahn, H.; Yokoyama, T. (1965).

Physiology of Breath-Hold Diving and the Ama of Japan . United States: National Academy of Sciences - National Research Council.

ISBN 0-309-01341-0 .

^ Ganter, Regina (21 October 2010).

"Pearling" .

Queensland Historical Atlas .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2020 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ Denoble, Petar (1 May 2011).

"The Story of Sponge Divers" .

dan.org .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ a b Kler, Balvinder Kaur; Tribe, John (2012).

"Flourishing Through Scuba: Understanding the Pursuit of Dive Experiences" .

Tourism in Marine Environments .

8 (1/2): 19– 32.

doi : 10.3727/154427312X13262430524027 .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-21 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ Lucrezi, S; Milanese, M; Cerrano, C; Palma, M. (5 July 2019).

"The influence of scuba diving experience on divers' perceptions, and its implications for managing diving destinations" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (7): e0219306.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1419306L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0219306 .

PMC 6611629 .

PMID 31276482 .

^ "How cavern and cave diving differ" .

cavediving.com .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ Beneton, Frédéric; Michoud, Guillaume; Coulange, Mathieu; Laine, Nicolas; Ramdani, Céline; Borgnetta, Marc; Breton, Patricia; Guieu, Regis; Rostain, J. C.; Trousselard, Marion (18 December 2017).

"Recreational Diving Practice for Stress Management: An Exploratory Trial" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

8 : 2193.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02193 .

PMC 5741699 .

PMID 29326628 .

^ Finswimming - CMAS Rules version 2012/03 In force as from January 1, 2013 (BoD179 - 22/11/2012) . Rome: Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. 2012. pp.

2– 3.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2023 . Retrieved September 4, 2022 .

^ Ciglianoa, John A.; Meyer, Ryan; Ballard, Heidi L.; Freitag, Amy; Phillips, Tina B.; Wasserf, Ann (October 2015).

"Making marine and coastal citizen science matter" .

Ocean & Coastal Management .

115 . Elsevier Science Direct: 77– 87.

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2015.06.012 .

^ Lucrezi, Serena; Milanese, Martina; Palma, Marco; Cerrano, Carlo (16 August 2018).

"Stirring the strategic direction of scuba diving marine Citizen Science: A survey of active and potential participants" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (8): e0202484.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1302484L .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0202484 .

PMC 6095588 .

PMID 30114250 .

^ "Orienteering Rules Edition 2009/01" . Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2013 . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "The Search is in the Planning" . Canadian Harvard Aircraft Association Dive Recovery Team. 2008. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015.

^ "About Aquathlon" .

www.cmas.org . Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2022 .

^ Finswimming - CMAS Rules Version 2012/03 In force as from January 1, 2013 (BoD179 - 22/11/2012) . Rome: Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. 2012.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2023 . Retrieved September 4, 2022 .

^ "About Spearfishing" .

www.cmas.org . World Underwater Federation (CMAS). Archived from the original on 23 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ "Underwater Fishing (Spear fishing) International Rules - English version" .

www.cmas.org . World Underwater Federation (CMAS). 23 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ "International Rules Underwater Target Shooting" (PDF) . Stowarzyszente Spearfishing Poland.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 14 February 2013 .

^ a b c Class IV Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour. October 2007.

^ a b c Class III Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour. October 2007.

^ a b c Class II Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour. October 2007.

^ a b c US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . Washington, DC: US Naval Sea Systems Command. 2006. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 8 June 2008 .

^ Kay, E.; Spencer, M. P. (1999).

In water recompression .

48th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop . Vol. UHMS Publication Number RC103.C3. United States: Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. p. 108.

^ Pyle, R.L.; Youngblood, D.A. (1995). "In-water Recompression as an emergency field treatment of decompression illness".

AquaCorp .

11 .

^ Doolette, D.J.; Mitchell, S.J. (June 2018).

"In-water recompression" .

Diving Hyperb Med .

48 (2): 84– 95.

doi : 10.28920/dhm48.2.84-95 .

PMC 6156824 .

PMID 29888380 .

^ a b c d e f Code Of Practice for Diving in Benign Conditions (Report). Pretoria: The South African Department of Labour.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af US Navy (2006).

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 15 September 2016 .

^ a b c Staff.

"Standards for Training Organisations/System" . EUF Certification International.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 September 2013 .

^ a b c "ISO approves 6 Diving Standards" . WRSTC. 2013.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 September 2013 .

^ a b c Vary, Colin (1983).

Diving for crayfish in South Africa . Cape Town: C. Struik.

ISBN 0-86977-180-9 .

^ a b c Hendrikse, Sandra; Merks, André (12 May 2009).

"Diving the Skafandro suit" . Diving Heritage.

Archived from the original on 2020-05-14 . Retrieved 2016-09-18 .

^ a b c d e f "The Sport Committee" . Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques. Archived from the original on 2022-11-27 . Retrieved 2023-01-07 .

^ Staff: Mine health and safety inspectorate (31 January 2011).

Guideline For the Compilation of a Mandatory Code of Practice for a Diving Operations Procedure Manual for Underwater Mining Operations (PDF) . Arcadia: Department of mineral resources . Retrieved 26 September 2016 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐cnmx5
Cached time: 20250812131048
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.530 seconds
Real time usage: 1.739 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8591/1000000
Revision size: 89291/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 662972/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3894/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 363181/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.832/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10706358/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1247.959      1 -total
 55.24%  689.389      1 Template:Reflist
 22.32%  278.578     37 Template:Cite_web
 15.24%  190.128      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 14.84%  185.143      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.86%  160.457     27 Template:Cite_book
  8.57%  106.909     35 Template:Navbox
  8.03%  100.165     15 Template:Cite_journal
  5.24%   65.376      2 Template:Sfnp
  5.23%   65.248      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:460458:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812131048 and revision id 1298999307. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diving_activities&oldid=1298999307 " Category : Underwater diving Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Source attribution CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Articles to be expanded from September 2022 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diving activities Add languages Add topic

