Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ontology 2 Epistemology 3 Geographical dispersal 4 Criticism 5 Notable Cartesians 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Cartesianism 29 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Magyar 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical and scientific system of René Descartes Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Cartesianism is the philosophical and scientific system of René Descartes and its subsequent development by other seventeenth century thinkers, most notably François Poullain de la Barre , Nicolas Malebranche and Baruch Spinoza .

[ 1 ] Descartes is often regarded as the first thinker to emphasize the use of reason to develop the natural sciences .

[ 2 ] For him, philosophy was a thinking system that embodied all knowledge.

[ 3 ] Aristotle and St. Augustine 's work influenced Descartes's cogito argument .

[ 4 ] [ failed verification ] [ 5 ] Additionally, there is similarity between Descartes's work and that of Scottish philosopher George Campbell's 1776 publication, titled Philosophy of Rhetoric .

[ 6 ] In his Meditations on First Philosophy he writes, "[b]ut what then am I? A thing which thinks. What is a thing which thinks? It is a thing which doubts, understands, [conceives], affirms, denies, wills, refuses, which also imagines and feels." [ 7 ] Cartesians view the mind as being wholly separate from the corporeal body. Sensation and the perception of reality are thought to be the source of untruth and illusions, with the only reliable truths to be had in the existence of a metaphysical mind. Such a mind can perhaps interact with a physical body, but it does not exist in the body, nor even in the same physical plane as the body. The question of how mind and body interact would be a persistent difficulty for Descartes and his followers, with different Cartesians providing different answers.

[ 8 ] To this point Descartes wrote, "we should conclude from all this, that those things which we conceive clearly and distinctly as being diverse substances, as we regard mind and body to be, are really substances essentially distinct one from the other; and this is the conclusion of the Sixth Meditation." [ 7 ] Therefore, we can see that, while mind and body are indeed separate, because they can be separated from each other, but, Descartes postulates, the mind is a whole, inseparable from itself, while the body can become separated from itself to some extent, as in when one loses an arm or a leg.

Ontology [ edit ] Descartes held that all existence consists in three distinct substances, each with its own essence: [ 8 ] matter, possessing extension in three dimensions mind, possessing self-conscious thought God, possessing necessary existence Epistemology [ edit ] Descartes brought the question of how reliable knowledge may be obtained ( epistemology ) to the fore of philosophical enquiry. Many consider this to be Descartes' most lasting influence on the history of philosophy.

[ 9 ] Cartesianism is a form of rationalism because it holds that scientific knowledge can be derived a priori from ' innate ideas ' through deductive reasoning . Thus Cartesianism is opposed to both Aristotelianism and empiricism , with their emphasis on sensory experience as the source of all knowledge of the world.

[ 8 ] For Descartes, the faculty of deductive reason is supplied by God and may therefore be trusted because God would not deceive us.

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Geographical dispersal [ edit ] In the Netherlands , where Descartes had lived for a long time, Cartesianism was a doctrine popular mainly among university professors and lecturers. In Germany the influence of this doctrine was not relevant and followers of Cartesianism in the German-speaking border regions between these countries (e.g., the iatromathematician Yvo Gaukes from East Frisia) frequently chose to publish their works in the Netherlands. In France , it was very popular, and gained influence also among Jansenists such as Antoine Arnauld , though there also, as in Italy, it became opposed by the Church. In Italy , the doctrine failed to make inroads, probably since Descartes' works were placed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum in 1663.

[ 12 ] In England , because of religious and other reasons, Cartesianism was not widely accepted.

[ 12 ] Though Henry More was initially attracted to the doctrine, his own changing attitudes toward Descartes mirrored those of the country: "quick acceptance, serious examination with accumulating ambivalence, final rejection".

[ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] According to the Roman Catholic philosopher Jacques Maritain , Descartes eliminated the distinction between angelic and human minds, as if humans were angels inhabiting machines, a position that Maritain derided as "angelism".

[ 14 ] In Thomas Aquinas 's thought, angels are capable of an instantaneous knowledge that is not mediated by the human senses.

[ 15 ] (Descartes, for his part, dismissed Aquinas's cogitations on the knowledge of angels as "inept".

[ 16 ] ) Maritain's interpretation is only one of many interpretations of Descartes' view about the relationship of body and soul, and some interpretations portray Descartes as instead, for example, a Scholastic-Aristotelian hylomorphist or even a covert materialist.

[ 14 ] Étienne Gilson responded to Maritain by saying that if Descartes committed the sin of angelism it was not an " original sin " but had been committed first by Plato , Saint Augustine , Avicenna , and even the Bible .

[ 16 ] John Crowe Ransom called Maritain's accusation of angelism a "phantasy".

[ 17 ] According to C. F. Fowler, Descartes explicitly denied an identity between human minds and the angels, but sometimes used language in a way that was vulnerable to the opposite interpretation.

[ 16 ] Notable Cartesians [ edit ] Principia philosophiae , 1685 Antoine Arnauld [ 12 ] Balthasar Bekker [ 12 ] Tommaso Campailla [ 18 ] Johannes Clauberg [ 12 ] Michelangelo Fardella [ 12 ] Antoine Le Grand [ 12 ] Adriaan Heereboord [ 12 ] Nicolas Malebranche François Poullain de la Barre Edmond Pourchot Pierre-Sylvain Régis [ 12 ] Henricus Regius [ 12 ] Jacques Rohault [ 12 ] Christopher Wittich [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Cartesian coordinate system Mind–body dualism Meditations on First Philosophy Mentalism (psychology) Simulism References [ edit ] ^ Caird 1911 , p. 414.

^ Grosholz, Emily (1991).

Cartesian method and the problem of reduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-824250-6 .

But contemporary debate has tended to...understand [Cartesian method] merely as the 'method of doubt'...I want to define Descartes's method in broader terms...to trace its impact on the domains of mathematics and physics as well as metaphysics .

^ Descartes, René; Translator John Veitch.

"Letter of the Author to the French Translator of the Principles of Philosophy serving for a preface" . Retrieved 18 August 2013 .

{{ cite web }} : |author2= has generic name ( help ) ^ Steup, Matthias (2018), "Epistemology" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2018 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 22 September 2019 , retrieved 17 April 2019 ^ Menn, Stephen (2002).

Descartes and Augustine . Cambridge University Press. p. 6.

ISBN 0521012848 .

On the face of it, Descartes' philosophy bears many resemblances to the thought of Augustine. Indeed, we know of several people who within Descartes' lifetime were sufficiently struck by these resemblances to call them to Descartes' attention...

First, in order that we may begin with the things which are most manifest, I ask you whether you yourself exist. Are you afraid that you will be deceived in this questioning, seeing that you certainly cannot be deceived if you do not exist?

^ "BBC Radio 4 - In Our Time, Cogito Ergo Sum" .

BBC . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b Descartes, Rene (1996).

Meditations on First Philosophy (PDF) . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. p. 10.

^ a b c d "Cartesianism | philosophy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 27 January 2016 .

^ Ree, Jonathan (1991).

The Concise Encyclopedia of Western Philosophy and Philosophers . London: Routledge. p. 78.

ISBN 0415078830 .

^ Ree, Jonathan (1991).

The Concise Encyclopedia of Western Philosophy and Philosophers . London: Routledge. p. 75.

ISBN 0415078830 .

^ Kelly, Anthony (2006).

The Rise of Modern Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 123.

ISBN 9780198752769 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003).

A History of Philosophy, Volume 4 . Continuum International. p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-8264-6898-7 .

^ Lennon, Thomas M.; John M. Nicholas; John Whitney Davis (1982).

Problems of Cartesianism . McGill-Queen's Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-7735-1000-5 .

^ a b Lokhorst, Gert-Jan (Winter 2021).

"Descartes and the Pineal Gland, § 2.4: Body and Soul" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Kim, Courtney Guest (14 October 2021).

" Three Reformers: Luther, Descartes, Rousseau by Jacques Maritain: a Review" .

catholicreads.com . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ a b c Fowler, C. F. (1999).

Descartes on the Human Soul: Philosophy and the Demands of Christian Doctrine . Archives internationales d'histoire des idées. Vol. 60. Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers . pp.

156– 160.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-011-4804-7 .

ISBN 0792354737 .

OCLC 40043673 .

^ Ransom, John Crowe (January 1946). "Descartes's Angels: The Dream of Descartes by Jacques Maritain".

The Sewanee Review .

54 (1): 153–156 (155).

JSTOR 27537665 .

^ Cristofolini, Paul; " Campailla, Thomas " in Biographical Dictionary of Italians - Volume 17 (1974), Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana . Retrieved 30 September 2015 Bibliography [ edit ] Francisque Bouillier, Histoire de la philosophie cartésienne (2 volumes) Paris: Durand 1854 (reprint: BiblioBazaar 2010).

Caird, Edward (1911).

"Cartesianism" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

414– 426.

This contains a long review of the principles of Cartesian philosophy.

Eduard Jan Dijksterhuis, Descartes et le cartésianisme hollandais. Études et documents Paris: PUF 1951.

Garrod, Raphaële; Marr, Alexander, eds. (2020).

Descartes and the "Ingenium": The Embodied Soul in Cartesianism . Brill's Studies in Intellectual History. Vol. 323.

Leiden : Brill Publishers .

ISBN 978-90-04-43761-6 .

ISSN 0920-8607 .

Tad M. Schmaltz (ed.), Receptions of Descartes. Cartesianism and Anti-Cartesianism in Early Modern Europe New York: Routledge 2005.

Richard A. Watson, The Downfall of Cartesianism 1673–1712. A Study of Epistemological Issues in Late 17th Century Cartesianism The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff 1966.

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartesianism&oldid=1288072811 " Categories : Cartesianism René Descartes Dualism (philosophy of mind) Foundationalism Metatheory of science Rationalism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2017 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2020 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cartesianism 29 languages Add topic

