Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Details Toggle Details subsection 1.1 Bangladesh 1.2 Cambodia 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents National Adaptation Programme of Action 3 languages Español Hausa Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Climate change adaptation plan This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2016 ) A National Adaptation Programme of Action ( NAPA ) is a type of plan submitted to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) [ 1 ] by least developed countries , to describe the country's perception of its most "urgent and immediate needs to adapt to climate change".

[ 2 ] NAPAs are not supposed to include original research, but use existing information and include profiles of priority projects that are intended to address those needs that have been identified.

The UNFCCC maintains a database of NAPAs, [ 3 ] and of country priorities that have been identified within NAPAs.

[ 4 ] As of November 2011, it contained reports from 46 LDCs.

[ 3 ] The Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) was established to finance the preparation of NAPAs and to implement the projects that they propose.

[ 5 ] The LDCF currently has resources of at least US$415 million, of which US$177 million has been approved for 47 projects, attracting more than US$550 million in co-financing in the process.

[ 5 ] Details [ edit ] NAPAs are intended to provide LDCs with an opportunity to identify their "urgent and immediate needs" for adapting to climate change.

[ 6 ] As part of the NAPA process, LDC government ministries, typically assisted by development agencies, assess their countries' vulnerability to climate change and extreme weather events. LDCs then develop a prioritized list of adaptation projects that will help the country cope with the adverse effects of climate change. LDCs who submit NAPAs to the UNFCCC then become eligible for funding through the LDCF for NAPA projects. The LDCF was designed through the UNFCCC specifically to assist least developed countries, which are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change.

[ 7 ] To date, forty five LDCs have written and submitted NAPAs to the UNFCCC, with Nepal as the latest country to submit its NAPA in November 2010.

[ 8 ] Three more countries (Angola, Myanmar, and Timor Leste) are scheduled to complete their NAPAs by the end of 2011.

[ 9 ] Bangladesh [ edit ] The Bangladesh NAPA proposes a range of priority adaptation projects with a focus on building the country's resilience to the impacts of climate change. These projects are designed to be implemented over the short to medium term, with a view to protecting vulnerable communities and ecosystems in Bangladesh from the impacts of climate change.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Some of the key adaptation priorities identified in the Bangladesh NAPA include: Agriculture: The NAPA identifies the need to improve irrigation systems, promote drought-resistant crops, and introduce new agricultural technologies to help farmers cope with the impacts of climate change.

Water resources: The NAPA identifies the need to build small-scale water storage facilities, improve water management practices, and protect water sources from contamination.

Health: The NAPA identifies the need to improve disease surveillance systems, strengthen health infrastructure, and promote public awareness about the health impacts of climate change.

Coastal zones: The NAPA identifies the need to build coastal embankments, improve early warning systems for cyclones and storm surges, and promote alternative livelihoods for coastal communities.

Infrastructure: The NAPA identifies the need to improve the resilience of infrastructure to the impacts of climate change, such as by building flood shelters and strengthening transportation networks.

Cambodia [ edit ] The National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) in Cambodia was developed to address the country's urgent and immediate needs for adapting to the impacts of climate change. Cambodia is highly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, including increased frequency and intensity of floods and droughts, as well as the potential loss of agricultural productivity and fisheries.

[ 12 ] The projects are designed to be implemented over the short to medium term, with a view to protecting vulnerable communities and ecosystems in Cambodia from the impacts of climate change.

See also [ edit ] Local Adaptation Plans of Action Climate change adaptation References [ edit ] ^ "UNFCCC: National Reports" .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2011 . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ "UNFCCC: National Adaptation Programmes of Action" .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2009 . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ a b "UNFCCC Database of NAPAs" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ "UNFCCC Database of NAPA priorities" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ a b "GEF website: about the LDCF" .

Global Environment Facility .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2011 . Retrieved 16 November 2011 .

^ "UNFCCC Conference of the Parties, Seventh Meeting" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 December 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ "UNFCCC Conference of the Parties, Article 4.9" .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2013 . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ "UNFCCC, NAPAs Received by the Secretariat" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2011 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ "Global Environment Facility, Least Developed Countries Fund" . 2 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ "Bangladesh National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) | UNDP Climate Change Adaptation" .

www.adaptation-undp.org .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

^ "National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA)" (PDF) .

Ministry of Environment and Forest Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

^ "National Adaptation Plan Process in Cambodia" (PDF) . General Secretariat of National Council for Sustainable Development/Ministry of Environment, Kingdom of Cambodia.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 – via United Nations Climate Change.

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Adaptation_Programme_of_Action&oldid=1233932026 " Category : Climate change policy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2016 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 11 July 2024, at 17:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Adaptation Programme of Action 3 languages Add topic

