Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Surfactants 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Lipophilicity 30 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Lipophilia" redirects here. For the paraphilia, see Fat fetishism .

Affinity of a molecule or a moiety for a lipophilic environment Lipophilicity (from Greek λίπος "fat" and φίλος "friendly") is the ability of a chemical compound to dissolve in fats , oils , lipids , and non-polar solvents such as hexane or toluene . Such compounds are called lipophilic (translated as "fat-loving" or "fat-liking" [ 1 ] [ 2 ] ). Such non-polar solvents are themselves lipophilic, and the adage "like dissolves like" generally holds true. Thus lipophilic substances tend to dissolve in other lipophilic substances, whereas hydrophilic ("water-loving") substances tend to dissolve in water and other hydrophilic substances.

Lipophilicity, hydrophobicity, and non-polarity may describe the same tendency towards participation in the London dispersion force , as the terms are often used interchangeably. However, the terms "lipophilic" and " hydrophobic " are not synonymous, as can be seen with silicones and fluorocarbons , which are hydrophobic but not lipophilic.

[ citation needed ] Surfactants [ edit ] Hydrocarbon -based surfactants are compounds that are amphiphilic (or amphipathic), having a hydrophilic, water interactive "end", referred to as their "head group", and a lipophilic "end", usually a long chain hydrocarbon fragment, referred to as their "tail". They congregate at low energy surfaces, including the air-water interface (lowering surface tension ) and the surfaces of the water-immiscible droplets found in oil/water emulsions (lowering interfacial tension). At these surfaces they naturally orient themselves with their head groups in water and their tails either sticking up and largely out of water (as at the air-water interface) or dissolved in the water-immiscible phase that the water is in contact with (e.g. as the emulsified oil droplet). In both these configurations the head groups strongly interact with water while the tails avoid all contact with water. Surfactant molecules also aggregate in water as micelles with their head groups sticking out and their tails bunched together.

Micelles draw oily substances into their hydrophobic cores, explaining the basic action of soaps and detergents used for personal cleanliness and for laundering clothes. Micelles are also biologically important for the transport of fatty substances in the small intestine surface in the first step that leads to the absorption of the components of fats (largely fatty acids and 2-monoglycerides).

[ citation needed ] Cell membranes are bilayer structures principally formed from phospholipids , molecules which have a highly water interactive, ionic phosphate head groups attached to two long alkyl tails.

[ citation needed ] By contrast, fluorosurfactants are not amphiphilic or detergents because fluorocarbons are not lipophilic.

[ citation needed ] Oxybenzone , a common cosmetic ingredient often used in sunscreens, penetrates the skin particularly well because it is not very  lipophilic.

[ 3 ] Anywhere from 0.4% to 8.7% of oxybenzone can be absorbed after one topical sunscreen application, as measured in urine excretions.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Ionic partition diagram ITIES Lipophilic bacteria Lipophobicity Microemulsion References [ edit ] ^ Compendium of Chemical Terminology , lipophilic , accessed 15 Jan 2007.

^ Alyn William Johnson (1999).

Invitation to Organic Chemistry . Jones & Bartlett Learning. p.

283 .

ISBN 978-0-7637-0432-2 .

^ Hanson KM, Gratton E, Bardeen CJ. (2006). "Sunscreen enhancement of UV-induced reactive oxygen species in the skin".

Free Radical Biology & Medicine 41(8): 1205–1212 ^ H. Gonzalez, H., Farbrot, A., Larko. O., and Wennberg, A. M. (2006). "Percutaneous absorption of the sunscreen benzophenone-3 after repeated whole-body applications, with and without ultraviolet irradiation".

British Journal of Dermatology , 154:337–340.

v t e Chemical solutions Solution Ideal solution Aqueous solution Solid solution Buffer solution Flory–Huggins Mixture Suspension Colloid Phase diagram Phase separation Eutectic point Alloy Saturation Supersaturation Serial dilution Dilution (equation) Apparent molar property Miscibility gap Concentration and related quantities Molar concentration Mass concentration Number concentration Volume concentration Normality Molality Mole fraction Mass fraction Isotopic abundance Mixing ratio Ternary plot Total dissolved solids Solubility Solubility equilibrium Solvation Solvation shell Enthalpy of solution Lattice energy Raoult's law Henry's law Solubility table (data) Solubility chart Miscibility Solvent ( Category ) Acid dissociation constant Protic solvent Polar aprotic solvent Inorganic nonaqueous solvent Solvation List of boiling and freezing information of solvents Partition coefficient Polarity Hydrophobe Hydrophile Lipophilic Amphiphile Lyonium ion Lyate ion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lipophilicity&oldid=1219888615 " Category : Chemical properties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 This page was last edited on 20 April 2024, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lipophilicity 30 languages Add topic

