Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Advantages and disadvantages 3 Efficiency 4 Development 5 Examples 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Solar pond 12 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski עברית 日本語 Polski Slovenščina Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Solar thermal energy For the fictional character by August Derleth, see Solar Pons .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Solar pond" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Diagram of a solar pond A solar pond is a pool of saltwater which collects and stores solar thermal energy.  The saltwater naturally forms a vertical salinity gradient also known as a " halocline ", in which low-salinity water floats on top of high-salinity water.  The layers of salt solutions increase in concentration (and therefore density) with depth.  Below a certain depth, the solution has a uniformly high salt concentration.

Description [ edit ] When the sun's rays contact the bottom of a shallow pool, they heat the water adjacent to the bottom. When water at the bottom of the pool is heated, it becomes less dense than the cooler water above it, and convection begins. Solar ponds heat water by impeding this convection. Salt is added to the water until the lower layers of water become completely saturated . High-salinity water at the bottom of the pond does not mix readily with the low-salinity water above it, so when the bottom layer of water is heated, convection occurs separately in the bottom and top layers, with only mild mixing between the two. This greatly reduces heat loss, and allows for the high-salinity water to get up to 90 °C while maintaining 30 °C low-salinity water.

[ 1 ] This hot, salty water can then be pumped away for use in electricity generation, through a turbine or as a source of thermal energy.

Advantages and disadvantages [ edit ] The approach is particularly attractive for rural areas in developing countries .  Very large area collectors can be set up for just the cost of the clay or plastic pond liner.

The accumulating salt crystals have to be removed and can be a valuable by-product and a maintenance expense.

No need for a separate collector.

The extremely large thermal mass means power is generated night and day.

Relatively low-temperature operation means solar energy conversion is typically less than 2%.

[ 2 ] Due to evaporation, non-saline water is constantly required to maintain salinity gradients.

Efficiency [ edit ] The energy obtained is in the form of low-grade heat of 70 to 80 °C compared to an assumed 20 °C ambient temperature.  According to the second law of thermodynamics (see Carnot-cycle ), the maximum theoretical efficiency of a cycle that uses heat from a high temperature reservoir at 80 °C and has a lower temperature of 20 °C is 1−(273+20)/(273+80)=17%.  By comparison, a power plant's heat engine delivering high-grade heat at 800 °C would have a maximum theoretical limit of 73% for converting heat into useful work (and thus would be forced to divest as little as 27% in waste heat to the cold temperature reservoir at 20 °C). The low efficiency of solar ponds is usually justified with the argument that the 'collector', being just a plastic-lined pond, might potentially result in a large-scale system that is of lower overall levelised energy cost than a solar concentrating system .

Development [ edit ] Further research is aimed at addressing the problems, such as the development of membrane ponds. These use a thin permeable membrane to separate the layers without allowing salt to pass through.

Examples [ edit ] Solar Evaporation Ponds in the Atacama Desert The largest operating solar pond for electricity generation was the Beit HaArava pond built in Israel and operated up until 1988. It had an area of 210,000 m 2 (2,300,000 sq ft) and gave an electrical output of 5 MW.

[ 3 ] India was the first Asian country to have established a solar pond in Bhuj , in Gujarat.  The project was sanctioned under the National Solar Pond Programme by the Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources in 1987 and completed in 1993 after a sustained collaborative effort by TERI, the Gujarat Energy Development Agency, and the GDDC (Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation Ltd). The solar pond successfully demonstrated the expediency of the technology by supplying 80,000 litres of hot water daily to the plant. It is designed to supply about 22,000,000 kWh [ citation needed ] of thermal energy annually .

The Energy and Resources Institute provided all technical inputs and took up the complete execution of research, development, and demonstration.  TERI operated and maintained this facility until 1996 before handing it over to the GDDC.  The solar pond functioned effortlessly till the year 2000 when severe financial losses crippled GDDC.  Subsequently, the Bhuj earthquake left the Kutch Dairy non-functional.

[ 4 ] The 0.8-acre (3,200 m 2 ) solar pond powering 20% of Bruce Foods Corporation's operations in El Paso, Texas is the second largest in the U.S.  It is also the first ever salt-gradient solar pond in the U.S.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Renewable energy portal Ocean thermal energy conversion Ice pond Seasonal thermal energy storage (STES) Thermal storage Deep lake water cooling Cooling pond Salt evaporation pond References [ edit ] ^ G. Boyle. Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future, 2nd ed.

^ G. Boyle. Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future, 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2004.

^ C, Nielsen; A, Akbarzadeh; J, Andrews; HRL, Becerra; P, Golding (2005), The History of Solar Pond Science and Technology , Proceedings of the 2005 Solar World Conference, Orlando, FL {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Solar Gradient Solar Ponds , Teriin, archived from the original on 26 October 2008 , retrieved 28 November 2009 .

^ "A". 2012.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.680.7971 .

External links [ edit ] The El Paso Solar Pond , University of Texas, archived from the original on 2013-06-04 , retrieved 2013-09-25 .

Bhuj Solar Pond in India , Teriin, archived from the original on April 2, 2007 .

"Israel's 150 KW Solar Pond" , Mother Earth news , May–Jun 1980 .

Research ponds and real world project at Pyramid Salt , Pyramid Hill, Northern Victoria, AU : Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, archived from the original on 2012-02-05 .

v t e Ponds , pools, and puddles Ponds Ash pond Balancing lake Ballast pond Beel Cooling pond Detention pond Dew pond Evaporation pond Facultative lagoon Garden pond Ice pond Immersion pond Infiltration basin Kettle pond Log pond Melt pond Mill pond Polishing pond Raceway pond Retention pond Sag pond Salt evaporation pond Sediment pond Settling pond Solar pond Stepwell Stew pond Tailings Tarn Waste pond Waste stabilization pond Pools Anchialine pool Brine pool Infinity pool Natural pool Ocean pool Plunge pool Reflecting pool Spent fuel pool Stream pool Swimming pool Tide pool Vernal pool Puddles Bird bath Coffee ring effect Puddle Puddles on a surface Seep puddle Biome Beaver dam Duck pond Fish pond Goldfish pond Koi pond Ecosystems Aquatic ecosystem Freshwater ecosystem Lake ecosystem Related Aerated lagoon Bakki shower Big fish–little pond Body of water Constructed wetland Full pond Hydric soil Phytotelma Pond of Abundance Pond liner Ponding Puddle (M C Escher) Spring Swimming hole Water aeration Water garden Water Lilies (Monet) Well Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solar_pond&oldid=1292934525 " Categories : Energy storage Ponds Solar thermal energy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solar pond 12 languages Add topic

