Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Demography 2 History 3 Culture 4 Education 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents French Australians 2 languages Français 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Ethnic group French Australians Australiens d'origine française ( French ) Total population French 36,028 (by birth, 2021) [ 1 ] 148,922 (by ancestry, 2021) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations France-born people by state or territory New South Wales 8,936 Victoria 5,615 Queensland 4,980 Western Australia 2,792 Languages Australian English French Religion Roman Catholic Protestant ( Huguenot ) Related ethnic groups French people Canadian Australians Québécois Cajuns Acadians Franco-Mauritians French New Zealanders Part of a series of articles on the French people Native communities France Italy ( Aosta ) Diaspora Africa Algeria Madagascar Mauritius Namibia ( Afrikaners ) Réunion 1 Senegal Seychelles South Africa ( Afrikaners ) Asia Hong Kong India Japan Korea Pakistan Middle East Israel Jews Lebanon Turkey United Arab Emirates Europe United Kingdom ( Huguenots ) Netherlands ( Huguenots ) Germany (pre-1918) Hungary Spain Portugal North America Cuba French Antilles 1 Guatemala Haiti Jamaica Mexico Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis United States French Louisianians Cajuns Muskrat French French Canadians Huguenots Breton Corsican Basque Canada Acadians Brayon Basque Québécois Franco-Ontarians Franco-Manitoban Fransaskois Franco-Albertan Franco-Columbian Franco-Yukonnais Franco-Ténois Franco-Newfoundlander Franco-Nunavois Saint Pierre and Miquelon 1 South America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Peru Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia New Caledonia 1 New Zealand 1 Overseas parts of France proper Migration of minorities in France (i.e.

Basques ) can be considered as separate (ethnically) or French migration (by nationality).

Culture Religion Literature Music Cinema Architecture Sport Cuisine Dress Symbols Cultural Heritage sites History History of France Napoleonic wars Language French Walloon Breton Romance Other List of French people People of French descent Basques Bretons Walloons Corsican immigration to Puerto Rico v t e French Australians ( French : Australiens d'origine française ), are Australian citizens or residents of French ancestry, or French-born people who reside in Australia . According to the 2021 Census , there were 148,922 people of French descent in Australia and 36,028 French-born people residing in the country. The largest French Australian community is in the state of New South Wales .

Demography [ edit ] People with French ancestry as a percentage of the population in Sydney divided geographically by postal area, as of the 2011 census.

According to the 2006 Australian census, 98,332 Australians (or 0.47% of the population) claim French ancestry, either alone or with another ancestry.

[ 3 ] Of these, 19,186 were born in France [ 4 ] and 12,735 of them had since acquired Australian citizenship .

[ 5 ] 8,281 (or 43%) of the residents born in France had arrived in Australia in 1979 or earlier.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Bruni d'Entrecasteaux , Jean-Michel Huon de Kermadec , Lapérouse , Louis Antoine de Bougainville , Jules Dumont d'Urville , Nicolas Baudin , François Péron and Marc-Joseph Marion du Fresne were some of the early European explorers to reach the continent.

Francis Barrallier explored the Blue Mountains .

Many Australians with French ancestry are descended from Huguenot refugees. Some of the earliest Huguenots to arrive in Australia held prominent positions in English society, notably Jane Franklin and Charles La Trobe .

Others who came later were from poorer Huguenot families. They migrated to Australia from England in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to escape the poverty in the East End of London , notably in the Huguenot enclaves of Spitalfields and Bethnal Green . Their impoverishment had been brought about by the effect of the Industrial Revolution , which caused the collapse of the Huguenot-dominated silk-weaving industry.

A number of French orders of priests, nuns and brothers have contributed to the Catholic Church in Australia . They included the teaching orders of the De La Salle Brothers , [ 6 ] Marist Brothers [ 7 ] and Marist Sisters . The prominent school St Joseph's College, Hunters Hill was founded by the French Marist Brother Emilian Pontet in 1881. The Marist Fathers staffed parishes and conducted missionary activities in the South Pacific .

[ 8 ] The Missionaries of the Sacred Heart , based in Kensington, New South Wales , ran missions in remote Australia and New Guinea.

[ 9 ] French architectural influence is still visible in Hunters Hill , not only in church buildings but also but in private houses built by the unusually large number of French settlers in the suburb.

[ 10 ] The largest post-war increase in French migration to Australia came during the 1960s and 1970s; unlike many other European countries, France did not establish a migration scheme in the immediate post-war period due to chronic underemployment, despite Australia seeing the French as some of the most desirable immigrants to obtain during that era.

[ 11 ] Since that time, there has only been a small flow of French immigrants to Australia. Many people in the French-Australian community now originate from French overseas territories , especially New Caledonia .

Culture [ edit ] Today, the Brisbane French Festival , held over the Bastille Day weekend, is Australia's biggest French festival.

[ 12 ] Participants include both French-born Australians and Australians of more distant French ancestry.

Alliance Française has an active presence in most Australian cities, teaching the French language, holding cultural events such as Beaujolais Nouveau festivals and sponsoring the nation's annual French film festival.

[ 13 ] SBS has also done much to increase the popularity of French cinema and culture with Australian audiences, though Hollywood still predominates with mainstream audiences.

Some Australians of French Huguenot descent have completely assimilated into the country's predominantly Anglo-Saxon culture but most still quietly but tenaciously hold on to as many aspects as they can of their French heritage and identify themselves very much as Huguenots, even hundreds of years after being exiled. The Huguenot Society of Australia does much to encourage Australian Huguenots to embrace their cultural heritage and provides genealogical research services.

[ 14 ] French cuisine has influenced the nation with French-inspired cafes, restaurants and boulangeries to be found in most major cities.

[ 15 ] French immigrant chefs, particularly those who appear on television, have done much to promote French cooking and food philosophy, including a growing understanding of the concept of terroir .

The French Benevolent Society has an active presence in the nation, providing a support network for elderly and incapacitated French Australians.

[ 16 ] Most of the French-born people in Australia are Roman Catholics and the Reformed Church of France (Église Réformée de France) is yet to establish a presence in the country, despite the vibrant group of Australians of Huguenot descent. However, Taizé -style services are becoming increasingly popular with both Roman Catholics and Protestants from a variety of denominations. Taizé provides one of the key grassroots ecumenical movements in the nation.

Education [ edit ] French international schools in Australia include: Lycée Condorcet (Sydney) Telopea Park School (Canberra) Auburn High School (Melbourne) Tingalpa State School/École publique de Tingalpa (Brisbane) [ 17 ] École maternelle franco-australienne Red Hill (Canberra) [ 18 ] Section Française de Caulfield Junior College/École française de Melbourne (Melbourne) [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] France portal Australia portal Alliance française Australia–France relations Bretons Caldoche Canadian Australians Dragonnade European Australians Europeans in Oceania French diaspora History of France Huguenot cross Huguenot Immigration to Australia List of Huguenots Reformed Church of France Religion in France Revocation of the Edict of Nantes Taizé Community References [ edit ] ^ "Birthplace" . Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

^ "Ancestry" . Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

^ "2006 Census of Population and Housing: Australia: Ancestry (full classification list) by sex" .

2006 Census .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original (XLS) on 10 March 2008 . Retrieved 19 May 2008 .

^ "20680-Country of Birth of Person (full classification list) by Sex – Australia" .

2006 Census .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Archived from the original (XLS) on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 27 May 2008 .

^ a b "2914.0.55.002 2006 Census Ethnic Media Package" (XLS) .

Census Dictionary, 2006 (cat.no 2901.0) .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 27 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 .

^ C. Moe, Hardly a soft landing: the first Australian foundation of the De La Salle Brothers - Armidale 1906, Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 28 (2007), 67-73.

^ N.A. Dennis, Pioneer Marist Brothers in Sydney, Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 19 (1998), 65-73.

^ A.P. Jeffcott, The coming of the Marist Fathers to Australia and the history of Villa Maria, Sydney, Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 3 (2) (1970), 13-28.

^ J. Franklin, Catholic missions to Aboriginal Australia: An evaluation of their overall effect , Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 37 (1) (2016), 45-68.

^ B. Sherry, Hunters Hill , Dictionary of Sydney , 2008.

^ Bouvet, Eric (August 2007).

"French migration to Australia in the post WWII period: Benevolent tolerance and cautious collaboration" (PDF) .

Flinders University Languages Group Online Review .

3 (2). Flinders University.

ISSN 1446-9219 . Retrieved 6 January 2017 .

^ "En collaboration avec l'Alliance Française" . Brisbane French Festival.

^ "Alliance Francaise French Film Festival 2016 in Australia" . affrenchfilmfestival.org . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ The Huguenot Society of Australia.

"Welcome to The Huguenot Society of Australia Website" . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ "Guide for all French products and services like French travel & restaurants" . French Australia. Archived from the original on 31 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 April 2016 .

^ "Accueil et Futurs Evénéments - French Benevolent Association of South Australia" . Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 31 May 2012 .

^ "Tingalpa State school - École publique de Tingalpa" (in French).

Agency for French Education Abroad . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

^ "École maternelle franco-australienne Red Hill" (in French).

Agency for French Education Abroad . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

^ "École française de Melbourne" (in French).

Agency for French Education Abroad . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

External links [ edit ] French Embassy France in Australia French Benevolent Society Huguenot Society of Australia Alliance Française (Brisbane Branch) French Schools in Australia French Australia Chamber of Commerce and Industry French Association of the North Shore (Sydney) Eglise Réformée de France French Connection: Early French Explorers of Tasmania Tasmania's Historic French Gardens Tassie's French Connection France in Tasmania Napoleon Bonaparte: Notable Australian Connections How Very French History of the Huguenots French culture in Australia Barko, Ivan (2008).

"French" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

(French in Sydney) v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e French diaspora Africa Algeria White Africans of European ancestry Mauritius Namibia ( Afrikaners ) Réunion 1 Senegal Asia Hong Kong India Japan Korea Pakistan Middle East Israel Lebanon Turkey United Arab Emirates Europe Hungary Netherlands ( Huguenots ) Poland ( Huguenots ) United Kingdom ( Huguenots ) North America Canada Acadians Brayon Basque Franco-Albertans Franco-Columbian Franco-Manitoban Franco-Nunavois Franco-Ontarian Franco-Ténois Franco-Newfoundlander Franco-Yukonnais Fransaskois Québécois Saint Pierre and Miquelon 1 Cuba French Antilles 1 Guatemala Haiti Jamaica Mexico Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis United States Cajuns French Canadians Huguenots Breton Corsican Basque Oceania Australia New Caledonia 1 French Polynesia 1 New Zealand South America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Peru Uruguay See also Basques Bretons Walloons Corsican immigration to Puerto Rico 1 Overseas parts of France proper Migration of minorities in France (i.e.

Basques ) can be considered as separate (ethnically) or French migration (by nationality).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_Australians&oldid=1300726867 " Categories : European diaspora in Australia French diaspora by country Australian people of French descent French diaspora in Australia French-Australian culture Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2019 Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Articles containing French-language text "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents French Australians 2 languages Add topic

