Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 China 2 Major works 3 Notes 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Joachim Bouvet 10 languages Català Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Jesuit Joachim Bouvet Plate from Joachim Bouvet's Etat présent de la Chine (1697) Chinese 白晋 or 白進 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Bái Jìn Wade–Giles Pái Chìn IPA [pǎɪ tɕîn] Courtesy name Chinese 明远 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Míng Yuǎn Wade–Giles Míng Yüǎn Yale Romanization Míng Ywǎn Joachim Bouvet ( Chinese : 白晋 or 白進 , courtesy name: 明远) (July 18, 1656, in Le Mans – June 28, 1730, in Peking) was a French Jesuit who worked in China , and the leading member of the Figurist movement.

China [ edit ] Bouvet was born in Le Mans , France; he entered the Society of Jesus in 1673. He went to China in 1687, as one of six Jesuits, the first group of French missionaries to China, sent by Louis XIV of France , under Superior Jean de Fontaney .

[ 1 ] Before setting out for their destination, he and his associates were admitted to the French Académie des Sciences and were commissioned by that learned body to carry on astronomical observations, to determine the geographical positions of the various places they were to visit, and to collect various scientific data.

[ 2 ] The group, after being provided with all necessary scientific instruments, by order of the king, sailed from Brest , 3 March 1685, with Father Fontaney as Superior. After spending some time in Siam , they finally arrived in Peking, 7 February 1688. The Jesuits were well received by the Kangxi Emperor . Bouvet and Jean-François Gerbillon stayed at Peking , teaching the emperor mathematics and astronomy.

[ 2 ] While engaged in this work, the two Jesuits wrote several mathematical treatises in the Tatar language which the emperor caused to be translated into Chinese , adding the prefaces himself. The emperor also granted them a site within the Imperial City enclosure for a church and residence which were finally completed in 1702.

[ 2 ] Bouvet later served as the Chinese emperor's envoy to France, and returned to his home country in 1697 with instructions from the emperor to obtain new missionaries. Kangxi made him the bearer of a gift of forty-nine volumes in Chinese for the French king. These were deposited in the Royal Library, and Louis XIV, in turn, commissioned Father Bouvet to present to the emperor a magnificently bound collection of engravings. During his sojourn in France, he corresponded with Leibniz and published two works about China. In 1698, Bouvet chartered the ship Amphitrite , registering it as a warship to avoid customs duties.

[ 3 ] In 1699 Bouvet arrived in China for the second time, accompanied by ten missionaries, among them Joseph Henri Marie de Prémare , Jean-Baptiste Régis , and Dominique Parrenin .

[ 4 ] Kangxi honored Bouvet further with the title of interpreter to his son, the heir-apparent.

A diagram of I Ching hexagrams sent by Bouvet to the German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1701.

[ 5 ] In 1700, with four of his fellow missionaries, Bouvet presented a memorialto the emperor, asking for a decision as to the meaning attached to the various ceremonies of the Chinese in honor of Confucius and their ancestors. The emperor, who had taken a keen interest in the controversy regarding the ceremonies , replied that they were simply civil usages, having no religious significance whatsoever. The memorial, together with the emperors reply, was published in the Peking Gazette but failed to allay the excitement then raging in Europe over the question. In 1706, Kangxi decided to send Bouvet to the Vatican to settle the Chinese Rites controversy but later changed his mind.

From 1708 to 1715, Bouvet and Jean-Baptiste Régis were engaged in a survey of the country and the preparation of maps of its various provinces.

As a sinologist, Bouvet focused his research on I Ching . Trying to find a connection between the Chinese classics and the Bible , Bouvet came to the conclusion that the Chinese had known the whole truth of the Christian tradition in ancient times and that this truth could be found in the Chinese classics. Even though he had some of his texts published, none of Bouvet's more extreme Figurist texts was published until the mid-19th century.

Bouvet died in Peking on June 28, 1730.

[ 6 ] His gravestone stele is on display at the Stone Carving Museum of Beijing (at the Five Pagoda Temple ) together with the gravestone steles of Father Gerbillon, and Father Regis.

Major works [ edit ] Etat présent de la Chine, en figures gravées par P. Giffart sur les dessins apportés au roi par le P. J. Bouvet (Paris, 1697) Portrait historique de l'empereur de la Chine (Paris, 1697) Notes [ edit ] ^ Witek, John W. "Joachim Bouvet", Biographical Dictionary of Chinese Christianity , 1998 ^ a b c Brock, Henry. "Joachim Bouvet." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 8 March 2023 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Sullivan, Michael (1989).

The Meeting of Eastern and Western Art . University of California Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-520-05902-3 .

^ Kupfer, Peter (2008).

Youtai - Presence and Perception of Jews and Judaism in China . Peter Lang. p. 256.

ISBN 9783631575338 .

^ Perkins, Franklin.

Leibniz and China: A Commerce of Light . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. p 117. Print.

^ von Collani, Claudia.

"Biography of Joachim Bouvet SJ, China missionary" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 31 July 2016 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Joachim Bouvet ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

References [ edit ] Li, Shenwen, 2001, Stratégies missionnaires des Jésuites Français en Nouvelle-France et en Chine au XVIIieme siècle , Les Presses de l'Université Laval, L'Harmattan, ISBN 2-7475-1123-5 Short biography in the Hong Kong Catholic diocesan Archive See also [ edit ] France-China relations Religion in China List of Roman Catholic missionaries in China Jesuit China missions Christianity in China List of Roman Catholic scientist-clerics v t e Christianity in China Foundations Timeline of Chinese history Christianity Catholic Church in China Catholic Church in Sichuan Catholic Church in Shaanxi Catholic Church in Tibet Protestantism in China Protestantism in Sichuan Chinese Orthodox Church Terms for God Tianzhu Shen Shangdi Bible translations Delegates' Version Chinese Union Version Studium Biblicum Version Chinese New Version Today's Chinese Version Hymns Hymns of Universal Praise Chinese New Hymnal Canaan Hymns Mission history Church of the East Xi'an Stele Jingjiao Documents Mogao Christian painting Murals from the Christian temple at Qocho Alopen Adam Catholic Franciscan missions (Yuan) Jesuit missions (Ming) Foreign Missions Society John of Montecorvino Odoric of Pordenone Giovanni de' Marignolli Francis Xavier Matteo Ricci Joachim Bouvet Angelo Zottoli Frédéric-Vincent Lebbe Chinese Rites controversy Martyr Saints of China St. Paul's College, Macau Protestant Agencies Medical missions in China Robert Morrison Karl Gützlaff Divie Bethune McCartee Hudson Taylor Lottie Moon Timothy Richard Jonathan Goforth Cambridge Seven Eric Liddell Gladys Aylward (more...) By province and region East Christianity in Anhui Christianity in Fujian Christianity in Jiangsu Christianity in Jiangxi Christianity in Shandong Christianity in Shanghai Christianity in Zhejiang West Christianity in Chongqing Christianity in Gansu Christianity in Guizhou Christianity in Ningxia Christianity in Qinghai Christianity in Shaanxi Christianity in Sichuan Christianity in Tibet Christianity in Xinjiang Christianity in Yunnan Central Christianity in Henan Christianity in Hubei Christianity in Hunan North Christianity in Beijing Christianity in Hebei Christianity in Heilongjiang Christianity in Inner Mongolia Christianity in Jilin Christianity in Liaoning Christianity in Shanxi Christianity in Tianjin South Christianity in Guangdong Christianity in Guangxi Christianity in Hainan Christianity in Hong Kong Christianity in Macau Chinese Christians (by period of prominence) Ming Candida Xu Xu Guangqi Yang Tingyun Qing Hong Xiuquan Liang Fa Xi Shengmo Republic T. C. Chao Chiang Kai-shek Cheng Jingyi Deng Yuzhi (Cora Deng) Feng Yuxiang Francis Hsu Jia Yuming Lu Zhengxiang Ma Xiangbo Watchman Nee Mary Stone (Shi Meiyu) John Sung Sun Yat-sen Tseng Pao-sun Wang Ming-Dao Francis C. M. Wei Paul Wei John Ching Hsiung Wu Wu Leichuan Wu Yi-fang Y. C. James Yen Ying Lianzhi Dora Yu Paul Yu Pin David Z. T. Yui People's Republic Joseph Gu He Guanghu Aloysius Jin Luxian Ignatius Kung Pin-Mei Samuel Lamb Lin Shengben Liu Xiaofeng Lü Xiaomin Matthias Lu K. H. Ting Wang Weifan Wang Yi Y. T. Wu Allen Yuan Zhao Fusan Church-state relations in People's Republic Catholic Patriotic Association Underground church The Christian Manifesto Protestant Lianghui Three-Self Patriotic Movement China Christian Council Seminaries House church Events Rites controversy Century of humiliation Opium Wars Taiping Rebellion Yangzhou riot Boxer Rebellion Tianjin Massacre Xinhai Revolution Anti-Christian Movement Nanjing incident Chinese Civil War Second Sino-Japanese War Denunciation Movement Cultural Revolution Boluan Fanzheng Impact Science and technology Anti-sex-selective abortion Anti-footbinding campaign Anti-opium campaign Chinese Roman Type Cantonese Roman Type Chinese Christian Colleges Manchurian revival Sino-Christian theology Interdenominational organisations China Christian Council National Christian Council of China Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy 2 Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joachim_Bouvet&oldid=1284094135 " Categories : 1656 births 1730 deaths People from Le Mans 17th-century French Jesuits French cartographers Jesuit missionaries in China French missionaries in China French sinologists Catholic clergy scientists 18th-century French Jesuits French Roman Catholic missionaries French expatriates in China Jesuit scientists Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joachim Bouvet 10 languages Add topic

