Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition in Hinduism 2 Importance of kama in Hinduism Toggle Importance of kama in Hinduism subsection 2.1 Relative precedence among artha and dharma 2.2 Necessity for existence 2.3 Holistic 2.4 Stages of life 2.5 Deity 3 In Buddhism Toggle In Buddhism subsection 3.1 Kama in Buddhist cosmology 3.2 Kama in Buddhist doctrine 3.3 Kama in monastic law and precepts 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kama 37 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Lietuvių मराठी မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip සිංහල தமிழ் ไทย Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept of pleasure, enjoyment and desire in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism For the Hindu god, see Kamadeva . For other uses, see Kama (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Karma .

Kama Erotic sculptures of Khajuraho Kamadeva whose arrows trigger desire The Gods Sing and Dance for Shiva and Parvati , late 18th century, depicting season of spring Aesthetic pleasure from the arts and nature [ 1 ] Holi festival, where Hindus enjoy celebrating colours, love and spring Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Part of a series on Love Red-outline heart icon Types of love Affection Bonding Broken heart Compassionate love Conjugal love Courtly love courtship troubadours Falling in love Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Infatuation Interpersonal relationship Intimacy Limerence Love addiction Love at first sight Love triangle Lovesickness Lovestruck Obsessive love Parental love Passion Passionate and companionate love Platonic love Puppy love Queerplatonic relationship Romance Self-love Amour de soi Unconditional love Unrequited love Social views Anarchist Free love Patriotism Chinese Ren Yuanfen French Amour-propre Greek words for love Agape Eros Ludus Mania Philautia Philia Pistis Pragma Storgḗ Xenia Indian Kama Bhakti Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Latin Amor Caritas Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Color wheel theory of love Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love letter Love of Christ Love of God in Christianity Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Religious views love deities Sacred Heart Similarity Physical attractiveness Triangular theory of love v t e Kama ( Sanskrit : काम, IAST : kāma ) is the concept of pleasure, enjoyment and desire in Hinduism , Buddhism , Jainism , and Sikhism . It can also refer to "desire, wish, longing" in Hindu , Buddhist , Jain , and Sikh literature.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, the term is also used in a technical sense to refer to any sensory enjoyment, emotional attraction or aesthetic pleasure experienced in connection with the arts, dance, music, painting, sculpture, and nature.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] In contemporary literature kama is often used to connote sexual desire and emotional longing , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 6 ] but the ancient concept is more expansive, and broadly refers to any desire, wish, passion, pleasure, or enjoyment of art and beauty, the aesthetic , enjoyment of life , affection , love and connection, and enjoyment of love with or without sexual connotations.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] In Hindu thought, kama is one among the three items of the trivarga and is one of the four Purusharthas , which are the four beneficial domains of human endeavor.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In Hinduism it is considered an essential and healthy goal of human life to pursue Kama without sacrificing the other three Purusharthas: Dharma (virtuous, ethical, moral life), Artha (material needs, income security, means of life) and Moksha (liberation, release, self-realization).

[ 10 ] [ 8 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In Buddhism and Jainism kama is to be overcome in order to obtain the goal of liberation from rebirth. But while kama is viewed as an obstacle for Buddhist and Jain monks and nuns, it is recognized as legitimate domain of activity for laity.

[ 13 ] Definition in Hinduism [ edit ] In contemporary Indian literature , kama is often used to refer to sexual desire . However, Kama more broadly refers to any sensory enjoyment, emotional attraction and aesthetic pleasure such as from the arts , dance , music , painting , sculpture , and nature .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Kama can refer to "desire, wish, or longing".

[ 2 ] The concept of kama is found in some of the earliest known verses in the Vedas . For example, Book 10 of the Rig Veda describes the creation of the universe from nothing by the great heat. In hymn 129 (RV 10.129.4)  it states [ clarification needed ] : कामस्तदग्रे समवर्तताधि मनसो रेतः परथमं यदासीत | सतो बन्धुमसति निरविन्दन हर्दि परतीष्याकवयो मनीषा || [ 14 ] Thereafter rose Desire in the beginning, Desire the primal seed and germ of Spirit, Sages who searched with their heart's thought discovered the existent's kinship in the non-existent.

— Rig Veda , ~ 15th Century BC [ 15 ] The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , one of the oldest Upanishads of Hinduism, uses the term kama, also in a broader sense, to refer to any desire: Man consists of desire (kama), As his desire is, so is his determination, As his determination is, so is his deed, Whatever his deed is, that he attains.

— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , 7th Century BC [ 16 ] Ancient Indian literature such as the Epics , which followed the Upanishads, develop and explain the concept of kama together with Artha and Dharma . The Mahabharata , for example, provides one of the expansive definitions of kama. The Epic describes kama to be any agreeable and desirable experience (pleasure) generated by the interaction of one or more of the five senses with anything associated with that sense, and whilst in harmony with the other goals of human life (dharma, artha and moksha).

[ 17 ] Kama is often used to refer to kamana (desire, longing or appetite). Kama, however, is more than kamana. Kama includes desire, wish, longing, emotional connection, love, appreciation, pleasure, and enjoyment.

[ 5 ] Vatsyayana , the author of the Kamasutra , describes kama as happiness that is a manasa vyapara (phenomenon of the mind). Just like the Mahabharata , Vatsyayana's Kamasutra defines kama as any pleasure an individual experiences from the world, with one or more senses: hearing, seeing, tasting, smelling, and feeling, in harmony with one's mind and soul.

[ 11 ] Experiencing harmonious music is kama, as is being inspired by natural beauty , the aesthetic appreciation of a work of art , and admiring with joy something crafted by another human being.

Vatsyayana's Kamasutra is often misunderstood to be a book solely about sexual and intimate relationships , but it was written as a guide to the nature of love, sexuality, finding a life partner, maintaining one's love life, and emotional fulfillment in life. In its discourse on kama it describes many forms of art, dance, and music, along with sex, as the means to pleasure and enjoyment.

[ 17 ] Kama is one's appreciation of incense, candles, music, scented oil, yoga stretching and meditation, and experiencing the heart chakra . The heart chakra is associated with love, compassion, charity, balance, calmness, and serenity, and is considered to be a seat of devotional worship. Opening the heart chakra is to experience an awareness of divine communion and joy in communion with deities and the self ( Atman ).

[ 18 ] John Lochtefeld describes kama as desire, noting that it often refers to sexual desire in contemporary literature, but in ancient Indian literature kāma includes any kind of attraction and pleasure such as those deriving from the arts .

Karl Potter describes [ 19 ] kama as an attitude and capacity . A little girl who hugs her teddy bear with a smile is experiencing kama. Two lovers in an embrace are experiencing kama. During these experiences the person feels more complete, fulfilled, and whole by experiencing that connection and nearness. This, in the Indian perspective, is kāma.

[ 19 ] Hindery notes the varying and diverse descriptions of kama in ancient Indian texts. Some texts, such as the Epic Ramayana , describe kama as the desire of Rama for Sita — a desire that transcends the physical and marital into a love that is spiritual, and something that gives Rama his meaning of life, his reason to live.

[ 20 ] Sita and Rama both frequently express their unwillingness and inability to live without the other.

[ 21 ] This romantic and spiritual description of kama in the Ramayana by Valmiki is more specific, observes Hindery [ 20 ] and others, [ 22 ] than the broader and more inclusive descriptions of kama, for example in the law codes of smriti by Manu .

Gavin Flood describes [ 23 ] kama as experiencing the positive emotional state of love whilst also not sacrificing one's dharma (virtuous, ethical behavior), artha (material needs, income security) and one's journey towards moksha (spiritual liberation, self-realization).

Importance of kama in Hinduism [ edit ] In Hinduism , kama is regarded as one of the four proper and necessary objectives or goals of human life ( purusharthas ), the others being Dharma (virtuous, proper, moral life), Artha (material prosperity, income security, means of life) and Moksha (liberation, release, self-actualization).

[ 12 ] [ 24 ] Relative precedence among artha and dharma [ edit ] Ancient Indian literature emphasizes that dharma precedes and is essential. If dharma is ignored, artha and kama lead to social chaos.

[ 25 ] Vatsyayana in Kama Sutra recognizes relative value of three goals as follows: artha precedes kama, while dharma precedes both kama and artha.

[ 11 ] Vatsyayana, in Chapter 2 of Kama Sutra , presents a series of philosophical objections argued against kama and then offers his answers to refute those objections. For example, Vatsyayana acknowledges that one objection to kama (pleasure, enjoyment) is this concern that kāma is an obstacle to moral and ethical life, to religious pursuits, to hard work, and to the productive pursuit of prosperity and wealth. Objectors claim that the pursuit of pleasure encourages individuals to commit unrighteous deeds that bring distress, carelessness, levity and suffering later in life.

[ 26 ] These objections were then answered by Vatsyayana, with the declaration that kama is as necessary to human beings as food, and kama is holistic with dharma and artha.

Necessity for existence [ edit ] Just like good food is necessary for the well-being of the body, good pleasure is necessary for the healthy existence of a human being, suggests Vatsyayana.

[ 27 ] A life devoid of pleasure and enjoyment—sexual, artistic, or nature—is hollow and empty. Just like no one should stop farming crops even though everyone knows herds of deer exist and will try to eat the crop as it grows up, in the same way claims Vatsyayana, one should not stop one's pursuit of kama because dangers exist. Kama should be followed with thought, care, caution and enthusiasm, just like farming or any other life pursuit.

[ 27 ] Vatsyayana's book the Kama Sutra , in parts of the world, is presumed or depicted as a synonym for creative sexual positions; in reality, only 20% of Kama Sutra is about sexual positions. The majority of the book, notes Jacob Levy, [ 28 ] is about the philosophy and theory of love, what triggers desire, what sustains it, how and when it is good or bad.

Kama Sutra presents kama as an essential and joyful aspect of human existence.

[ 29 ] Holistic [ edit ] Vatsyayana claims kama is never in conflict with dharma or artha, rather all three coexist and kama results from the other two.

[ 11 ] A man practicing Dharma, Artha and Kama enjoys happiness now and in future. Any action which conduces to the practice of Dharma, Artha and Kama together, or of any two, or even one of them should be performed. But an action which conduces to the practice of one of them at the expense of the remaining two should not be performed.

— Vatsyayana, The Kama sutra, Chapter 2 [ 30 ] In Hindu philosophy, pleasure in general, and sexual pleasure in particular, is neither shameful nor dirty. It is necessary for human life, essential for well-being of every individual, and wholesome when pursued with due consideration of dharma and artha. Unlike the precepts of some religions, kama is celebrated in Hinduism, as a value in its own right.

[ 31 ] Together with artha and dharma, it is an aspect of a holistic life.

[ 5 ] [ 32 ] All three purusharthas —Dharma, Artha and Kama—are equally and simultaneously important.

[ 33 ] Stages of life [ edit ] Some [ 11 ] [ 34 ] texts in ancient Indian literature observe that the relative precedence of artha, kama and dharma are naturally different for different people and different age groups. In a baby or child, education and kāma (artistic desires) take precedence; in youth kāma and artha take precedence; while in old age dharma takes precedence.

Deity [ edit ] Kama is deified as Kamadeva and his consort Rati . Deity Kama is comparable to the Greek deity Eros —they both trigger human sexual attraction and sensual desire.

[ 6 ] [ 35 ] Kama rides a parrot, and the deity is armed with bow and arrows to pierce hearts. The bow is made of sugarcane stalk, the bowstring is a line of bees, and the arrows are tipped with five flowers representing five emotions-driven love states.

[ 36 ] The five flowers on Kama arrows are lotus flower (infatuation), ashoka flower (intoxication with thoughts about the other person), mango flower (exhaustion and emptiness in absence of the other), jasmine flower (pining for the other) and blue lotus flower (paralysis with confusion and feelings). These five arrows also have names, the last and most dangerous of which is Sammohanam , infatuation.

[ 37 ] Kama is also known as Ananga (literally "one without body") because desire strikes formlessly, through feelings in unseen ways.

[ 6 ] The other names for deity Kama include Madan (he who intoxicates with love), Manmatha (he who agitates the mind), Pradyumna (he who conquers all) and Kushumesu (he whose arrows are flowers).

[ 38 ] In Buddhism [ edit ] See also: Buddhism and sexuality While in a narrow sense kāma refers to sexuality, it also refers to a broader domain of sensuality. In early Buddhist thought kāma has three general meanings .

Psychologically, kāma refers to the subjective desire for sexual or sensual pleasure. Secondly, kāma may also refer to the phenomenological experience of sensual pleasure. Lastly, kāma may also refer to the objects of pleasure, or the types of objects and actions that are believed to give rise to experiences of sensual pleasure.

[ 13 ] Kāma is central in early Buddhist cosmology, doctrine, and in the program of monastic discipline ( vinaya ).

Kama in Buddhist cosmology [ edit ] The Buddhist cosmos consists of three hierarchically arranged realms ( bhava or dhātu ): the Desire Realm ( kāmabhava ), the Form Realm ( rūpabhava ), and the Formless Realm ( arūpabhava ). All beings inhabiting the Desire Realm, including human beings, animals, hungry ghosts, and the inhabitants of the various Buddhist heavens and hells , are considered to be afflicted by deep-seated sensual desire ( kāma ). The upper two levels of the cosmos are inhabited by beings who have either severely attenuated or nearly eradicated sensual desire through advanced meditative practice.

[ 13 ] The Buddhist heavens, especially the Tāvatiṃsa heaven, is portrayed in Buddhist literature as saturated with the objects of sensual enjoyment. Such enjoyment is therefore regarded as a positive reward for ethical conduct, a result of one's merit ( puñña ) or good karma .

[ 13 ] Kama in Buddhist doctrine [ edit ] In early Buddhist doctrine, the taint of sensuality ( kāma-āsava ) is one of the three (sometimes four) psychological taints ( āsava ) that must be eradicated for the attainment of awakening. In the Buddha's first sermon, the Dhammacakkapavattana Sutta, the "desire for sensual pleasure" ( kāmataṇhā ) is enumerated as one of the three forms of desire ( taṇhā ) that entrap beings in the cycle of rebirth ( saṃsāra ).

[ 13 ] In the Buddhist Pali Canon , Gautama Buddha renounced ( Pali : nekkhamma ) sensuality ( kama ) as a route to Enlightenment .

[ 39 ] Some Buddhist lay practitioners recite daily the Five Precepts , a commitment to abstain from "sexual misconduct" ( kāmesu micchacara กาเมสุ มิจฺฉาจารา).

[ 40 ] Typical of Pali Canon discourses, the Dhammika Sutta ( Sn 2.14) includes a more explicit correlate to this precept when the Buddha enjoins a follower to "observe celibacy or at least do not have sex with another's wife." [ 41 ] Kama in monastic law and precepts [ edit ] Because the monastic vocation is premised on the renunciation of kāma , there are many rulings in monastic law ( vinaya ) that prohibit activities and practices that in the context of ancient India were associated with sensuality.

[ 13 ] In the Pali Vinaya ( Vinaya Piṭaka ), this first and foremost includes abstaining from sex and other forms of sexual activity such as masturbation and intimate relations between the sexes. Beyond sexuality, monastic law also prohibits engagement in a wide variety of activities deemed as sensual. This includes the use of various kinds of luxury items, such as the use of perfumes ( gandha ), cosmetics ( vilepana ), garlands ( mālā ), bodily adornments and ornamentation ( maṇḍana - vibhūsanaṭṭhāna ), lavish furnishings, ostentatious clothing, and other such items. It also includes abstaining from various forms of musical, song, and dance performances.

[ 13 ] The term kāma-guṇa is used in the Pali Buddhist literature to refer to the kinds of objects whose use or appropriation is believed to give rise to sensual pleasure.

[ 42 ] [ 13 ] Many of these are also included among the ten rules of training ( sikkhāpada ) observed by novices ( sāmaṇera , sāmaṇerī ), and figure among the eight precepts observed by Buddhist laity on special ritual occasions such as the fortnightly uposatha .

[ 13 ] This includes abstaining from sex, the use of garlands, cosmetics, ornamentation, and lavish beds and bedding as well as attending musical, song, and dance performances ( naccagītavāditavisūkadassanā ). The association of these kinds of activities with sensuality is also reflected in the Kāmasūtra.

[ 13 ] [ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Kamashastra Kama Sutra Arishadvargas , six enemies Alcmaeon (mythology) Buddhist cosmology of the Theravada school Cupid Hinduism and LGBT topics Kaam , a word with a similar meaning References [ edit ] ^ a b c See: Kate Morris (2011), The Illustrated Dictionary of History, ISBN 978-8189093372 , pp 124; Robert E. Van Voorst, RELG: World, Wadsworth, ISBN 978-1-111-72620-1 , pp 78 ^ a b Monier Williams, काम, kāma Archived 2017-10-19 at the Wayback Machine Monier-Williams Sanskrit English Dictionary, pp 271, see 3rd column ^ a b c Macy, Joanna (August 1975). "The Dialectics of Desire".

Numen .

22 (2).

Leiden : Brill Publishers : 145– 160.

doi : 10.1163/156852775X00095 .

eISSN 1568-5276 .

ISSN 0029-5973 .

JSTOR 3269765 .

S2CID 144148663 .

^ a b Lang, Karen C. (June 2015). Mittal, Sushil (ed.). "When the Vindhya Mountains Float in the Ocean: Some Remarks on the Lust and Gluttony of Ascetics and Buddhist Monks".

International Journal of Hindu Studies .

19 (1/2).

Boston : Springer Verlag : 171– 192.

doi : 10.1007/s11407-015-9176-z .

eISSN 1574-9282 .

ISSN 1022-4556 .

JSTOR 24631797 .

S2CID 145662113 .

^ a b c d R. Prasad (2008), History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization , Volume 12, Part 1, ISBN 978-8180695445 , pp 249-270 ^ a b c James Lochtefeld (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism , Volume 1, Rosen Publishing, New York, ISBN 0-8239-2287-1 , page 340.

^ Lorin Roche.

"Love-Kama" . Archived from the original on 20 April 2017 . Retrieved 15 July 2011 .

^ a b Salagame, Kiran K. (2013). "Well-being from the Hindu/Sanātana Dharma Perspective". In Boniwell, Ilona; David, Susan A.; Ayers, Amanda C. (eds.).

Oxford Handbook of Happiness .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199557257.013.0029 .

ISBN 9780199557257 .

S2CID 148784481 .

^ Olivelle, Patrick (2019).

"From trivarga to puruṣārtha" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

139 (2): 381.

ISSN 2169-2289 .

^ Zysk, Kenneth (2018). "Kāma". In Basu, Helene; Jacobsen, Knut A.; Malinar, Angelika; Narayanan, Vasudha (eds.).

Brill's Encyclopedia of Hinduism . Vol. 7.

Leiden : Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/2212-5019_BEH_COM_2050220 .

ISBN 978-90-04-17641-6 .

ISSN 2212-5019 .

^ a b c d e The Hindu Kama Shastra Society (1925), The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana , University of Toronto Archives, pp. 8 ^ a b see: A. Sharma (1982), The Puruṣārthas: a study in Hindu axiology, Michigan State University, ISBN 9789993624318 , pp 9-12; See review by Frank Whaling in Numen, Vol. 31, 1 (Jul., 1984), pp. 140-142; A. Sharma (1999), The long uruṣārthas: An Axiological Exploration of Hinduism Archived 2020-12-29 at the Wayback Machine , The Journal of Religious Ethics, Vol. 27, No. 2 (Summer, 1999), pp. 223-256; Chris Bartley (2001), Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy, Editor: Oliver Learman, ISBN 0-415-17281-0 , Routledge, Article on Purushartha, pp 443 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Fiorucci, Anthony (2023).

Guilty pleasures: kāma in ancient India and the Pali Vinaya . Uppsala: Uppsala University.

ISBN 978-91-506-3025-1 .

^ Rig Veda Book 10 Hymn 129 Archived 2018-02-16 at the Wayback Machine Verse 4 ^ Ralph Griffith (Translator, 1895), The Hymns of the Rig veda , Book X, Hymn CXXIX, Verse 4, pp 575 ^ Klaus Klostermaier , A Survey of Hinduism , 3rd Edition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-7082-4 , pp. 173-174 ^ a b R. Prasad (2008), History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization , Volume 12, Part 1, ISBN 978-8180695445 , Chapter 10, particularly pp 252-255 ^ "Kama - Hindupedia, the Hindu Encyclopedia" .

www.hindupedia.com . 7 April 2023.

^ a b Karl H. Potter (2002), Presuppositions of India's Philosophies , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120807792 , pp. 1-29 ^ a b Roderick Hindery, "Hindu Ethics in the Ramayana", The Journal of Religious Ethics , Vol. 4, No. 2 (Fall, 1976), pp. 299 ^ See verses at 2.30, 4.1, 6.1, 6.83 for example; Abridged Verse 4.1: "Sita invades my entire being and my love is entirely centered on her; Without that lady of lovely eyelashes, beautiful looks, and gentle speech, I cannot survive, O Saumitri."; for peer reviewed source, see Hindery, The Journal of Religious Ethics, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Fall, 1976), pp 299-300 ^ Benjamin Khan (1965), The concept of Dharma in Valmiki Ramayana , Delhi, ISBN 978-8121501347 ^ Gavin Flood (1996), The meaning and context of the Purusarthas, in Julius Lipner (Editor), The Fruits of Our Desiring , ISBN 978-1896209302 , pp 11-13 ^ Brodd, Jeffrey (2003).

World Religions . Winona, MN: Saint Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-725-5 .

^ Gavin Flood (1996), The meaning and context of the Purusarthas, in Julius Lipner (Editor) - The Fruits of Our Desiring, ISBN 978-1896209302 , pp 16-21 ^ The Hindu Kama Shastra Society (1925), The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana , University of Toronto Archives, pp. 9-10 ^ a b The Hindu Kama Shastra Society (1925), The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana , University of Toronto Archives, Chapter 2, pp 8-11; pp 172 ^ Jacob Levy (2010), Kama sense marketing, iUniverse, ISBN 978-1440195563 , see Introduction ^ Alain Daniélou, The Complete Kama Sutra: The First Unabridged Modern Translation of the Classic Indian Text, ISBN 978-0892815258 ^ The Hindu Kama Shastra Society (1925), Answer 4, The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana , University of Toronto Archives, pp. 11 ^ Bullough and Bullough (1994), Human Sexuality: An Encyclopedia, Routledge, ISBN 978-0824079727 , pp 516 ^ Gary Kraftsow, Yoga for Transformation - ancient teachings and practices for healing body, mind and heart, Penguin, ISBN 978-0-14-019629-0 , pp 11-15 ^ C. Ramanathan, Ethics in the Ramayana, in History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civilization (Editor: R. Prasad), Volume 12, Part 1, ISBN 978-8180695445 , pp 84-85 ^ P.V. Kane (1941), History of Dharmashastra, Volume 2, Part 1, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, pp. 8-9 ^ Kama Archived 2015-06-07 at the Wayback Machine in Encyclopædia Britannica, Chicago, 2009 ^ Coulter and Turner, Encyclopedia of Ancient Deities, Francis & Taylor, ISBN 978-1135963903 , pp 258-259 ^ Śaṅkarakavi, Fabrizia Baldissera Śāradātilakabhāṇaḥ 1980 "Sammohanam , infatuation , name of the fifth arrow of Kāma , the most dangerous because it leads to the ultimate stage of love folly" ^ William Joseph Wilkins (193), Hindu mythology, Vedic and Puranic , Thacker & Spink, Indiana University Archives, pp 268 ^ See, for instance, Dvedhavitakka Sutta ( MN 19) (Thanissaro, 1997a).

Archived 2008-05-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ See, for instance, Khantipalo (1995).

Archived 2020-11-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Dhammika Sutta: Dhammika" .

www.accesstoinsight.org .

^ "Bahuvedaniya Sutta: The Many Kinds of Feeling" .

www.accesstoinsight.org . Retrieved 2024-10-18 .

^ Ali, Daud (2011).

"Rethinking the History of the "Kāma" World in Early India" .

Journal of Indian Philosophy .

39 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1007/s10781-010-9115-7 .

ISSN 0022-1791 .

JSTOR 23884104 .

Sources [ edit ] Fiorucci, Anthony (2023).

Guilty Pleasures: Kāma in ancient India and the Pali Vinaya . PhD thesis: Uppsala University.

ISBN 978-91-506-3025-1 , diva-portal.org .

Ireland, John D. (trans.) (1983).

Dhammika Sutta: Dhammika (excerpt) ( Sn 2.14). Retrieved 5 Jul 2007 from "Access to Insight" at Dhammika Sutta: Dhammika .

Khantipalo, Bhikkhu (1982, 1995).

Lay Buddhist Practice: The Shrine Room, Uposatha Day, Rains Residence (The Wheel No. 206/207). Kandy: Buddhist Publication Society . Retrieved 5 Jul 2007 from "Access to Insight" at http://www.accesstoinsight.org/lib/authors/khantipalo/wheel206.html .

Sri Lanka Buddha Jayanti Tipitaka Series (n.d.) (SLTP).

Pañcaṅgikavaggo ( AN 5.1.3.8, in Pali). Retrieved 3 Jul 2007 from "MettaNet-Lanka" at 5:3 Pancangikavaggo - Pali .

Thanissaro Bhikkhu (trans.) (1997a).

Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Two Sorts of Thinking ( MN 19). Retrieved 3 Jul 2007 from "Access to Insight" at Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Two Sorts of Thinking .

Thanissaro Bhikkhu (trans.) (1997b).

Samadhanga Sutta: The Factors of Concentration ( AN 5.28). Retrieved 3 Jul 2007 from "Access to Insight" at Samadhanga Sutta: The Factors of Concentration .

External links [ edit ] Kama at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote About.com page [ permanent dead link ] Kamadeva's holy sacrifice (archived 22 March 2018) v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Hinduism Hindu art Hindu architecture Music Chakra Dharma Gurus and sants Karma Mantra Moksha Om Yoga Worship Studies Portal v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐cntm5
Cached time: 20250814215253
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.997 seconds
Real time usage: 1.228 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4022/1000000
Revision size: 31531/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 241621/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4230/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 163487/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.542/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21597519/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  871.204      1 -total
 28.65%  249.573      1 Template:Reflist
 27.21%  237.032      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.30%  141.991      1 Template:Love_sidebar
 15.36%  133.830     21 Template:Lang
 11.88%  103.484      3 Template:Navbox
 11.53%  100.453      1 Template:Hinduism
 10.82%   94.283     19 Template:ISBN
  7.85%   68.424      1 Template:Aesthetics
  7.83%   68.175      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1434556:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215253 and revision id 1289562883. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kama&oldid=1289562883 " Categories : Puruṣārthas Buddhist philosophical concepts Theosophical philosophical concepts Sanskrit words and phrases Hindu philosophical concepts Hinduism and sexuality Pleasure Happiness Theories of truth Relational ethics Hindu ethics Concepts in ethics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2023 Pages using Sister project links with default search All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 11:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kama 37 languages Add topic

