Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Higher-order perception theory 1.2 Actualist higher-order thought theory 1.3 Dispositionalist higher-order thought theory 1.4 Self-representational higher-order theories 1.5 Higher-order statistical inference view 1.6 Radical plasticity thesis 2 Scientific perspectives 3 Motivation 4 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 4.1 Against inner-sense and actualist HOT views 5 References Toggle the table of contents Higher-order theories of consciousness 4 languages Français Italiano Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific theory Higher-order theories of consciousness postulate that consciousness consists in perceptions or thoughts about first-order mental states .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In particular, phenomenal consciousness is thought to be a higher-order representation of perceptual or quasi-perceptual contents, such as visual images.

[ 1 ] Higher-order theories are distinguished from other cognitive /representational accounts of consciousness which suggest that merely first-order mentality of certain sorts constitutes consciousness.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] Higher-order perception theory [ edit ] Also called inner-sense theory , this version of higher-order theory proposes that phenomenal consciousness consists not in immediate sensations but in higher-level sensing of those sensations . Or put another way: A phenomenally conscious mental state is a state with analog/non-conceptual intentional content, which is in turn the target of a higher-order analog/non-conceptual intentional state, via the operations of a faculty of 'inner sense'.

[ 1 ] One motivation for this approach is that it accounts for phenomenal consciousness absent beliefs or behaviors associated with those experiences—so that, e.g., someone could feel pain without necessarily exhibiting functional reactions to pain.

[ 1 ] Actualist higher-order thought theory [ edit ] David Rosenthal is a foremost advocate of this view. It claims that a mental state is conscious when it is the subject of a higher-order thought (HOT). Phenomenal consciousness in particular corresponds to certain kinds of mental states (e.g., visual inputs) that are the subjects of HOTs. Rosenthal excludes the special case in which one learns about one's lower-order states by conscious deduction. For instance, if psychoanalysis could reveal one's unconscious motives, this would not suddenly make them conscious.

[ 1 ] Dispositionalist higher-order thought theory [ edit ] The dispositionalist mirrors the actualist view except that the first-order mental state need not actually be thought about—it only needs to be available to potentially be thought about.

[ 1 ] While actualist accounts would seem to require immense higher-order computation on all first-order percepts, dispositionalist accounts do not; they merely require availability of first-order information. Such availability could come from, e.g., global broadcasting as in the Global Workspace Theory .

[ 1 ] Self-representational higher-order theories [ edit ] Self-representational higher-order theories consider the higher-order state to be constitutive or internal to its first-order state.

[ 1 ] This may be either because: the first-order and higher-order states are identical, with the same state serving two different roles, or the first-order and higher-order states are part of the same whole, and the whole complex is what becomes conscious.

[ 1 ] An example of the second, "part-whole" self-representational theory is Vincent Picciuto's "quotational theory of consciousness" in which consciousness consists of "mentally quoting" a first-order perception.

[ 4 ] Higher-order statistical inference view [ edit ] In this theory, higher-level processing determines that a first-order representation is reliable.

[ 5 ] : 366 Radical plasticity thesis [ edit ] Similar to a HOT view, this theory proposes that the brain "learns" when there exists a trustworthy lower-level representation.

[ 5 ] : 366 Scientific perspectives [ edit ] Higher-order theories originated in philosophy, but they have also gained some scientific defenders.

[ 5 ] : 365 Here are some examples of evidence supporting higher-order views: Reporting of conscious experience seems in some studies to occur serially following unconscious processing rather than in parallel with it.

[ 5 ] : 368 Unconscious processing is quite powerful on its own, so it is not obvious that task performance requires consciousness. Higher-order views agree with this, unlike, e.g., global-workspace views.

[ 5 ] : 368 Impairments to the prefrontal cortex may impair subjective reports without affecting task performance. If the prefrontal cortex were mainly serving an attentional role, performance should degrade along with reportability.

[ 5 ] : 369 Some interpretations of certain disorders of consciousness suggest that they operate by affecting the prefrontal cortex, where higher-order thoughts are assumed to take place.

[ 5 ] : 370–71 Edmund Rolls defends a higher-order account of consciousness. He argues that consciousness consists in higher-order thoughts allowing one to monitor and correct errors and "that the brain systems that are required for consciousness and language are similar." [ 6 ] : 404–05 Qualia like pain become conscious when "they enter into a specialized linguistic symbol-manipulation system, which is part of a higher-order thought system" that helps with, inter alia, "flexible planning of actions." [ 6 ] : 407 Motivation [ edit ] Higher-order theory can account for the distinction between unconscious and conscious brain processing. Both types of mental operations involve first-order manipulations, and according to higher-order theory, what makes cognition conscious is a higher-order observation of the first-order processing.

[ 1 ] In neuroscience terms, higher-order theory is motivated by the distinction between first-order information in early sensory regions versus higher-order representations in prefrontal and parietal cortices .

[ 5 ] : 365–66 Criticisms [ edit ] Against inner-sense and actualist HOT views [ edit ] Scott Sturgeon argues against inner-sense theory on the grounds that it could give rise to disorders in which, e.g., one has a first-order perception of red which mis-triggers a second-order sense of "looks orange". But we do not see any such disorders in neurology .

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] More generally, inner-sense and actualist views face the "targetless higher-order representation problem" in which there might be, e.g., a higher-order experience/thought about perceiving red without a corresponding first-order redness percept.

[ 1 ] One reply is that this is no more a problem for higher-order theories than for other neuroscientific theories of consciousness, which also involve many layers of processing that could theoretically be inconsistent.

[ 5 ] : 370 Peter Carruthers points out that inner sense of or actualist HOTs about first-order percepts might greatly increase the computing power required to consciously process stimuli, for not only does one need to have a perception, but one then needs to have another (perhaps highly detailed) perception or thought about that perception.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Peter Carruthers (15 Aug 2011).

"Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 August 2014 .

^ David Rosenthal; Josh Weisberg (2008).

"Higher-order theories of consciousness" .

Scholarpedia .

3 (5): 4407.

Bibcode : 2008SchpJ...3.4407R .

doi : 10.4249/scholarpedia.4407 .

^ Droege, Paula.

"Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 31 August 2014 .

^ Picciuto, Vincent (2014).

Consciousness and Mental Quotation: An intrinsic higher-order approach (PhD thesis). University of Maryland.

hdl : 1903/15231 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Hakwan Lau; David Rosenthal (Aug 2011).

"Empirical support for higher-order theories of conscious awareness" (PDF) .

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

15 (8): 365– 373.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2011.05.009 .

PMID 21737339 .

S2CID 32235393 .

^ a b Edmund T. Rolls (2005).

Emotion Explained . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-857003-5 .

^ Sturgeon, Scott (2000).

Matters of Mind: Consciousness, Reason and Nature . London: Routledge.

^ Carruthers, Peter (2000).

Phenomenal Consciousness: A Naturalistic Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Higher-order_theories_of_consciousness&oldid=1296560235 " Category : Consciousness Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 18:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Higher-order theories of consciousness 4 languages Add topic

