Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 System operation Toggle System operation subsection 2.1 Beacons 2.2 Space segment 2.3 Ground segment 3 System architecture Toggle System architecture subsection 3.1 LEOSAR 3.2 GEOSAR 3.3 MEOSAR 3.4 Ground segment 3.5 Beacons 3.5.1 Current Beacon Technologies 3.5.2 Beacon Transmission Technologies 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Conception and demonstration 4.2 First legal framework 4.3 Development 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents International Cospas-Sarsat Programme 18 languages Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Slovenčina Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°08′04″N 16°50′04″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.13444°N 16.83444°E ﻿ / 41.13444; 16.83444 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International satellite-aided search and rescue initiative International Cospas-Sarsat Program Established 1 July 1988 ; 37 years ago ( 1988-07-01 ) (Date definitive agreement was signed; preceding memorandums of understanding signed 23 November 1979 and 5 October 1984) Type Intergovernmental organization Legal status Active Headquarters Montreal , Quebec , Canada Membership 45 Formally associated "Participant" states and agencies Algeria ** Argentina ** Australia ** Brazil ** Canada * Chile ** China *** Cyprus ** Denmark Finland France * Germany Greece ** India *** Indonesia ** Italy ** Japan ** Korea ** Malaysia ** Netherlands New Zealand ** Nigeria Norway ** Pakistan ** Peru ** Poland Qatar ** Russia * Saudi Arabia ** Serbia Singapore ** South Africa ** Spain ** Sweden Switzerland Thailand ** Togo ** Tunisia Turkey ** United Arab Emirates ** United Kingdom ** United States * Viet Nam ** Hong Kong, China, Marine Department ** International Telecommunication Development Company (Taiwan)** *Party State, and Space- and Ground-Segment Provider **Ground-Segment Provider ***Space- and Ground-Segment Provider Additionally, although not State Participants, the European Union , through its Galileo Programme, [ 1 ] is a Space- and Ground-Segment Provider, and EUMETSAT is a Space-Segment Provider Official languages English French Russian Head Shefali Juneja (Head of Secretariat ) Council Chair (rotating) Bruno Chazal (France) Website www .cospas-sarsat .int www .406 .org Logo as used until 1992 The International Cospas-Sarsat Programme is a satellite -aided search and rescue (SAR) initiative. It is organized as a treaty -based, nonprofit , intergovernmental , humanitarian cooperative of 45 nations and agencies (see infobox).

[ 2 ] It is dedicated to detecting and locating emergency locator radio beacons activated by persons, aircraft or vessels in distress, and forwarding this alert information to authorities that can take action for rescue.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Member countries support the distribution of distress alerts using a constellation of around 65 satellites orbiting the Earth which carry transponders and signal processors capable of locating an emergency beacon anywhere on Earth transmitting on the Cospas-Sarsat frequency of 406 MHz.

Distress alerts are detected, located and forwarded to over 200 countries and territories at no cost to beacon owners or the receiving government agencies.

[ 6 ] Cospas-Sarsat was conceived and initiated by Canada , France , the United States , and the former Soviet Union in 1979.

[ 7 ] The first rescue using the technology of Cospas-Sarsat occurred on 10 September 1982 ; 42 years ago ( 1982-09-10 ) .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The definitive agreement of the organization was signed by those four States as the "Parties" to the agreement on 1 July 1988.

The term Cospas-Sarsat derives from COSPAS (КОСПАС), an acronym from the transliterated Russian "Космическая Система Поиска Аварийных Судов" ( Latin script : "Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudov" ), meaning "Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress", and SARSAT, an acronym for "Search And Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking".

[ 10 ] Background [ edit ] Cospas-Sarsat is best known as the system that detects and locates emergency beacons activated by aircraft, ships and people engaged in recreational activities in remote areas, and then sends these distress alerts to search-and-rescue (SAR) authorities.

Distress beacons capable of being detected by the Cospas-Sarsat System (currently 406-MHz beacons) are available from several manufacturers and vendor chains. Cospas-Sarsat does not make or sell beacons.

Between September 1982 and December 2023 the Cospas-Sarsat System provided assistance in rescuing at least 63,745 people in 19,883 SAR events.  In 2023 Cospas-Sarsat on average assisted in the rescue of almost nine persons each day.  In 2021, 2022 and 2023 (the latest year for which statistics have been compiled), Cospas-Sarsat assistance included the following: [ 11 ] Year People Rescued SAR Events → Aviation Land Maritime 2023 3,109 1,076 20% 44% 36% 2022 3,223 1,144 20% 39% 41% 2021 3,623 1,149 18% 45% 37% These statistics under-count the number of events where Cospas-Sarsat assisted, because they only include cases when an accurate report from SAR personnel is provided back through reporting channels to the Cospas-Sarsat Secretariat.

Cospas-Sarsat does not undertake search-and-rescue operations. This is the responsibility of national administrations that have accepted responsibility for SAR in various geographic regions of the world (typically the same geographic area as their flight information region ). Cospas-Sarsat provides alert data to those authorities.

Cospas-Sarsat cooperates with United Nations -affiliated agencies, such as the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the International Maritime Organization (IMO), and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), among other international organizations, to ensure the compatibility of the Cospas-Sarsat distress alerting services with the needs, the standards and the applicable recommendations of the global community.

[ 12 ] Cospas-Sarsat is an element of the IMO's Global Maritime Distress Safety System (GMDSS), and is a component of ICAO's Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System (GADSS). The IMO requires automatic-activating Cospas-Sarsat beacons ( EPIRBs , see below) on all vessels subject to requirements of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (so-called SOLAS-class vessels), commercial fishing vessels, and all passenger ships in international waters. Similarly, ICAO requires Cospas-Sarsat beacons aboard aircraft on international flights, as well as the ability to track such aircraft when in distress (see "Beacons" under "System architecture" below).

[ 13 ] National administrations often impose requirements in addition to the international requirements of those agencies.

Cospas-Sarsat only monitors for alerts from digital distress beacons that transmit on 406 MHz (so-called 406 beacons). Older beacons that transmit using the legacy analog signal on 121.5 MHz or 243 MHz rely on being received only by nearby aircraft or rescue personnel. For satellite reception of alerts by Cospas-Sarsat the beacon must be a model that transmits at 406 MHz.

[ 6 ] Cospas-Sarsat has received many honors for its humanitarian work, including induction into the Space Foundation 's Space Technology Hall of Fame for space technologies improving the quality of life for all humanity.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] System operation [ edit ] The components and operation of the Cospas-Sarsat system The system consists of a ground segment and a space segment that include: Distress radio-beacons to be activated in a life-threatening emergency SAR signal repeaters (SARR) and SAR signal processors (SARP) aboard satellites Satellite downlink receiving and signal processing ground stations called LUTs (local user terminals) Mission control centres (MCCs) that distribute to rescue coordination centres distress alert data (particularly beacon location data) generated by the LUTs Rescue coordination centres (RCCs) that facilitate coordination of the SAR agency and personnel response to a distress situation.

Beacons [ edit ] A Cospas-Sarsat distress beacon is a digital 406-MHz radio transmitter that can be activated in a life-threatening emergency to summon assistance from government authorities.  Beacons are manufactured and sold by dozens of vendors. They are classified in three main types. A beacon designed for use aboard an aircraft is known as an emergency locator transmitter ( ELT ). One designed for use aboard a marine vessel is called an emergency position-indicating radio beacon ( EPIRB ). And one that is designed to be carried by an individual is known as a personal locator beacon ( PLB ). Sometimes PLBs are carried aboard aircraft or vessels, but whether this satisfies safety requirements depends on local regulations.

[ 6 ] A Cospas-Sarsat beacon does not transmit until it is activated in an emergency (or when certain testing features are activated by the user). Some beacons are designed to be manually activated by a person pressing a button, and some others are designed for automatic activation in certain circumstances (e.g., ELTs may be automatically activated by a physical shock, such as in a crash, and EPIRBs may be automatically activated by contact with water). There are no subscription or other costs imposed by Cospas-Sarsat for beacon ownership or use. (Some countries may impose licensing and/or registration charges for beacon ownership, and some jurisdictions may assess costs for rescue operations.) [ 16 ] See below for recent beacon innovations.

Space segment [ edit ] The Cospas-Sarsat system operational space segment consists of SARR and/or SARP instruments aboard: [ 17 ] Five satellites in polar low-altitude Earth orbit with LEOSAR (low-altitude Earth orbit search-and-rescue) payloads (one other in preparation for use), Twelve satellites in geostationary Earth orbit with GEOSAR (geostationary Earth orbit search-and-rescue) payloads (two others in preparation for use), 48 satellites in medium-altitude Earth orbit with MEOSAR (medium-altitude Earth orbit search-and-rescue) payloads (seven others in preparation for use).

A SARR or SARP instrument is a secondary payload and associated antennas attached to those satellites as an adjunct to the primary satellite mission. A SARR instrument retransmits a beacon distress signal to a satellite ground station in real time. A SARP instrument records the data from the distress signal so that the information can later be gathered by a ground station when the satellite passes overhead.

Ground segment [ edit ] The satellites are monitored by receiving ground stations (LUTs) equipped to track (point at and follow) the satellites using satellite dishes or phased antenna arrays . LUTs are installed by individual national administrations or agencies. The distress messages received by a LUT are transferred to an associated mission control centre which uses a detailed set of computer algorithms to route the messages to rescue coordination centres worldwide.

System architecture [ edit ] When a distress beacon is activated, the Cospas-Sarsat system: decodes the binary coded message of the beacon, which contains information such as the identity of the vessel/aircraft and, for beacons equipped with the feature, the location of the beacon derived from a local navigation source (such as a GPS receiver incorporated into the beacon's design), and performs a mathematical analysis of the signal to calculate the location of the beacon, even if the beacon's location is not reported in the distress message.

The Cospas-Sarsat system is the only satellite distress alerting system that is capable of this dual, redundant means of locating an activated distress beacon.

The SARR and/or SARP instrument typically is attached to a satellite that is being launched primarily for another purpose. The primary mission of all of the LEOSAR and GEOSAR satellites is meteorological (gathering of weather data). The primary mission of all of the MEOSAR satellites is navigation .

LEOSAR [ edit ] Example of LEOSAR signal footprint.

LEOSAR was the original Cospas-Sarsat space segment architecture. The complementary LEOSAR-satellite orbits provide periodic coverage of the entire Earth. Because of their relatively low altitude (and therefore, relatively small " footprint " of visibility of any particular part of the Earth at any given time), there are intervals of time when a LEOSAR satellite may not be over a particular geographic location. So there can be a delay in receiving an alert signal, and a delay in relaying that signal to the ground. For this reason, LEOSAR satellites are equipped with the " store-and-forward " SARP modules in addition to " real-time " SARR modules. The satellite can pass over a remote area of the Earth and receive a distress message, and then forward that data later when it passes into view of a ground station (that typically are located in less remote areas). The five satellites in the LEOSAR constellation have approximately 100 minute orbits. Because of their polar orbits the latency between satellite passes overhead is smallest at the poles and higher latitudes.

The Cospas-Sarsat LEOSAR system was made possible by Doppler processing. LUTs detecting distress signals relayed by LEOSAR satellites perform mathematical calculations based on the Doppler -induced frequency shift received by the satellites as they pass over a beacon transmitting at a fixed frequency. From the mathematical calculations, it is possible to determine both bearing and range with respect to the satellite. The range and bearing are measured from the rate of change of the received frequency, which varies both according to the path of the satellite in space and the rotation of the Earth. This allows a computer algorithm to trilaterate the position of the beacon. A faster change in the received frequency indicates that the beacon is closer to the satellite's ground track . When the beacon is moving toward or away from the satellite track due to the Earth's rotation, the Doppler shift induced by that motion also can be used in the calculation.

GEOSAR [ edit ] Because their geostationary orbit does not provide a relative motion between a distress beacon and a GEOSAR satellite, there is no opportunity to use the Doppler effect to calculate the location of a beacon. Therefore, the GEOSAR satellites only can relay a beacon's distress message. If the beacon is a model with a feature to report its location (e.g., from an on-board GPS receiver) then that location is relayed to SAR authorities. While the inability to independently locate a beacon is a drawback of GEOSAR satellites, those satellites have an advantage in that the present constellation well covers the entire Earth in real time, except for the polar regions.

MEOSAR [ edit ] The most recent space segment augmentation for Cospas-Sarsat is MEOSAR. MEOSAR blends the advantages of the LEOSAR and GEOSAR systems, while avoiding their drawbacks. The MEOSAR system is becoming the dominant capability of Cospas-Sarsat. In addition to the large number of satellites, the MEOSAR system benefits from relatively large satellite footprints and sufficient satellite motion relative to a point on the ground to allow the use of Doppler measurements as part of the method of calculating a distress beacon's location. MEOSAR consists of SARR transponders aboard the following navigation-satellite constellations: the European Union 's Galileo , Russia 's Glonass , and the United States ' Global Positioning System (GPS).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In November 2022, China became the newest MEOSAR space-segment provider, with Cospas-Sarsat SAR payloads aboard six of its BeiDou (BDS) navigation spacecraft. The first SAR-equipped BDS spacecraft was launched on 19 September 2018, and the last on 23 November 2019.

Operational distribution of MEOSAR alert data began at 1300 UTC on 13 December 2016. Following continued testing and adjustment, a declaration of initial operational capability (IOC) was made by the Cospas-Sarsat Council effective from 25 April 2023. The MEOSAR system advances the ability to provide near-instantaneous detection, identification, and location-determination of 406-MHz beacons. Prior to the operational introduction of MEOSAR, MEOSAR data was successfully used to assist in determining the crash location of EgyptAir flight 804 in the Mediterranean Sea.

[ 22 ] The location of a distress beacon is calculated by the receiving LUT by analyzing the frequency-difference-of-arrival (related to Doppler -induced variations), and/or the time-difference-of-arrival of a beacon's radio signal due to the differences in distance between the beacon and each MEOSAR satellite that may be in view.

With respect to GPS-hosted payloads, experimental S-band payloads aboard 18 GPS Block IIR and GPS Block IIF satellites, and four payloads aboard GPS Block IIIA satellites are used operationally by the Cospas-Sarsat System.

GPS Block IIIF satellites are planned to have dedicated, operational L-band SAR payloads provided by Canada, with launches beginning around 2026. The GPS SAR system is known as the Distress Alerting Satellite System (DASS) by NASA .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Additionally, the Galileo component of the MEOSAR system is able to download information back to the distress radio-beacon by encoding "Return Link Service" messages into the Galileo navigation data stream. It can be used to activate an indicator on the beacon to confirm receipt of the distress message.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Ground segment [ edit ] As of December 2022 the LEOSAR satellites are tracked and monitored by 55 commissioned LEOLUT (low-altitude Earth-orbit local user terminals) antennas, the GEOSAR satellites by 27 commissioned GEOLUT antennas [1] and the MEOSAR satellites by 26 commissioned MEOLUT stations, each having multiple antennas. The data from these earth stations is transferred to and distributed by 32 MCCs established globally , 14 of which are commissioned to process data from all three constellation types.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] (See infobox for the countries and agencies that are ground-segment providers.) Beacons [ edit ] Current Beacon Technologies [ edit ] Most Cospas-Sarsat-compatible 406-MHz beacons also transmit distress or tracking signals on additional frequencies. Most commonly, Cospas-Sarsat beacons have a 121.5-MHz transmitter to provide a signal that can be received by local search crews (airborne, on ground or at sea) using direction-finding equipment. Additionally, the latest EPIRBs include an automatic identification system (AIS) transmitter in the marine VHF band that allows the beacon to be easily tracked from nearby vessels. Recent PLB models designed for attachment to marine life vests transmit an AIS signal to act as a maritime survivor locating system, also known as a man overboard (MOB) system, that activates alarms on nearby vessels and allows the beacon to be tracked by properly equipped vessels.

Beacons with such combinations of signals simultaneously allow for global alerting through the 406-MHz transmission to satellites and the swiftest local response from the 121.5-MHz and AIS transmissions (particularly in the maritime environment by nearby vessels).

In response to recent commercial aviation disasters and subsequent ICAO requirements for autonomous tracking of aircraft in distress, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Cospas-Sarsat established specifications for ELTs for distress tracking (ELT(DT)s) to meet the ICAO requirements (amended Annex 6, Part I of the Convention on International Civil Aviation ). Whereas conventional ELTs are designed to activate on impact or by manual activation by the flight crew, ELT(DT)s activate autonomously when an aircraft enters threatening flight configurations that have been predetermined by expert agencies. In this way, ELT(DT)s allow a plane in distress to be tracked in-flight, prior to any crash, without human intervention aboard the aircraft. ELT(DT)s have been specified using both the existing beacon transmission method (narrowband BPSK) and the second-generation (spread-spectrum QPSK) modulation schemes (see transmission technologies below).  Cospas-Sarsat capability for receiving and processing distress messages from ELT(DT)s using the narrowband BPSK transmission method was declared operational effective 1 January 2023.  In October 2023 capability for receiving and processing distress messages from ELT(DT)s using the spread-spectrum QPSK modulation method was declared with an effective date of 1 January 2024.

Beacon Transmission Technologies [ edit ] There has been one transmission modulation method used by Cospas-Sarsat 406-MHz digital beacons since their inception more than 30 years ago, binary phase-shift keying (BPSK), with two allowed bit-string lengths: 112 (with 87 bits of message information) and 144 (with 119 bits of message information). Several message protocols are allowed in the available message-bit string to accommodate different kinds of beacons (ELTs, EPIRBs and PLBs), different vessel/aircraft identifiers, and different national requirements. The time length of these transmissions is approximately one-half second. These narrowband transmissions occupy approximately 3 kHz of bandwidth in a channelized scheme across the assigned 406.0 to 406.1 MHz band.

[ 33 ] Cospas-Sarsat has recently specified a new, additional beacon modulation and message scheme based on spread-spectrum technology with quadrature phase-shift keying (QPSK). Presently beacons that use this scheme are termed "second generation" beacons. It allows the use of battery-saving lower-power transmissions, improves the accuracy of the determination of the beacon location by the Cospas-Sarsat System, and avoids the need for discrete channelization in the assigned 406.0 to 406.1 MHz band (e.g., avoiding the need for periodic closing and opening of channels by Cospas-Sarsat for use by beacon manufacturers based on narrowband channel loading). Second-generation beacons have a longer transmission period of one second, with 250 transmitted bits, 202 of those being message bits. Additionally, the information sent in the message bits from one transmission to the next can be changed on a rotating transmission schedule ("rotating message fields") to allow significantly more information to be communicated over the course of a series of transmission bursts.

[ 34 ] Deployment of this technology in ELT(DT)s may begin in January 2024.  Cospas-Sarsat readiness for deployment of the technology in other types of beacons is expected later in 2024.

History [ edit ] COSPAS-SARSAT international satellite system, search for ships and aircraft in distress. Stamp of USSR, 1987.

Conception and demonstration [ edit ] In the early 1970s, the Space System Group at Communications Research Centre Canada (CRC) began investigating whether an ELT could be detected and located from space. They realized that this could be accomplished through the Doppler shift of an ELT signal received by an orbiting satellite. CRC contacted AMSAT and was granted use of an OSCAR amateur radio satellite, through which they located an ELT modified to the satellite's uplink frequency. NASA contacted CRC over its success and the United States later agreed to a joint project.

[ 35 ] First legal framework [ edit ] On 23 November 1979, a " memorandum of understanding concerning cooperation in a joint experimental satellite-aided search and rescue project" was signed in Leningrad, USSR, among the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration , the USSR Ministry of Merchant Marine, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales of France, and the Department of Communications of Canada. Under Article 3 of the memorandum, it was stated that: [ 36 ] "Cooperation will be achieved through effecting interoperability between the SARSAT project and the COSPAS project at 121.5MHz, 243MHz and in the 406.0 – 406.1 MHz band and conducting of tests, mutual exchange of test results and preparation of a joint report. The objective of this cooperation is to demonstrate that equipment carried on low-altitude, near polar-orbiting satellites can facilitate the detection and location of distress signals by relaying information from aircraft and ships in distress to ground stations, where the information processing is completed and passed to rescue services." "This joint Project will permit the Parties to make recommendations on follow-on global applications." Development [ edit ] The first system satellite, "COSPAS-1" ( Kosmos 1383 ), was launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome on June 29, 1982.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Cospas-Sarsat began tracking the two original types of distress beacons, EPIRBs and ELTs, in September 1982. While the satellite's operation was being verified on September 9, COSPAS-1 detected an ELT signal in British Columbia and relayed the information to a then-experimental ground station at Defence Research Establishment Ottawa (DREO). The Canadians calculated the position of the small aircraft, which was 90 km (56 mi) off course, and within hours the crash survivors were rescued via airlift. These were the first persons rescued with the assistance of Cospas-Sarsat, and authorities judged that pilot Jonathan Ziegelheim would likely have died of his injuries if not for the swift rescue made possible by satellite detection.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 35 ] Prior to the founding of Cospas-Sarsat, the civilian aviation community had already been using the 121.5 MHz frequency for distress, while the military aviation community utilized 243.0 MHz as the primary distress frequency with the 121.5 MHz frequency as an alternate.  In each case, detection of the distress signal relied on reception by aircraft passing nearby, and localization of the signal was done with Earth-based direction finding equipment.  Satellites made it possible to expand this "local" search paradigm into a global capability.

Each of the four founding Party States took responsibility for one of the major tasks in the project.  The United States (with project leadership from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, MD, USA) directed Datron Systems in Chatsworth, CA, USA to design and build LUT ground stations to receive the downlink from the satellites.  At Datron, a team designed a LUT with five horn antennas , and Jeffrey Pawlan designed the downconverter and the specialized monopulse receiver capable of locking onto the downlink from the satellites. France and Canada were responsible for the data generation and decoding.  They designed the computer that determined the approximate position of the beacon from the Doppler shift of the beacon's signal caused by the relative motion of the beacon and the receiving satellite.  The former Soviet Union was responsible for the design and construction of the first satellite to be launched.  Engineers from all four countries met in Moscow in February 1982 to successfully test the operational functionality of all of the equipment together in the same laboratory.

The Party States led development of the 406-MHz marine EPIRB , that used a digital messaging scheme, for detection by the system.  The EPIRB was seen as a key advancement in SAR technology in the perilous maritime environment.  The digital message allowed the beacon and its associated vessel to be uniquely identified.  Early in its history, the Cospas-Sarsat system was engineered to detect beacon-alerts transmitted at 406 MHz, 121.5 MHz and 243.0 MHz.  Because of a large number of false alerts, and the inability to uniquely identify such beacons because of their old, analogue technology (that provided no message, only a tone indicating distress), the Cospas-Sarsat system beginning in 2009 stopped receiving alerts from beacons operating at 121.5 MHz and 243.0 MHz, and now only receives and processes alerts from modern, digital 406-MHz beacons.

In the early 2000s (in 2003 in the USA) a new type of distress beacon, the personal locator beacon (PLB), became available [ 43 ] for use by individuals who cannot contact emergency services through normal telephone-originated services, such as 1-1-2 or 9-1-1 .  Typically PLBs are used by people engaged in recreational activities in remote areas, and by small-aircraft pilots and mariners as an adjunct to (or, when permitted, a substitute for) an ELT or EPIRB.

The design of distress beacons as a whole has evolved significantly since 1982. The newest 406-MHz beacons often incorporate global navigation satellite system (GNSS) receivers (such as those using GPS ). Such beacons determine their location using the internal GNSS receiver (or a connection to an external navigation source) and transmit in their distress message highly accurate position reports.  This provides a second method for Cospas-Sarsat to know the location of the distress, in addition to the calculations independently done by Cospas-Sarsat LUTs to determine the location.  The distress alert received by the satellites and the beacon location contained in the message and/or calculated from the distress signal are forwarded almost instantly to SAR agencies by Cospas-Sarsat's extensive international data-distribution network. This two-tiered reliability and global coverage of the system has inspired the current motto of SAR agencies: "Taking the 'Search' out of Search and Rescue." [ 44 ] References [ edit ] ^ Galileo's Contribution to Cospas-Sarsat ^ Cospas-Sarsat website, Formally associated Participant states and agencies ^ International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement – UN Treaty Series (PDF) ^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement" (PDF) ^ "Strategic Goals for the Cospas-Sarsat Programme", Cospas-Sarsat Strategic Plan (PDF) , Cospas-Sarsat ^ a b c Cospas-Sarsat website, "What is a Cospas-Sarsat 406 MHz Beacon" ^ Space Foundation's Space Technology Hall of Fame inducted technology ^ The Washington Post, 30 September 1982, page A3 ^ The Hartford Courant, 25 November 1982, page A6 ^ "About the Programme - International COSPAS-SARSAT" .

www.cospas-sarsat.int . Retrieved 2022-12-21 .

^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "Cospas-Sarsat System Data No.50, December 2024" (PDF) ^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "Cospas-Sarsat Strategic Plan", at section 2.1 (PDF) ^ AIN Online, "New ELT Rules from ICAO ^ Space Foundation Website ^ Space Technology Hall of Fame induction ceremony , 17 September 2014 ^ Cospas-Sarsat Website, "Handbook of (National) Beacon Regulations" , archived from the original on 2017-01-28 , retrieved 2017-02-03 ^ Cospas-Sarsat Website, "Current Space Segment Status and SAR Payloads" ^ "SAR/Galileo Satellites Information" . European GNSS Service Centre. 4 December 2021. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2021 .

^ "Search and Rescue (SAR) / Galileo Service" . European Union Space Programme Agency . Retrieved 19 December 2021 .

^ "SAR Payload Characteristics" . European GNSS Service Centre. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021 . Retrieved 19 December 2021 .

^ "SAR/Galileo Satellites Information" . European GNSS Service Centre. Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 19 December 2021 .

^ Clark, Nicola; Youssef, Nour (June 2016), "New York Times article, "Black Box from Missing EgyptAir Flight 804 is Said to be Detected" " , The New York Times ^ GPS World (January 2011) : The Distress Alerting Satellite System (DASS) ^ "NASA - Taking the 'Search' out of Search and Rescue" . Archived from the original on 2020-11-09 . Retrieved 2018-08-07 .

^ "Distress Alerting Satellite System (DASS)" . Archived from the original on 11 June 2016.

^ "First Galileo personal emergency beacon coming to 19 European countries" . GPS World. 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Galileo Search and Rescue Service – Navipedia" .

gssc.esa.int .

^ "Galileo now replying to SOS messages worldwide" . 30 November 2021 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ Cospas-Sarsat Website, "Cospas-Sarsat System" ^ Cospas-Sarsat Website, "Cospas-Sarsat System Data" (PDF) ^ ICAO Update on the Global Aeronautical Distress and safety System (GADSS) Global Aircraft Tracking Initiatives (March 2016) (PDF) ^ European Commission Proposal for Council Decision (June 2022) ^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "Specification for Cospas-Sarsat 406 MHz Distress Beacons", at section 2 (PDF) ^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "Specification for Second-Generation Cospas-Sarsat 406-MHz Distress Beacons", at section 2 (PDF) ^ a b Verrall, Ronald I.; Heard, Garry J. (2022).

The History of Defence Science in the Canadian Arctic (PDF) (Report). Ottawa, Canada: Department of National Defence . pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 9780660457819 .

^ Cospas-Sarsat website, "The History and Experience of the International Cospas-Sarsat Programme for Satellite-Aided Search and Rescue", at page 20 (PDF) ^ Hillger, Don; Garry Toth.

"COSPAS / SARSAT Program" . Colorado State University . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ Krebs, Gunter Dirk.

"Nadezhda" . Retrieved 6 October 2011 .

^ Kramer, Herbert J.

"COSPAS-S&RSAT (International Satellite System for Search & Rescue Services)" . eoportal . Retrieved 1 April 2023 .

^ Cospas-Sarsat Website, Information Bulletin, page 2 (PDF) ^ The Washington Post, 30 September 1982, page A3 ^ The Hartford Courant, 25 November 1982, page A6 ^ "NASA Search and Rescue Mission Office : Emergency Beacons" . 20 October 2007. Archived from the original on 20 October 2007.

^ "Taking the "Search" Out of "Search-and-Rescue" " . 14 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016.

External links [ edit ] Official Website for the International Cospas-Sarsat Programme International Astronautical Federation, "The History and Experience of the International Cospas-Sarsat Programme for Satellite-Aided Search and Rescue" Archived 2017-02-11 at the Wayback Machine Official Website for the USA's Sarsat Program Official Website for NASA's Search-and-Rescue Mission Office "Detailed SARSAT and COSPAS satellite information" . Archived from the original on August 15, 2015 . Retrieved September 8, 2015 .

"Lay Person Explanation of the Satellite System: COSPAS-SARSAT: 14,000 Lives Saved and Counting" . Archived from the original on January 13, 2015 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

v t e Politics of outer space Spacefaring nations Space policy Space traffic management Space debris management Space Debris Working Group Space Debris Committee Planetary protection principle Post-detection policy Asteroid impact Prediction Avoidance Spaceguard The Spaceguard Foundation Space races Cold War Space Race Sputnik crisis Timeline Billionaire space race Mars race Records Space propaganda Space competition Chinese space program Two Bombs, One Satellite doctrine (1966–1976) Shuguang program (1966–1972) Chinese ASAT program (1964–) 2007 test Project 921 (1992–) Shenzhou program Tiangong program Space station Chinese Lunar Exploration Program (2003–) Mars and beyond Planetary Exploration of China (2016–) MARS-500 study ESA Science Programme European Launcher Development Organisation (1960–1975) Europa launcher programme (1962–1973) European Space Research Organisation (1964–1975) European Space Agency (1975–) EU/ESA Space Council European Cooperation for Space Standardization European Space Research and Technology Centre Concurrent Design Facility European Astronaut Centre ESA Centre for Earth Observation Living Planet Programme European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications European Data Relay System Space Telescope European Coordinating Facility (1983–2010) European Space Astronomy Centre (2005–) European Space Security and Education Centre European Space Operations Centre ESTRACK network Guiana Space Centre Ariane launcher programme (1973–) Vega launcher programme (1998–) European Space Policy Institute Space Situational Awareness Programme Future Launchers Preparatory Programme Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle PRIDE Space Rider ESA Television Mars and beyond Mars Exploration Joint Initiative MARS-500 study Aurora programme ExoMars Horizon 2000 (1985–1995) SOHO Cassini–Huygens Huygens Cluster Cluster II XMM- Newton Rosetta INTEGRAL Herschel Planck Horizon 2000 Plus (1995–2015) ISS programme Politics Gaia LISA Pathfinder BepiColombo Cosmic Vision (2015–2025) Solar Orbiter Euclid ARIEL EnVision CHEOPS JUICE ATHENA LISA Comet Interceptor SMILE EU Space Programme Western European Union Satellite Centre (1992–2002) EU Satellite Centre (2002–) EU/ESA Space Council EU Commission DG Defence Industry and Space European GNSS Supervisory Authority (2004–2010) European GNSS Agency (2010–2021) EU Agency for the Space Programme (2021–) Galileo programme Copernicus programme EGNOS programme EUSST programme Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications European Union Aviation Safety Agency European Network of Civil Aviation Safety Investigation Authorities European Defence Agency Europe by Satellite Other European initiatives and bodies AeroSpace and Defence Industries Association of Europe Eurospace Eurocontrol Council of Europe Council of European Aerospace Societies European Broadcasting Union European Civil Aviation Conference European Committee for Standardization / European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations European Telecommunications Standards Institute European Organisation for Civil Aviation Equipment European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites European Patent Organisation European Patent Office European Telecommunications Satellite Organization European Southern Observatory Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Indian space policy Department of Space Indian Human Spaceflight Programme Space Activities Bill Indian ASAT programme Mission Shakti British space programme Creation of the British National Committee for Space Research (1958) Start of the Ariel programme (1962) Black Arrow launcher (1964–1971) Creation of the British National Space Centre (1985) Outer Space Act 1986 Project Juno (1991) Space Innovation and Growth Team (2009–2010) Creation of the UK Space Agency (2010) Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 Space Industry Act 2018 UK Global Navigation Satellite System (2018–2020) 2021 Integrated Review Defence in a Competitive Age US space policy Truman space policy Operation Paperclip list of scientists Aerobee rocket program RAND Establishment of Cape Canaveral Eisenhower space policy WS-117L Project Vanguard Sputnik crisis Introduction to Outer Space 1958 NASA Act Space Act Agreement Cancellation of Man in Space Soonest Launch of Project Mercury Missile gap Launch of X-15 program Kennedy space policy Launch of the Mariner program Launch of the Gemini project Launch of the Apollo program " We choose to go to the Moon " Johnson space policy 1967 Outer Space Treaty Nixon space policy Moon landing Extra-Terrestrial Exposure Law Launch of the Space Shuttle Program Skylab Ford space policy Apollo–Soyuz Launch of the Viking program Carter space policy Reagan space policy Citizens' Advisory Council Strategy of Technology doctrine Strategic Defense Initiative Space Station Freedom proposal 1984 Space Act 1985 anti-satellite missile test Space Shuttle Challenger disaster Rogers Report Ride Report George H. W. Bush space policy Space Exploration Initiative 1990 Augustine Committee Hubble Space Telescope National Space Council Clinton space policy Faster, better, cheaper Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Launch of the Mars Exploration Program 1998 Space Act Decadal Planning Team Launch of the X-37 program George W. Bush space policy Aerospace Industry Commission 2002 National missile defense directive Space Shuttle Columbia disaster Vision for Space Exploration Aldridge Commission ESAS 2005 NASA Act Launch of the Constellation program Operation Burnt Frost Obama space policy 2009 Augustine Committee Kennedy Space Center speech Cancellation of the Constellation program Launch of the Space Launch System program Redesign of the Orion program Flexible path Mars Exploration Joint Initiative 2010 NASA Act Title 51 Space Shuttle retirement Development of the Commercial Crew Program 2014 NASA Act 2015 Space Act Trump space policy Re-establishment of the National Space Council Creation of the Space Force Launch of the Artemis program Launch of the Lunar Gateway project Executive Order 13959 China exclusion policy of NASA International Traffic in Arms Regulations Full-spectrum dominance doctrine Budget of NASA House Committee on Space NESDIS Office of Space Commerce FCC FAA/AST NRO IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Society Antennas & Propagation Society Broadcast Technology Society Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society Vehicular Technology Society USSR and Russia Soviet space program Stalin Operation Osoaviakhim (1946) list of scientists Khrushchev Sputnik program Sputnik crisis (1957) Vostok program (1960–1963) Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (1960–1982) Soviet crewed lunar programs (1961–1976) Voskhod program (1964–1966) Brezhnev Soyuz program (1967–) Interkosmos (1967–1991) Salyut program (1971–1986) Almaz (1973–1977) Buran program (1974–1993) Apollo–Soyuz (1975) Gorbachev Mir (1986–2001) Roscosmos Yeltsin Gore–Chernomyrdin Commission ISS (1993–) Shuttle–Mir program ISS programme Politics Medvedev Medvedev modernisation programme 2010 Military doctrine Putin United Rocket and Space Corporation (2013–2015) 2014 Military doctrine 2015 Creation of Roscosmos Mars MARS-500 study ExoMars Other policies Australian space program Brazilian space program Emirati space program Japanese space program Kazakh space program Kenyan space program Lebanese space program North Korean space program Pakistani space program Space programme 2040 Philippine space program South Korean space program Ugandan space initiatives International Space Station programme Politics of the International Space Station United Nations International Civil Aviation Organization ITU-R Office for Outer Space Affairs UN-SPIDER Space Generation Advisory Council Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space General Assembly Fourth Committee Other intergovernmental or inter-agency bodies African Space Agency Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems Committee on Earth Observation Satellites Committee on Space Research International Planetary Data Alliance International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Group on Earth Observations Global Standards Collaboration Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' International Mobile Satellite Organization International Space Exploration Coordination Group International Space Station Multilateral Coordination Board International Telecommunications Satellite Organization Intersputnik Orbital Debris Co-ordination Working Group Regional African Satellite Communication Organization Arab Satellite Communications Organization Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization Space law Partial Test Ban Treaty (1963) Outer Space Treaty (1967) Rescue Agreement (1968) Space Liability Convention (1972) US-USSR Cooperation Agreement (1972) Satellite Convention (1974) Registration Convention (1975) Bogota Declaration (1976) Moon Treaty (1979) Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space (1981) International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Agreement (1988) International Space Station Intergovernmental Agreement (1998) International Docking System Standard International Charter 'Space and Major Disasters' (1999) Cape Town Treaty, Space Assets protocol (2012) Artemis Accords (2020) Space jurisdiction Common heritage of mankind Extraterrestrial real estate Astronomical naming conventions ITU Radio Regulations CCSDS standards ODCWG standards CEOS standards COSPAR standards International Designator IPDA standards GSC standards GEO standards ISECG standards Various conventions, treaties, agreements, memorandums, charters or declarations establishing and governing intergovernmental organisations or inter-agency bodies dealing with space affairs Commercial use Space industry India Russia United Kingdom United States Private spaceflight Launch market competition Space tourism Space advertising Space technology Space-based economy Space trade Space manufacturing Lunar resources Project Harvest Moon Asteroid mining Militarisation Space forces, units and formations Space forces Australia Brazil Canada China Colombia France Germany Iran AJA IRGC Israel Japan Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Pakistan Russia South Korea Spain Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States History Structure Vietnam Ranks and insignia Space commands France India Italy NATO NORAD United Kingdom United States Space warfare Space domain awareness Space weapon Anti-satellite weapon China India Russia United States Kinetic bombardment Kill vehicle Missile defense Military satellite Reconnaissance satellite Spaceplane Satellite jamming Space advocacy Air & Space Forces Association Alliance for Space Development National Space Society Space Frontier Foundation Mars Society Moon Society Students for the Exploration and Development of Space Arthur C. Clarke Institute for Modern Technologies British Interplanetary Society Coalition for Deep Space Exploration International Academy of Astronautics International Astronautical Federation International Astronomical Union Lunar Explorers Society Space Exploration Alliance Space Fellowship Space Force Association Space Foundation The Planetary Society v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons v t e Soviet Union–United States relations Diplomatic posts Embassy Washington D.C.

Soviet Ambassadors Mrs. George Pullman House Moscow US Ambassadors Spaso House Kuybyshev Consulates New York John Hammond House San Francisco Saint Petersburg Vladivostok United Nations Headquarters Representatives Russian Mission Residency Other Elmcroft Estate Killenworth Lothrop Mansion Pioneer Point Diplomacy World War II Summits Declaration of the Four Nations Lend-Lease Lend-Lease Sherman tanks Moscow Conference (1941) Moscow Conference (1942) Moscow Conference (1943) Moscow Conference (1944) Moscow Conference (1945) Potsdam Conference Council of Foreign Ministers Tehran Conference Yalta Conference Cold War Summits 1973 United States–Soviet Union wheat deal Berlin Conference (1954) Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls Council for American–Soviet Trade Dartmouth Conference Eighteen Nation Committee on Disarmament European Advisory Commission Geneva Accords (1988) Geneva Conference (1973) Geneva Summit (1955) Geneva Summit (1985) Glassboro Summit Conference Governors Island Summit Helsinki Summit (1990) Lacy-Zarubin Agreement Madrid Conference Letter Malta Summit Moscow Summit (1972) Moscow Summit (1974) Moscow Summit (1988) Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions NATO Double-Track Decision Reykjavík Summit Stalin Note State visit by Nikita Khrushchev to the United States United Nations Security Council Resolution 135 United States restitution to the Soviet Union US/USSR Acceptance of Law Governing Innocent Passage Vienna Summit Washington Summit (1987) Washington Summit (1973) Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control Policies Containment Détente Linkage Rollback Stimson Doctrine Welles Declaration Triangular diplomacy Zero Option Speeches 1989 visit by Boris Yeltsin to the United States American University speech And you are lynching Negroes Chicken Kiev speech Evil Empire speech Ich bin ein Berliner Kitchen Debate Kuzma's mother Shoe-banging incident Tear down this wall!

We will bury you Other Pushinka Soviet Military Power publication Historical Relations Russia–United States Russian Empire–United States Treaties and Agreements Arms Control 1990 Chemical Weapons Accord Agreement on the Prevention of Nuclear War Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty INF McCloy–Zorin Accords Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty SALT I NTM SALT II START I Threshold Test Ban Treaty Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Space Outer Space Treaty Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes Territory Four Power Agreement on Berlin Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany USSR–USA Maritime Boundary Agreement Wanfried agreement World War II Moscow Declarations Potsdam Agreement Other Baruch Plan Bush legs Moscow–Washington hotline U.S.–Soviet Incidents at Sea agreement Legislation Executive Order 8484 Former Soviet Union Demilitarization Act of 1992 FRIENDSHIP Act of 1993 Jackson–Vanik amendment Russian Famine Relief Act Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 Science Space APAS Apollo–Soyuz Bion satellites Kosmos 782 Kosmos 936 Kosmos 1129 Kosmos 1514 Kosmos 1667 Kosmos 1887 Kosmos 2044 International Cospas-Sarsat Programme Mir SAGE Space Race TOPAZ-I U.S.–Soviet Space Bridge Yardymly Other International Conference of Laser Applications Shvetsov M-25 Uzel Culture Chess US vs. USSR radio chess match 1945 World Chess Championship 1972 Bobby Fischer Education Anglo-American School of Moscow St. Petersburg Russian Cultural Center Russian Embassy School in Washington, D.C.

Russian Mission School in New York Literature Amerika (magazine) Deep Black Eagles East International Publishers Russian Life Sovfoto The Admiral's Daughter Who's Who in the CIA X Article Radio / Music Ordinary People Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Wave Sports 1972 Olympic men's basketball final 1976 Philadelphia Flyers–Red Army game Glasnost Bowl Goodwill Games Miracle on Ice Super Series USA–USSR Track and Field Dual Meet Series TV / Film Free to Be... a Family Soviet submissions for the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film Stalingrad The Extraordinary Adventures of Mr. West in the Land of the Bolsheviks Other American National Exhibition Apollo-Soyuz (cigarette) In Soviet Georgia Soviet Interview Project White Coke Cold War Overview Origins Timeline 1947–1948 1948–1953 1953–1962 1962–1979 1979–1985 1985–1991 Nuclear arms race Space Race Timeline Espionage Americans Soviets Atomic spies Cold War in Asia Operations Operation Anadyr Operation Breakthrough Operation Cedar Operation Chrome Dome Operation Cyclone Operation Denver Operation Dropshot Operation Giant Lance Operation Gold Operation Ivy Bells Operation Keelhaul Operation Lincoln Operation Monopoly Operation RYAN Operation Safe Haven (1957) Operation Shocker Operation Sunrise Projects Project Azorian Project Coldfeet Project Dark Gene Project Genetrix Project Grab Bag Project HOMERUN Project Hula Project Moby Dick Project Mogul Venona project Other 7th Air Escadrille Active Measures Working Group Bomber gap CIA activities in the Soviet Union Cold War tensions and the polio vaccine GIUK gap Missile gap Nitrophenyl pentadienal NSC 68 Plan Totality Red Scare Seven Days to the River Rhine Sheldon names Smolensk Archive SDI The Moscow rules United States aerial reconnaissance of the Soviet Union United States war plans (1945–1950) U.S. Army Field Manual 30-31B Incidents World War II Gorin v. United States Niš incident Cold War 1958 C-130 shootdown incident 1960 RB-47 shootdown incident 1960 U-2 incident 1961 F-84 Thunderstreak incident 1964 T-39 shootdown incident 1980 Summer Olympics boycott 1983 Soviet nuclear false alarm incident 1984 Summer Olympics boycott 1986 Black Sea incident 1988 Black Sea bumping incident Able Archer 83 Autumn Forge 83 Aeroflot Flight 244 Air-to-air combat losses between the Soviet Union and the United States Arrest of Mark Kaminsky and Harvey Bennett Arthur D. Nicholson Berlin Blockade Berlin Crisis of 1958–1959 Berlin Crisis of 1961 Capture of the Tuapse Cuban Missile Crisis Crateology Dymshits–Kuznetsov hijacking affair Feodor Fedorenko Gambell incident Hollow Nickel Case Iran crisis of 1946 John Anthony Walker Karl Linnas Kasenkina Case Korean Air Lines Flight 007 Martin and Mitchell defection Moscow Signal Pan Am Flight 708 Seaboard World Airlines Flight 253A Shostakovich v. Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp.

Siberian Seven Soviet submarine K-129 Soviet submarine K-219 Sputnik crisis SS Metallurg Anosov Transfermium Wars Turkish Straits crisis United States grain embargo against the Soviet Union Urengoy–Pomary–Uzhhorod pipeline We begin bombing in five minutes Yellow rain Yeniseysk-15 Military relations Russian Revolution American Expeditionary Force, North Russia American Expeditionary Force, Siberia North Russia intervention Siberian intervention United States and the Russian Revolution White movement World War II Allied Control Council Allied Kommandatura Allied technological cooperation during World War II ALSIB Arctic convoys of World War II Belorussia-class cargo ship Berlin Victory Parade of 1945 Elbe Day Four Policemen Line of Contact Northwest Staging Route Pacific Route Persian Corridor Persian Gulf Command SS Dakotan SS Iowan Tripartite Naval Commission USS West Bridge Warsaw airlift Cold War Eisenhower Doctrine Four Power Naval Commission Four-Power Authorities Military liaison missions Reagan Doctrine Truman Doctrine Armaments AG submarines Bell P-63 Kingcobra Comparison of the AK-47 and M16 SS Indigirka Tupolev Tu-4 Tupolev Tu-70 Tupolev Tu-80 USCGC Southwind Organizations Soviet Union Amtorg Trading Corporation Ansonia Clock Company Foundation for Social Inventions Gennady Alferenko Institute for US and Canadian Studies Russian Soviet Government Bureau Soviet Government Purchasing Commission in the U.S.

United States American Committee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia Ark Project American Peace Mobilization American Relief Administration American Russian Institute American–Soviet friendship movement American-Soviet Peace Walks Center for Citizen Initiatives Communist Party USA Dewey Commission Freedom Sunday for Soviet Jews Friends of Soviet Russia Friendship Flight '89 Friendship Flight (Alaska Airlines) Fund for Armenian Relief Kennan Institute Kersten Committee National Committee for a Free Europe National Council of American–Soviet Friendship Organization for Jewish Colonization in Russia Russian-American Industrial Corporation Russian War Relief Society for Technical Aid to Soviet Russia Student Struggle for Soviet Jewry U.S. Commission on the Ukraine Famine U.S. Peace Council Related Baltic Freedom Day Captive Nations Captive Nations Week GAZ Georgi Bolshakov Little Joe New world order (politics) Refusenik Roswell Garst Samantha Smith Self-propelled barge T-36 Sisson Documents Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War Suzanne Massie Category:Soviet Union–United States relations Authority control databases VIAF 41°08′04″N 16°50′04″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.13444°N 16.83444°E ﻿ / 41.13444; 16.83444 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Cospas-Sarsat_Programme&oldid=1295759005 " Categories : Maritime communication Emergency communication Rescue Soviet and Russian space institutions Canada–Soviet Union relations International telecommunications Soviet Union–United States relations France–Soviet Union relations Intergovernmental organizations established by treaty Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2014 Articles containing Russian-language text Webarchive template wayback links Coordinates not on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Cospas-Sarsat Programme 18 languages Add topic

