Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Full title 2 Background and context 3 Tract 4 Themes 5 Reception 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book on constitutional theory by John Milton Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates is a book by John Milton , in which he defends the right of people to execute a guilty sovereign, whether tyrannical or not.

In the text, Milton conjectures about the formation of commonwealths. He comes up with a kind of constitutionalism but not an outright anti-monarchical argument. He gives a theory of how people come into commonwealths and come to elect kings. He explains what the role of a king should be, and conversely what a tyrant is, and why it is necessary to limit a ruler's power through laws and oaths.

Full title [ edit ] The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates: proving that it is lawful, and hath been held so through the ages, for any, who has the Power, to call to account a Tyrant, or wicked King, and after due conviction, to depose, and put him to death; if the ordinary MAGISTRATE have neglected, or deny’d to do it.  And that they, who of late so much blame Deposing, are the Men that did it themselves .

[ 1 ] Background and context [ edit ] In February 1649, less than two weeks after Parliament executed Charles I , Milton published The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates to justify the action and to defend the government against the Presbyterians who initially voted for the regicide and later condemned it, and whose practices he believed were a "growing threat to freedom." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Milton aimed to expose false reasoning from the opposition, citing scripture throughout the Tenure of Kings and Magistrates to counter biblical reference that would cast holy and public disapproval on Parliament's actions.

[ 4 ] "Milton’s case was not that Charles I was guilty as charged, but that Parliament had the right to prosecute him." [ 5 ] Milton later remarked that the piece was "written to reconcile men's minds, rather than to determine anything about Charles".

[ 6 ] The work also rebuts theories posited by Robert Filmer and Thomas Hobbes .

[ 1 ] Specifically, Milton took issue with the notions that a separation of powers leads to anarchy and that the king's power was naturally absolute.

[ 7 ] The work appeared five times: in 1649, perhaps written during the King's trial, with a second edition following in 1650 ("with improvements" [ 1 ] ), and twice in collections ( Works , 1697, and Complete Collection , 1698).  A final edition, revised, retitled, and presenting somewhat altered views, appeared in 1689 [ 8 ] during a controversy over the succession of William III. This edition, titled Pro Populo Adversus Tyrannos: Or the Sovereign Right and Power of the People over Tyrants , may have been edited by James Tyrell , a historian, but continued to be advertised, in 1691, as being Milton's work.

[ 9 ] Tract [ edit ] Milton begins The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates by paraphrasing the words of Sallust to describe the nature of tyranny: [ 10 ] Hence is it that Tyrants are not oft offended, nor stand much in doubt of bad men, as being all naturally servile; but in whom vertue and true worth most is eminent, them they feare in earnest, as by right thir Maisters, against them lies all thir hatred and suspicion. Consequentlie neither doe bad men hate Tyrants, but have been alwayes readiest with the falsifi'd names of Loyalty , and Obedience , to colour over thir base compliances.

[ 11 ] Milton continues by discussing the nature of law, and the rule of law, and the private sphere: [ 10 ] And surely they that shall boast, as we doe, to be a free Nation, and not have in themselves the power to remove, or to abolish any governour supreme, or subordinat, with the government it self upon urgent causes, may please thir fancy with a ridiculous and painted freedom, fit to coz'n babies; but are indeed under tyranny and servitude; as wanting that power, which is the root and source of all liberty, to dispose and œconomize in the Land which God hath giv'n them, as Maisters of Family in thir own house and free inheritance. Without which natural and essential power of a free Nation, though bearing high thir heads, they can in due esteem be thought no better than slaves and vassals born, in the tenure and occupation of another inheriting Lord.  Whose government, though not illegal, or intolerable, hangs over them as a Lordly scourge, not as a free government; and therfore to be abrogated. How much more justly then may they fling off tyranny, or tyrants; who being once depos'd can be no more the privat men, as subject to the reach of Justice and arraignment as any other transgressors.

[ 12 ] Milton calls on the people to support Parliament's actions and wisdom: [ 2 ] Another sort there is, who comming in the cours of these affaires, to have thir share in great actions, above the form of Law or Custom, at least to give thir voice and approbation, begin to swerve, and almost shiver at the Majesty and grandeur of som noble deed, as if they were newly enter'd into a great sin; disputing presidents, forms, and circumstances, when the Common-wealth nigh perishes for want of deeds in substance, don with just and faithfull expedition. To these I wish better instruction, and vertue equal to thir calling; the former of which, that is to say Instruction, I shall indeavour, as my dutie is, to bestow on them; and exhort them not to startle from the just and pious resolution of adhering with all thir strength & assistance to the present Parlament & Army, in the glorious way wherin Justice and Victory hath set them; [ 13 ] Themes [ edit ] Jonathan Scott believed that The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates was one of the "key republican texts" during the 17th century.

[ 14 ] However, Milton gave up parts of his Republican views to support Parliament, especially when he called for the people to support the government.

[ 2 ] "[It is] more properly termed a regicide tract, justifying the killing of King Charles I, rather than a republican tract, justifying the establishment of a new kind of government." [ 15 ] The argument in The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates is complicated, and Milton attempts to reexplain his views in Eikonoklastes .

[ 16 ] With both pieces Milton attempted to disrupt the popular image of Charles I as innocent ( Eikonoklastes means "image breaker").

[ 3 ] The work is unique compared to other works during its time because Milton emphasises the deeds of individuals as the only way for there to be justice. The work also emphasises the freedom of the individual, and only through such freedom is an individual able to develop properly. Citing classical and biblical references, this emphasis refutes the divine right of kings , as well as Hobbes's idea of absolute power held by a monarch. Milton argues that no man is better than another, having all been created in God's image, free and equal, and that all have a right to dispose of themselves. Further, he argues that their freedom and equality entitles them to inflict the same treatment upon the king they would receive at the hands of the law, that magistrates are empowered by the people: [ 17 ] [ 18 ] It being thus manifest that the power of Kings and Magistrates is nothing else, but what is only derivative, transferr’d and committed to them in trust from the People, to the Common good of them all, in whom the power yet remains fundamentally, and cannot be tak’n from them, without a violation of thir natural birthright.

[ 19 ] Milton emphasises the concept of trust, instilled in the king by the people, and the dynasty's violation of that trust.

[ 20 ] He describes the crimes perpetrated by the executed King, asserting that kings are accountable to more than just God.

[ 21 ] Also, Milton emphasises the importance of an education focusing on the ability to discriminate between ideas and establishing self-discipline.

[ 22 ] Reception [ edit ] The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates immediately influenced the political works and theories of many others, including Bulstrode Whitelocke , John Canne , John Lilburne , John Twyn , and various anonymous works. The amount of attention that the work received prompted John Shawcross to declare that the work, itself, allowed Milton to be viewed as a "great writer".

[ 8 ] Later on, the work was able to influence others without them knowing; a piece by Algernon Sidney, which copies words directly from The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates , influenced various tracts and many responders to Sidney did not know that the lines were originally from Milton.

[ 23 ] Milton's controversial denial of the divine right of kings prevented widespread acceptance of The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates .

[ 4 ] The Song Curse my Name by the German metal band Blind Guardian is an interpretation of Milton's tract.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Frison 2005 p. 171 ^ a b c Dzelzainis 2003 p. 296 ^ a b Woolrych 1997 p. 644 ^ a b Patrick 1967 p. 365 ^ Corns 1998 p. 72 ^ qtd in Shawcross 1993 p. 104 ^ Frison 2005 p. 172 ^ a b Shawcross 1993 p. 105 ^ Shawcross 1993 p. 117 ^ a b Dzelzainis 2003 p. 306 ^ Milton 1962 p. 190 ^ Milton 1962 pp. 236–237 ^ Milton 1962 p. 194 ^ Scott 1992 p. 37 ^ Corns 1998 p. 67 ^ Dzelzainis 2003 p. 307 ^ Frison 2005 p. 176 ^ Frison 2005 p. 178 ^ qtd in Frison 2005 p. 177 ^ Frison 2005 p. 177 ^ Frison 2005 p. 179 ^ Shawcross 1993 p. 104 ^ Shawcross 1993 p. 106 References [ edit ] Corns, Thomas N.

John Milton: the Prose Works .  Twayne:  New York, 1998.  67–75.  Print.

Dzelzainis, Martin. "Republicanism" in A Companion to Milton . Ed. Thomas Corns. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003.

Frison, Danièle.  "Rights and Liberties in John Milton’s The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates ".  Christophe Tournu & Neil Forsyth, eds.

Milton, Rights and Liberties .  Bern: Peter Lang, 2005.  171–181.  Print.

Milton, John.

Complete Prose Works of John Milton.

Vol III Ed. Don Wolfe. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1962.

Patrick, J. Max.

The Prose of John Milton.

New York: Doubleday and Company Inc., 1967.

Scott, Jonathan. "The English Republican Imagination" in Revolution and Restoration: England in the 1650s . ed.

John Morrill . London: Collins & Brown, 1992.

Shawcross, John.

John Milton: The Self and the World . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1993.

Woolrych, Austin.

The Oxford Companion to British History .  Ed. John Cannon.  New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.  644.  Print.

External links [ edit ] The complete text of The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates at the Wayback Machine (archived 1 December 2023), presented by Dartmouth College .

v t e John Milton Topics Poetic style Reception history Religion Politics Early life Relationships Poetry Poems 1645 On the Morning of Christ's Nativity Upon the Circumcision The Passion Arcades Comus " Lycidas " " L'Allegro " " Il Penseroso " Paradise Lost Paradise Regained Samson Agonistes Poems 1673 Antiprelatical tracts Of Reformation Of Prelatical Episcopacy Animadversions The Reason of Church-Government Apology for Smectymnuus Divorce tracts Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce Judgement of Martin Bucer Concerning Divorce Tetrachordon Colasterion Political tracts Areopagitica The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates Eikonoklastes Defensio pro Populo Anglicano Defensio Secunda A Treatise of Civil Power The Ready and Easy Way Other writings Of Education The History of Britain Of True Religion Individual sonnets " When I Consider How My Light Is Spent " " On the Late Massacre in Piedmont " " Methought I Saw my Late Espoused Saint " Disputed De Doctrina Christiana Related John Milton (father) Edward Phillips (nephew) John Phillips (nephew) Milton: A Poem in Two Books (1804–1810) Neo-Miltonic syllabics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Tenure_of_Kings_and_Magistrates&oldid=1260997865 " Categories : 1649 books Political books Books by John Milton Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from December 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 3 December 2024, at 18:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates Add languages Add topic

