Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Linguistics 2 Philosophy of mathematics 3 Epistemology 4 Legal philosophy 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources Toggle the table of contents Conventionalism 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands Polski Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical belief that principles depend on societal agreements, not external reality Conventionalism is the philosophical attitude that fundamental principles of a certain kind are grounded on (explicit or implicit) agreements in society, rather than on external reality.

Unspoken rules play a key role in the philosophy's structure.  Although this attitude is commonly held with respect to the rules of grammar , its application to the propositions of ethics , law , science , biology , mathematics , and logic is more controversial.

Linguistics [ edit ] See also: Cratylism and True name The debate on linguistic conventionalism dates back to Plato 's Cratylus and the philosophy of Kumārila Bhaṭṭa .

[ citation needed ] It has been the standard position of modern linguistics since Ferdinand de Saussure 's l'arbitraire du signe , but there have always been dissenting positions of phonosemantics , recently defended by Margaret Magnus and Vilayanur S. Ramachandran .

[ citation needed ] Philosophy of mathematics [ edit ] See also: Preintuitionism The French mathematician Henri Poincaré was among the first to articulate a conventionalist view.  Poincaré's use of non-Euclidean geometries in his work on differential equations convinced him that Euclidean geometry should not be regarded as an a priori truth.  He held that axioms in geometry should be chosen for the results they produce, not for their apparent coherence with – possibly flawed – human intuitions about the physical world.

Epistemology [ edit ] Conventionalism was adopted by logical positivists , chiefly A. J. Ayer and Carl Hempel , and extended to both mathematics and logic.  To deny rationalism , Ayer sees two options for empiricism regarding the necessity of the truth of formal logic (and mathematics): 1) deny that they actually are necessary, and then account for why they only appear so, or 2) claim that the truths of logic and mathematics lack factual content – they are not "truths about the world" – and then explain how they are nevertheless true and informative.

[ 1 ] John Stuart Mill adopted the former, which Ayer criticized, opting himself for the latter.  Ayer's argument relies primarily on the analytic/synthetic distinction .

The French philosopher Pierre Duhem espoused a broader conventionalist view encompassing all of science.

[ 2 ] Duhem was skeptical that human perceptions are sufficient to understand the "true," metaphysical nature of reality and argued that scientific laws should be valued mainly for their predictive power and correspondence with observations.

Karl Popper broadened the meaning of conventionalism still more. In The Logic of Scientific Discovery , he defined a "conventionalist stratagem" as any technique that is used by a theorist to evade the consequences of a falsifying observation or experiment. Popper identified four such stratagems: introducing an ad hoc hypothesis that makes the refuting evidence seem irrelevant; modifying the ostensive definitions so as to alter the content of a theory; doubting the reliability of the experimenter; declaring that the observations that threaten the tested theory are irrelevant; casting doubt on the acumen of the theorist when he does not produce ideas that can save the theory.

Popper argued that it was crucial to avoid conventionalist stratagems if falsifiability of a theory was to be preserved. It has been argued that the standard model of cosmology is built upon a set of conventionalist stratagems.

[ 3 ] In the 1930s, a Polish philosopher Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz proposed a view that he called radical conventionalism – as opposed to moderate conventionalism developed by Henri Poincaré and Pierre Duhem . Radical conventionalism was originally outlined in The World-Picture and the Conceptual Apparatus , an article published in “Erkenntnis” in 1934. The theory can be characterized by the following theses: (1) there are languages or – as Ajdukiewicz used to say – conceptual apparatuses (schemes) which are not intertranslatable, (2) any knowledge must be articulate in one of those languages, (3) the choice of a language is arbitrary, and it is possible to change from one language to another.

[ 4 ] Therefore, there is a conventional or decisional element in all knowledge (including perceptual). In his later writings – under the influence of Alfred Tarski – Ajdukiewicz rejected radical conventionalism in favour of a semantic epistemology.

Legal philosophy [ edit ] Conventionalism, as applied to legal philosophy is one of the three rival conceptions of law constructed by American legal philosopher Ronald Dworkin in his work Law's Empire . The other two conceptions of law are legal pragmatism and law as integrity .

According to conventionalism as defined by Dworkin, a community's legal institutions should contain clear social conventions relied upon which rules are promulgated. Such rules will serve as the sole source of information for all the community members because they demarcate clearly all the circumstances in which state coercion will and will not be exercised.

Dworkin nonetheless has argued that this justification fails to fit with facts as there are many occasions wherein clear applicable legal rules are absent. It follows that, as he maintained, conventionalism can provide no valid ground for state coercion . Dworkin himself favored law as integrity as the best justification of state coercion.

One famous criticism of Dworkin's idea comes from Stanley Fish who argues that Dworkin, like the Critical Legal Studies movement, Marxists and adherents of feminist jurisprudence , was guilty of a false 'Theory Hope'. Fish claims that such mistake stems from their mistaken belief that there exists a general or higher 'theory' that explains or constrains all fields of activity like state coercion.

Another criticism is based on Dworkin's assertion that positivists' claims amount to conventionalism.

H. L. A. Hart , as a soft positivist, denies such claim as he had pointed out that citizens cannot always discover the law as plain matter of fact. It is however unclear as to whether Joseph Raz , an avowed hard positivist, can be classified as conventionalist as Raz has claimed that law is composed "exclusively" of social facts, which could be complex, and thus difficult to be discovered.

In particular, Dworkin has characterized law as having the main function of restraining state's coercion.

[ citation needed ] Nigel Simmonds has rejected Dworkin's disapproval of conventionalism, claiming that his characterization of law is too narrow.

See also [ edit ] French historical epistemology Émile Boutroux Consensus theory of truth References [ edit ] ^ Ayer, Alfred Jules.

Language, Truth and Logic , Dover Publications, Inc.: New York. 1952. p. 73.

^ Yemima Ben-Menahem, Conventionalism: From Poincare to Quine , Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 39.

^ Merritt, David (2017). "Cosmology and convention".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics .

57 : 41– 52.

arXiv : 1703.02389 .

Bibcode : 2017SHPMP..57...41M .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2016.12.002 .

S2CID 119401938 .

^ See: J. Giedymin, Editor’s Introduction , in: K. Ajdukiewicz, The Scientific World-Perspective and Other Essays 1961-1963 , ed. by J. Giedymin, “Synthese” Library, vol. 108, Dordrecht 1978, pp. XIX-XX. To this brief characterization Giedymin adds that – according to Ajdukiewicz – the nature of changes in science throughout its history is discontinuous.

Sources [ edit ] The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Henri Poincaré "Pierre  Duhem". Notes by David Huron Mary Jo Nye, "The Boutroux Circle and Poincare's Conventionalism," Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 40, No. 1. (Jan. – Mar., 1979), pp. 107–120.

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250817153931
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.363 seconds
Real time usage: 0.475 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1872/1000000
Revision size: 8796/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 59539/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4161/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28839/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.224/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5166539/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  384.994      1 -total
 30.96%  119.210      3 Template:Navbox
 24.53%   94.443      1 Template:Philosophy_of_language
 21.90%   84.324      1 Template:Reflist
 18.86%   72.598      1 Template:Short_description
 18.85%   72.559      1 Template:Cite_journal
 12.26%   47.188      3 Template:Citation_needed
 10.53%   40.554      2 Template:Pagetype
 10.31%   39.686      3 Template:Fix
  8.84%   34.042      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7490670:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817153931 and revision id 1306407337. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conventionalism&oldid=1306407337 " Categories : Metatheory of science Metaethics Theories of deduction Theories of law Ethical theories Relativism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 15:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conventionalism 19 languages Add topic

