Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influence of Germany and Austria-Hungary 2 Modern Albanian historiography Toggle Modern Albanian historiography subsection 2.1 Albanian socialist historiography (1945-1992) 2.2 Post communist Albanian Historiography 3 Themes Toggle Themes subsection 3.1 Early Albanian history 3.2 Ottoman period and Islam in Albania 3.3 Skanderbeg 3.4 Treaty of London 3.5 Other 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Albania 1 language Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Methodology in Albanian history studies The Historiography of Albania ( Albanian : Historiografia e Shqipërisë ) or Albanian historiography ( Albanian : Historiografia shqiptare ) refers to the studies, sources, critical methods and interpretations used by scholars to study the history of Albania and Albanians .

Influence of Germany and Austria-Hungary [ edit ] Theodor Ippen in Shkodër wearing a northern Albanian costume Theodor Anton Ippen , who would become a consul of Austria-Hungary in Scutari between 1897 and 1903, belonged to the group of Albanologists whose works were published through the state-financed institutes of Austria-Hungary .

[ 1 ] He participated in writing and disseminating the first history of Albania published on the Albanian language because he insisted that it would be beneficial for the awakening of the Albanian national consciousness and therefore for the Dual Monarchy.

[ 2 ] Ippen struggled for the establishment of an independent nation-state of Albanians.

[ 3 ] Modern Albanian historiography [ edit ] There are two main sources of modern Albanian historiography : intellectuals from the Albanian National Awakening ( Rilindja ) period and historians from the regime of the People's Socialist Republic of Albania .

[ 4 ] From 1878 onward, the national Awakening period galvanised Albanian intellectuals among some who emerged as the first modern Albanian scholars and they were preoccupied with overcoming linguistic and cultural differences between Albanian subgroups (Gegs and Tosks) and religious divisions (Muslim and Christians).

[ 5 ] At that time, these scholars lacked access to many primary sources to construct the idea that Albanians were descendants of Illyrians, while Greater Albania was not considered a priority.

[ 5 ] Compared with their Balkan counterparts, these Albanian historians were very moderate and alongside politicians mainly had the goal to get socio-political recognition and autonomy for Albanians under Ottoman rule.

[ 5 ] Two major historical works written by Albanians during this early phase of modern historiography within Albania are Athanase Gegaj's L'Albanie et l'Invasion turque au XVe siècle (1937) and Fan Noli's George Castrioti Scanderbeg (1405-1468) (1947), both written outside Albania.

[ 6 ] Albanian socialist historiography (1945-1992) [ edit ] Albanian socialist historiography was associated with the Albanian state building project of national legitimation.

[ 7 ] Albanian historiography was based upon the works of a group of Albanian speaking intelligentsia that during the early to mid 19th century developed a national narrative when professional Albanian historians did not exist.

[ 7 ] Balanced approaches to history were not encouraged during the period between the end of World War II and the death of Enver Hohxa in 1985.

[ 8 ] After the Second World War the communist government trained scholars to become historians and write Albanian history, while due to the political context they were preoccupied with matters relating to national identity.

[ 7 ] In 1959, the first volume on the history of Albania was published that dealt with topics ranging from antiquity until the 19th century and was a major undertaking that was a serious analysis of Greek , Latin , Byzantine and Ottoman sources.

[ 7 ] Elements of national construction dominated parts of the work such as stressing the Illyrians as the ancestors of the Albanians, the existence of an Albanian medieval state and that Albanians during the Ottoman period were an autonomous entity.

[ 7 ] These themes though linked to matters of national identification were not completely unfounded.

[ 7 ] During the communist period , the regime attempted to instill a national consciousness through the scope of a teleological past based upon Illyrian descent, Skanderbeg 's resistance to the Ottomans and the nationalist reawakening ( Rilindja ) of the 19th and early 20th centuries.

[ 9 ] Those themes and concepts of history have still continued within a post-communist environment modified and adapted to fit contemporary Albania's aspirations regarding Europe.

[ 9 ] Albanian historiographical scholarship though compromised by political influences did manage to produce reliable information at times.

[ 7 ] Of Stalinist Albania, Bernd Jürgen Fischer stated that it produced good historians though not always good history.

[ 8 ] Drawing upon themes of national struggles established during the Rilindja period, Albanian socialist historiography centred itself upon the main narrative of nationhood that within history writing included Marxist historical materialism and nationalism.

[ 10 ] There were two main notable groups of Albanian historians in that period: [ 11 ] Military historians: Ndreci Plasari and Shyqri Ballvora Political historians: Aleks Buda , Stefanaq Pollo , Arben Puto and Luan Omari.

Aleks Buda, who also became a president of the Academy of Sciences of Albania , is sometimes considered as a founder of the Albanian post WWII historiography.

[ 12 ] Buda belonged to a small group of intellectuals allowed by the Albanian communist regime to have access to foreign literature in order to use them to prepare new ideological and theoretical directives for the rest of their colleagues.

[ 13 ] Post communist Albanian Historiography [ edit ] When Albanian socialist historiography dealt with people, it tended to see things black and white.

[ 14 ] The legacy of understanding history through such dichotomies has remained for a majority of Albanians which for example they view Skanderbeg and the anti-Ottoman forces as "good" while the Ottomans are "bad".

[ 15 ] The influence of ideology upon Albanian historians during the socialist era of Albanian Historiography can be seen not only in publications published by Academy of Sciences of Albania (i.e.

Historia e Shqipërisë ) but also in specialized works published by individual authors like Viron Koka, Mentar Belegu and Ilijaz Fishta.

[ 16 ] Due to that legacy, Robert Elsie emphasized that there was no reliable and objective historiography in Albania which could serve as a basis for his historical dictionary of Albania he compiled and published in 2010.

[ 17 ] Oliver Jens Schmitt stated that the post-World War II Albanian regime propagated the official version of the past using all available means. People in Albania were subjected to state organized indoctrination and propaganda. Schmitt explained that because of political influence it was impossible to organize open discussion about socialist historiography, while those who attempted to criticize it would be denounced often as non-professionals or foreigners with evil objectives.

[ 18 ] The influence of such historical myths still remain which for example in 2009 Schmitt was severely criticised in Albania after producing an academic biography that challenged the traditional Albanian concept of Skanderbeg.

[ 9 ] Post-communist Albanian historiography has attempted to move away from previous political influences of the Hoxha era and shift the discipline toward a more scientific methodological direction, however, themes of national struggles continue.

[ 10 ] Political pressures have been placed upon contemporary Albanian historiography.

[ 19 ] For example the Albanian government in 2013 reformed the Academy of Sciences by allowing it to influence the scholarship of historians by urging them to rewrite history (mostly in relation to the modern period).

[ 19 ] Those moves caused heated debate among historians of which one group viewing the initial intent as being a move to place aside distortions of the past that assisted in empowering the communists and another group seeing it as a repeat of the communist regime's politicisation of history.

[ 19 ] Themes [ edit ] Early Albanian history [ edit ] Main article: Origin of the Albanians The picture created by Albanian science about the early history of Albanians is simplified, uncritical and has appearances of fabrication.

[ 20 ] Albanian scholars have continuously asserted and claimed antecedence of Albanian culture over Slav culture .

[ 21 ] The official Albanian historiography, which influenced many Albanians, emphasizes that Albanians have always lived in Albania and supports the hypothesis that Albanians are descendants of Illyrians , while some non-Albanian scholars consider the question of the origin of Albanians to be unsolved.

[ 22 ] Ottoman period and Islam in Albania [ edit ] Main articles: Islamization of Albania and Islam in Albania § Debates about Islam and contemporary Albanian identity The image of Islam produced by both main sources of modern Albanian historiography was neither objective nor positive.

[ 23 ] Although the communist regime fell (1992) in Albania, contemporary Albanian historians have still held onto inherited stereotypes and myths regarding Islam from Albanian socialist historiography.

[ 24 ] Albanian historiographical myths regarding Islam include: [ 25 ] Islam was imported by the Ottomans and is an alien element of Albanian culture.

Albanians converted from Christianity to Islam not because of their religious feelings though instead for other opportunistic reasons or because they were sometimes forced to do so.

Albanian religious sentiments are weak because Albanian national feeling was always more important for Albanians than their religious adherence and affiliations.

Numerous historians from Albania with nationalist perspectives (Ramadan Marmallaku, Kristo Frasheri, Skender Anamali, Stefanaq Pollo, Skender Rizaj and Arben Puto) intentionally emphasized "the Turkish savagery" and "heroic Christian resistance against the Osmanli state in Albania".

[ 26 ] Albanian historiography tends to ignore religiously inspired enmity between Albanians of different faiths.

[ 27 ] Trends from Albanian nationalist historiography composed by scholars during and of the communist era onward linger on that interpret Ottoman rule as being the "yoke" period, akin to other Balkan historiographies.

[ 15 ] Skanderbeg [ edit ] Although the Myth of Skanderbeg had little to do with the reality of historical Skanderbeg , it was incorporated in works about history of Albania .

[ 28 ] Treaty of London [ edit ] Main article: Treaty of London (1913) The Treaty of London interpreted by nationalist Albanian historiography symbolizes the partition of the Albanian nation into three parts.

[ 29 ] Other [ edit ] The Serbian argument that Kosovo was first settled by the Albanians in the 17th century is rejected by modern Albanian historiography.

[ 30 ] References [ edit ] ^ Blumi, Isa (2007), Seeing Beyond the River Drin, Sarajevo, Ottoman Albanians and Imperial Rivalry in the Balkans after 1878 (PDF) , Austria: Kakanien revisited, p. 3, At the center of this Sarajevo-based policy were highly regarded Albanologists such as Theodor Ippen (b.1861), Norbert Jokl (1877-1942) and Franz Nopcsa (1877-1933) who all published influential studies on Albanian language, geography, archeology and history through state-funded institutes in Budapest, Sarajevo and Vienna.

^ Clayer, Nathalie (2007), Aux origines du nationalisme albanais: la naissance d'une nation majoritairement musulmane on Europe , Karthala, p. 416, ISBN 9782845868168 , retrieved January 19, 2011 , Ce sont aussi les fonctionnaires austro-hongrois qui furent à l'origine du premier livre sur l'histoire de l'Albanie en albanais". Dès le mois de mai 1897, le consul Ippen insistait auprès du ministre des Affaires étrangères de la Double Monarchie sur les avantages que procurerait, pour l'éveil de la conscience nationale albanaise et donc pour l' action autrichienne en Albanie, l'écriture et la diffusion d'une histoire de l'Albanie.

^ Ethnologia Balkanica . Prof. M. Drinov Academic Publishing House. 1998. p. 215.

he promoted the Albanian educational system and supported the establishment of an independent Albanian state ^ Kressing & Kaser 2002 , p. 40 Modern Albanian historiography has two important sources: the thinkers of the 'renaissance' (rilindja) period (1844-1912), and the historians of the Communist regime.

^ a b c Kostov, Chris (2010).

Contested Ethnic Identity: The Case of Macedonian Immigrants in Toronto 1900-1996 . Peter Lang. p. 40.

ISBN 9783034301961 .

^ Gran, Peter (1996).

Beyond Eurocentrism: A New View of Modern World History . Syracuse University Press. p. 221.

^ a b c d e f g Di Lellio 2009 , p. 11. "The development of an Albanian scholarly tradition of historians is relatively recent and tightly linked to a project of national legitimation. While a loose international network of Albanian-speaking intellectuals began to develop a national narrative in the first half of the 19th century, professional historians were absent. Only after WWII did the Enver Hoxha regime start to train the scholars who would take up the task of writing Albanian history and, from the outset, the profession was strongly influenced by an authoritarian project of state building; political circumstances kept Albanian historians absorbed by issues of national identity. This does not mean that their work does not yield reliable information. The first volume of the history of Albania that first appeared in 1959 concerns the period from antiquity through the mid-19th century and is a major enterprise based on a serious examination of Greek, Latin, Byzantine and Turkish sources. Its emphasis on the autochthonous character of the Albanians as the sole descendants of the Illyrians and on the existence of an Albanian state in the XII century; and the insistence on the Albanian nation as an autonomous entity during the Ottoman epoch, are all elements of a national construction and in the end inseparable from the process of national identification, but not entirely without foundation." ^ a b Jürgen Fischer 1999 , p. 281 The political climate in Albania under Enver Hoxha, who ruled Albania from World War II until his death in 1985, did little to encourage a balanced approach to history.

^ a b c Schmidt-Neke 2014 , p. 14.

^ a b Brisku 2013 , p. 16.

^ Jürgen Fischer 1999 , p. 281 ^ Hysa, Armanda; Keber, Katarina (2010).

Historièni seminar 8 . Založba ZRC. p. 111.

ISBN 978-961-254-216-0 .

^ Hysa, Armanda; Keber, Katarina (2010).

Historièni seminar 8 . Založba ZRC. p. 120.

ISBN 978-961-254-216-0 .

^ Jürgen Fischer 1999 , p. 281 ...socialist Albanian historiography tends, when dealing with people, to see things in black and white terms.

^ a b Schmidt-Neke 2014 , p. 15.

^ Ilirjani, Altin; Arolda Elbasani; Ridvan Peshkopia (2010), Albanian Journal of Politics , vol. 1, Chapel Hill, NC: Shoqata Shqiptare e Shkencave Politike, p. 178, ISBN 9780977666225 , OCLC 70817932 , ... the ideologically tingled historiography of socialist-era Albanian historians, as evidenced not only in official publications issued by the Academy of Sciences of Albania, like in....Historia e Shqipërisë, but also in more specialized works by authors such as...

^ Elsie 2010 , p. xi ...Compiling a historical dictionary for a country... as Albania... because there is still no objective and reliable historiography in Albania.

^ Jens, Oliver; Ben Andoni (2013).

"Historia shqiptare-një histori e hapur" .

ResPublica (in Albanian). Archived from the original on 21 February 2014 . Retrieved 6 February 2014 .

Mbas 1945, për herë të parë në historinë e Shqipërisë, Shteti përdorte të gjitha mjetet e tij për të prodhuar dhe propaganduar versionin e tij zyrtar të së shkuarës. Fatkeqësisht, kjo ndodhte në një shtet Orvellian, ku historianët ishin thjesht mjete në duart e diktatorit, i cili personalisht diktonte linjat kryesore të interpretimit. Kjo ishte periudha ku shumë nga Shqiptarët u konfrontuan për herë të parë me historinë – e sistemi shkollor i shtetit të ri integroi për herë të parë gjithashtu fëmijë nga zonat rurale dhe familjet e varfra. ... Kritikët ose u denoncuan si jo-profesionistë (sepse ata nuk u rekrutuan në institucionet kërkimore për shkak të mendimeve të tyre ndryshe) apo si të huaj me qëllime të errëta.

^ a b c Brisku 2013 , p. 17.

^ Bartl 2001 , p. 17 Слика коју албанска наука ствара о раној историјисопственог народа је поједностављена, некритичка и делује исконструисано.

^ Elsie 2004 , p. xvii Albanian scholars ever ready to assert antecedence of their culture over that of the Slavs ^ Kressing & Kaser 2002 , p. 41 The official historiography claims that Albanians have always lived in Albania and therefore gives credit to the thesis that they are the descendants of the Illyrians...However, non-Albanian researchers consider the question of Illyrian or Thracian origin of the Albanians to be unsolved...Nevertheless, this version of history has influenced many Albanians ^ Kressing & Kaser 2002 , p. 40 Neither of them produced an objective and positive image of Islam.

^ Kressing & Kaser 2002 , p. 41 Since the fall of Communism, Albanian historians have not started to free themselves from their inherited stereotypes. This explains why contemporary history, when it comes to Islam, is still the prisoner of myths.

^ Kressing & Kaser 2002 , p. 41 One of these myths is that Islam is an alien element of Albanian culture imported by the Ottomans. The reason is that Albanians were originally Christian (Saint Paul visited Illyria). Other myths say that they had converted for a number of reasons which had nothing to do with religion. They were opportunists. They wanted to escape the taxes imposed on Christians and to benefit from the many advantages attached to being Muslim in a Muslim society. It is said also that they were forced by the Ottomans to embrace Islam. Those who converted are often presented as traitors to the true spirit of the nation. Another important myth is the weakness of Albanians’ religious feeling. Communists worked hard to show that in their history national feeling was always more important for Albanians than religious feeling. In their propaganda, they did not hesitate to distort the ideas of the rilindja writers. As an example, they used - out of context - the famous declaration of Pashko Vasa Shkodrani: ‘The religion of the Albanians is Albanianism’. Actually, he wanted to encourage national unity while still respecting each person’s religious belief.

^ Kopanski 1997 , p. 192 Albanian nationalist historians like Ramadan Marmallaku, Kristo Frasheri, Skender Anamali, Stefanaq Pollo, Skender Rizaj and Arben Puto in their books deliberately emphasized "the Turkish savagery" and "heroic Christian resistance against the 
Osmanli state in Albania".

^ Schwandner-Sievers & Jürgen_Fischer 2002 , p. 62 ...there are many instances of religiously inspired animosities, which present day Albanian historiography tends to ignore.

^ Bartl, Peter (2009), Bartl, Peter: review of: Schmitt, Oliver Jens, Skanderbeg. Der neue Alexander auf dem Balkan (in German), p. 617, Dieser Mythos hatte mit der historischen Realität wenig zu tun, er fand aber nichtsdestotrotz Eingang auch in die albanische Geschichtsschreibung. [This myth had a little to do with the historical reality, but it was nonetheless included in the Albanian history too.] ^ Ersoy, Ahmet; Maciej Górny; Vangelis Kechriotis (2010), Modernism : the creation of nation-states , Budapest; New York: Central European University Press, pp. 236, 237, ISBN 9781441684110 , OCLC 699519530 , Decisions of the London ...In nationalist Albanian historiography, this symbolizes the partition of the nation into three parts; Kosovo was annexed by Serbia, Çamëria (Gr. Tsamouria) was annexed by Greece, and the remaining part became the state of Albania ^ Singh, Jasvir (1 January 2009).

Problem of Ethicity: Role of United Nations in Kosovo Crisis . Dr. Jasvir Singh. p. 84.

ISBN 978-81-7142-701-7 .

Modern Albanian historiography rejects the Serbian argument that the Albanians first settled in Kosovo in seventeenth Sources [ edit ] Bartl, Peter (2001) [1995], Albanci : od srednjeg veka do danas (in Serbian), translated by Ljubinka Milenković, Belgrade: Clio, ISBN 9788671020176 , OCLC 51036121 , retrieved 1 February 2012 Brisku, Adrian (2013).

Bittersweet Europe: Albanian and Georgian Discourses on Europe, 1878–2008 . New York: Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9780857459855 .

Dhrimo, Ali. “Der Beitrag deutscher Forscher auf dem Gebiet des Albanischen”, in Albanien in Vergangenheit und Gegenwart: Internationales Symposion der Südosteuropa-Gesellschaft in Zusammenarbeit mit der Albanischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Winterscheider Mühle bei Bonn, 12. bis 15. September 1989 . Edited by Klaus-Detlev Grothusen. Munich, 1991, pp. 160–172.

Di Lellio, Ana (2009).

"The battle of Kosovo 1389." An Albanian epic . London: IB Tauris.

ISBN 9781848850941 .

Kopanski, Atuallah Bogdan (1997).

"Islamization of Albanians in the Middle Ages: The primary sources and the predicament of the modern historiography" .

Islamic Studies .

36 (2/3): 191– 208.

Jürgen Fischer, Bernd (1999), Albania at war, 1939-1945 , West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University Press, ISBN 9780585063881 , OCLC 42922446 Kressing, Frank; Kaser, Karl (2002), Albania--a country in transition : aspects of changing identities in a South-East European country (PDF) , Baden-Baden: Nomos, ISBN 9783789076701 , OCLC 50737195 Schmidt-Neke, Michael (2014).

"A burden of Legacies: The transformation of Albanian's political system" . In Pichler, Robert (ed.).

Legacy and Change: Albanian Transformation from Multidisciplinary Perspectives . Münster: LIT Verlag. pp.

13– 30.

ISBN 9783643905666 .

Schwandner-Sievers, Stephanie; Jürgen Fischer, Bernd (2002), Albanian identities: myth and history , USA: Indiana University Press, ISBN 978-0-253-34189-1 Elsie, Robert (2004).

Songs of the frontier warriors . Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers.

ISBN 978-0865164123 .

Elsie, Robert (2010), Historical dictionary of Albania , Lanham: Scarecrow Press, ISBN 9780810873803 , OCLC 454375231 Further reading [ edit ] Pipa, Arshi (1989), The politics of language in socialist Albania , Boulder: East European Monographs, ISBN 9780880331685 v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Historiography of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐j482s
Cached time: 20250815091902
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 0.959 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18760/1000000
Revision size: 27366/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 389302/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18401/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 48/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 117356/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.397/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15822418/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  780.093      1 -total
 29.40%  229.356      1 Template:Historiography
 29.02%  226.366      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 26.92%  209.963      1 Template:Reflist
 26.29%  205.124     16 Template:Navbox
 15.81%  123.330     11 Template:Citation
 12.83%  100.057     36 Template:Ill
 12.04%   93.955      1 Template:Europe_topic
 10.53%   82.126      2 Template:Langx
  9.78%   76.270     49 Template:Iso2country Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:41894424:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815091902 and revision id 1277923942. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_Albania&oldid=1277923942 " Categories : Historiography of Albania History of Albania Hidden categories: CS1 Albanian-language sources (sq) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Albanian-language text CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr) This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Albania 1 language Add topic

