Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The text 2 Dating 3 Later printed sources 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Turba Philosophorum 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Italiano Nederlands Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Turba Philosophorum The Turba Philosophorum , also known as Assembly of the Philosophers , is one of the oldest European alchemy texts, translated from the Arabic , like the Picatrix .

[ 1 ] It is considered to have been written c. 900 A.D.

The text [ edit ] To quote Plessner, "the Turba Philosophorum , written c. 900 A. D., is a well planned and, from a literary point of view, a most remarkable attempt to put Greek alchemy into the Arabic language and to adapt it to Islamic science".

[ 2 ] Nine philosophers take part in a discussion, being, once the text has been transcribed back to the original Arabic, Anaximander , Anaximenes , Anaxagoras , Empedocles , Archelaus , Leucippus , Ecphantus , Pythagoras and Xenophanes . The statements of the philosophers, whilst usually different from the known beliefs of the pre-Socratics, are usually recognisable as outgrowths of Greek philosophy. They discuss matter, how it acts, and relate this to cosmology, with three theses presented by Xenophanes in his closing speech, being, again from Plessner: "1) The creator of the World is Allah, the God of Islam; 2) The world is of a uniform nature; 3) All creatures of the upper as well as of the lower world are composed of all four elements." Dating [ edit ] Plessner argues that the Turba was written around 900 AD, based on the following reasoning.  The earliest text known to draw on the Turba is the Kitab al-Ma al-waraqi by Ibn Umail , who died in the middle of the tenth century.  In turn, an earlier date can be ruled out by the appearance in the text of poison hidden in the body of a woman, which kills a dragon by her embrace.  The Hindu myth of the ‘poison-maiden’ who kills men by her embrace arrived in Arabic literature around the first half of the 9th century, with the translation into Arabic of the ‘Poison Book’ ascribed to the Indian Chanakya .

[ 2 ] Later printed sources [ edit ] In print, the title occurs in the Auriferae artis, quam chemiam vocant, antiquissimi authores, sive Turba philosophorum of 1572, and later works. A page from the Newton Project [ 3 ] references a work of essentially the same title, but of 1610. There the Turba is described as "an anthology of pre-medieval alchemical texts published in Latin translation (from Arabic)". Another source is given as the 1659-61 edition of Lazarus Zetzner's Theatrum Chemicum .

Notes [ edit ] ^ S. H. Nasr (2006), Islamic Philosophy from Its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy , State University of New York Press, p. 147 ^ a b Martin Plessner, The Place of the Turba Philosophorum in the Development of Alchemy ISIS, Vol. 45, No. 4, Dec. 1954, pp. 331-338, here p. 337.

^ The Newton Project a non-profit organization dedicated to publishing online Sir Isaac Newton’s writings References [ edit ] Waite, Arthur Edward (1896).

The Turba Philosophorum, or Assembly of the Sages – via Wikisource .

(English translation) Julius Ruska , Turba Philosophorum (Berlin 1931) Adam McLean, Turba Philosophorum , The Alchemy web site on Levity Martin Plessner , Vorsokratische Philosophie und griechische Alchemie in arabisch-lateinischer Überlieferung: Studien zu Text und Inhalt der Turba philosophorum (Wiesbaden 1975) v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Turba_Philosophorum&oldid=1303748708 " Category : Alchemical works of the medieval Islamic world This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 21:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Turba Philosophorum 9 languages Add topic

