Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Function 3 Governance 4 Offices Toggle Offices subsection 4.1 People 5 Land Rights News 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Northern Land Council 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organisation in  Northern Territory, Australia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Northern Land Council" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Northern Land Council ( NLC ) is a land council representing the Aboriginal peoples of the Top End of the Northern Territory of Australia, with its head office in Darwin .

While the NLC was established in 1974, its origins began in the struggle of Australian Aboriginal people for rights to fair wages and land, including the strike and walk off by the Gurindji people at Wave Hill cattle station in 1966, as well as other activities relating to Indigenous land rights .

History [ edit ] The Commonwealth Government of Gough Whitlam set up the Aboriginal Land Rights Commission , a Royal Commission , in February 1973 to inquire into how land rights might be achieved in the Northern Territory .

Justice Woodward 's first report in July 1973 recommended that a Northern Land Council and a Central Land Council be established in order to present to him the views of Aboriginal people.

[ 1 ] In response to the report of the Royal Commission a Land Rights Bill was drafted, but the Whitlam government was dismissed before it was passed. The Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 was eventually passed by the Fraser Government on 16 December 1976 and began operation on Australia Day , that is 26 January 1977.

[ citation needed ] This Act established the basis upon which Aboriginal people in the Northern Territory could, for the first time, claim rights to land based on traditional occupation. In effect it allowed title to be transferred of most of the Aboriginal reserve lands and the opportunity to claim other land not owned, leased or being used by someone else.

[ citation needed ] The Northern Land Council was established in 1974.

[ 2 ] Kathy Mills was the first woman to be elected to the Northern Land Council.

[ 3 ] Function [ edit ] The most important responsibility of the councils is to consult traditional owners and other Aboriginal people who have an interest in Aboriginal land about land use, land management and access by external tourism, mining and other businesses.  This sometimes involves facilitating group negotiation and consensus-building among scores of traditional Aboriginal landowner groups, and many other affected Aboriginal people.

[ citation needed ] Many Aboriginal people in the Northern Land Council's area live in the major towns. As of 2012 [update] there were  about 200 communities scattered over Aboriginal land in the NLC's area, ranging in size from small family groups on outstations to settlements of up to 3,000 people.

[ 4 ] Governance [ edit ] The Northern Land Council is a representative body with statutory authority under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976 . It also has responsibilities under the Native Title Act 1993 .

[ 5 ] It is one of four in the Northern Territory. and the largest; the others are: [ 5 ] the Central Land Council (CLC) covering the southern half the Tiwi Land Council covering the Tiwi Islands north of Darwin the Anindilyakwa Land Council covering Groote Eylandt in the Gulf of Carpentaria .

The Full Council is the major decision-making body, as of 2021 [update] consisting of 78 elected members and five co-opted women, making 83 members in total. There is also an Executive Council and Regional Councils.

[ 6 ] The NLC’s jurisdiction covers seven regions: Darwin/ Daly/ Wagait; West Arnhem; East Arnhem; Katherine; Victoria River District (VRD); Ngukurr; and Borroloola/ Barkly.

[ 6 ] Offices [ edit ] The head office is located in Darwin.

[ 7 ] The NLC's Top End zone is divided into seven regions with regional offices. The head office and Royalties Office are in the city of Darwin .

[ 7 ] Regional offices representing the seven districts are in: [ 7 ] Katherine Jabiru (West Arnhem) Nhulunbuy (East Arnhem) Tennant Creek Ngukurr Borroloola (Barkly/Borroloola) Timber Creek (Victoria River district) People [ edit ] Current Jessie Schaecken was appointed to the position of Interim CEO by the NLC’s Executive Council on 15 March 2024.

As of October 2022 [update] : NLC Chair is Samuel Bush-Blanasi, who has served seven terms on the council, three of those as chairman. He graduated from Kormilda College in Darwin, and is a talented artist. He was a co-founder of the Association of Northern, Kimberley and Arnhem Aboriginal Artists and of Top End Aboriginal Bush Broadcasting Association.

[ 8 ] Joe Martin-Jard was appointed acting CEO on 16 July 2021, and has been CEO since 22 December 2021. He was formerly CEO of the Central Land Council, and before that had worked for the federal government as well as in the private sector.

[ 9 ] Past Silas Ngulati Roberts , the first chairman of the organisation serving in that role from its establishment in 1974 until c. 1982.

[ 10 ] Marion Scrymgour , former member of the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly and former CEO of the Tiwi Islands Regional Council , was CEO from March 2019 [ 11 ] to July 2021. She was first female CEO at any NT land council.

[ 12 ] John Bugy Bugy Christophersen ( c.

1951–2021), who represented the Kakadu area within the West Arnhem region [ 6 ] and was previously a longtime activist for Indigenous rights, died in April 2021, aged 69. He had been an organiser of the convoy that went to Sydney to join the 40,000-strong protest at the 1988 Bicentenary of Australia , and became the vice-president of the World Council of Indigenous Peoples in 1990. Offices closed as a mark of respect at his passing.

[ 13 ] He was also the biological father of athlete and politician Nova Peris , although she had no contact with him between the ages of 2 and 16.

[ 14 ] Kathy Mills OAM ( c.

1935 – 24 April 2022) was the first woman to be elected to the Northern Land Council.

[ 3 ] Land Rights News [ edit ] Land Rights News is the longest-running Aboriginal newspaper.

[ 15 ] In April 1976, the Central Land Council published the first edition of Central Australian Land Rights News , which ran until August 1984. In July 1976, the NLC launched Land Rights News: A Newsletter for Aboriginals and Their Friends . A major goal of these newspapers was not only to provide information to Aboriginal people on land rights issues , but also to correct misinformation, provide in-depth coverage of native title issues , and to challenge the stereotypes represented in mainstream newspapers in Australia, and to encourage its readers to take action.

[ 16 ] In September 1985 the two land councils pooled their resources to start producing Land Rights News: One Mob, One Voice, One Land ( LRN ).

[ 16 ] In 1988, the newspaper won a UNAA Media Peace Award . At that time, the paper was under the editorship of NLC director John Ah Kit and CLC director Pat Dodson .

[ 17 ] In 1989, it won a print media award.

[ 16 ] In 2002, Aboriginal journalist Todd Condie left the Koori Mail after ten years, to work on Land Rights News .

[ 16 ] From 2011 [ 18 ] [ 19 ] and as of October 2022 [update] , Land Rights News is published three times a year in two editions: "Central Australia" [ 15 ] and "Northern Edition", [ 20 ] and remains the longest-running Aboriginal newspaper. It is also the only printed newspaper published in Central Australia.

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Aboriginal Land Rights Commission (Australia) --- "First Report: July 1973" [First Woodward Report] [1973] IndigLRes 1" .

www.austlii.edu.au . Archived from the original on 31 July 2023 . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

^ "Our history" .

Northern Land Council . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ a b "Aboriginal elder Kathy Mills National Reconciliation Week" .

Engaging Women . 27 May 2018 . Retrieved 31 March 2022 .

^ "About the Northern Land Council" .

Northern Land Council . Archived from the original on 18 March 2012.

^ a b Audit Report - Northern Territory Land Councils and the Aboriginals Benefit Account . Audit Report No.28.

Australian National Audit Office . 7 February 2003.

ISBN 0-642-80684-5 .

ISSN 1036-7632 . Archived from the original on 17 July 2005 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

PDF ^ a b c "Our Council" .

Northern Land Council . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ a b c "Contact" .

Northern Land Council . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ "NLC Chair" .

Northern Land Council . 2022 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ "NLC Chief Executive Officer" .

Northern Land Council . 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ Long, Jeremy (2008). "Silas Ngulati Roberts (1925-1983)".

Northern Territory Dictionary of Biography (Rev ed.). Darwin: Charles Darwin University Press. p. 496.

ISBN 9780980457810 .

^ "NT deputy Scrymgour makes history" .

The Age . 26 November 2007 . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ "NLC Chief Executive Officer" .

Northern Land Council . 13 March 2018. Archived from the original on 23 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2022 .

^ Masters, Emma (21 April 2021).

"Former Northern Land Council leader remembered as lifelong Indigenous rights activist" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ Hersh, Philip (22 September 2000).

"Across generations" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ a b c "Land Rights News" .

Central Land Council . 19 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ a b c d Burrows, Elizabeth Anne (2010).

Writing to be heard: the Indigenous print media's role in establishing and developing an Indigenous public sphere (PhD).

Griffith University . pp. 161, 184, 229, 239, 254, 285, 321.

doi : 10.25904/1912/3292 . Retrieved 1 October 2022 .

PDF ^ "UN Media Peace Awards" .

Tribune . No. 2531. New South Wales. 7 September 1988. p. 12 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 – via National Library of Australia.

^ "Land Rights News Central Australia" (catalogue entry) , Trove , Central Land Council for the three Northern Territory Land Councils, ISSN 1325-0140 ^ Central Land Council (Australia); Northern Territory Land Councils (Australia), "Land Rights News" (catalogue entry) , Trove , Central Land Council for the three Northern Territory Land Councils, ISSN 1325-0140 ^ "All documents" .

Northern Land Council . 1 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Aboriginal peoples in the Northern Territory Peoples Airiman Alawa Alura Alyawarre Amarak Amijangal Andakerebina Anindilyakwa Anmatyerre Arrernte Awarai Awinmul Beriguruk Bilingara Binbinga Bingongina Bininj Burarra Dagoman Daii Dalabon Dangu Dhuwal Dhuwala Djalakuru Djaŋu Djerait Djerimanga Djinang Djinba Djowei Doolboong Emmiyangal Gaagudju Gaari Gadjerong Gambalang Garrwa/Karawa Giimbiyu Gudanji Gungorogone Gunindiri Gurindji Iwaidja Jaako Jamindjung Jawoyn Jingili Karrangpurru Kaytetye Kukatja Kunapa Kungarakan Kunibidji Kunwinjku Kwarandji Larrakia Madngella Makarrwanhalmirr Mangarayi Mantjintjarra Ngalia Mariamo Maridan Maridjabin Marimanindji Marinunggo Marijedi Mariu Marra Marranunggu Marrithiyal Mati Ke Matuntara Maung Menhdheyangal Mudburra Mulluk-Mulluk Muringura Murngin=Yolgnu Murrinh-Patha Nagara Nanggikorongo Nangiomeri Ngaanyatjarra Ngalakgan Ngalia Ngaliwurru Ngandi Ngardok Ngarinman Ngarnka Ngarti Ngolokwangga Ngormbur Norweilemil Nungali Nunggubuyu Oitbi Perrakee ?

Pintupi Pitjantjatjara Pongaponga Puneitja Rembarrnga Ritharngu/Diakui Tiwi Tjial Waanyi Wadere Wadjiginy Wagoman Wakaya Walu Wambaya Wandjira Wardaman Warlmanpa Warlpiri Warndarang Warumungu Watta Wilingura Wongkamala Wulwulam Wurango Yangman Yan-nhaŋu/Nango Yanyuwa Yaroinga Yindjilandji Yolngu Yukul Yumu Yunggor Communities Ali Curung Alice Springs town camps Alpurrurulam Angurugu Anmatjere Aputula Areyonga Arltarlpilta Bagot Baniyala Barunga Bickerton Island Binjari Borroloola Bulman Canteen Creek Daly River Elcho Island Engawala Gapuwiyak Gove Peninsula Gunbalanya Haasts Bluff Hermannsburg Imanpa Jay Creek Jilkminggan Kalkarindji Kaltukatjara Kintore Lajamanu Ltyentye Apurte Maningrida Milikapiti Milingimbi Island Minjilang Minyerri Mirrngadja Mount Liebig Mutitjulu Nauiyu Nambiyu Nganmarriyanga Ngukurr Numbulwar Nyirripi Papunya Peppimenarti Pirlangimpi Ramingining Tara Titjikala Tjunti Umbakumba Utopia Wadeye Wallace Rockhole Warruwi Warumunga Wilora Wugularr Wurrumiyanga Wutungurra Yarralin Yirrkala Yuendumu Land councils Anindilyakwa Central Northern Tiwi Religion and culture Dreamtime ( muda , mura-mura , tjukurrpa , etc.) Garkain Mimi Yawkyawk Indigenous protected areas: Angas Downs Anindilyakwa Crocodile Islands Maringa Dhimurru Djelk Ganalanga-Mindibirrina Katiti Petermann Laynhapuy Marri-Jabin Marthakal Northern Tanami Southern Tanami By state or territory New South Wales Northern Territory Queensland South Australia Tasmania Victoria Western Australia v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Northern_Land_Council&oldid=1294854799 " Categories : Aboriginal land councils Aboriginal land rights in Australia Organisations serving Indigenous Australians 1973 establishments in Australia Aboriginal organisations in the Northern Territory Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2022 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 05:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Northern Land Council 1 language Add topic

