Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of investors 2 Investor protection through government 3 Investment tax structures 4 Role of the financier Toggle Role of the financier subsection 4.1 Perceptions 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Investor 37 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Tagalog Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who allocates capital with the expectation of a financial return For the Swedish investment company, see Investor AB .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Investor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Financial market participants Organisations Credit unions Development finance institution Insurance companies Investment banks Investment funds Pension funds Prime brokers Trusts Terms Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Finance Financial market Participants Corporate finance Personal finance Public finance Banks and banking Financial analyst Financial planner Financial regulation Fund governance Stock Market Super angel Part of a series on Finance Markets Assets Asset (economics) Bond Asset growth Capital asset Commodity Derivatives Domains Equity Foreign exchange Money Over-the-counter Private equity Real estate Spot Stock Participants Angel investor Bull (stock market speculator) Financial planner Investor institutional Retail Speculator Locations Financial centres Offshore financial centres Conduit and sink OFCs Instruments Bond Cash Collateralised debt obligation Credit default swap Time deposit ( certificate of deposit ) Credit line Deposit Derivative Futures contract Indemnity Insurance Letter of credit Loan Mortgage Option ( call exotic put ) Performance bonds Repurchase agreement Stock Security Syndicated loan Synthetic CDO Corporate General Accounting Audit Capital budgeting Capital structure Corporate finance Credit rating agency Enterprise risk management Enterprise value Risk management Financial statements Transactions Leveraged buyout Mergers and acquisitions Structured finance Venture capital Taxation Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) Corporate tax haven Tax inversion Tax haven Transfer pricing Personal Credit / Debt Employment contract Financial planning Retirement Student loan Public Government spending Final consumption expenditure Operations Redistribution Transfer payment Government revenue Taxation Deficit spending Budget ( balance ) Debt Non-tax revenue Warrant of payment Banking Central bank Deposit account Fractional-reserve Full-reserve Investment banking Loan Money supply Lists of banks Bank regulation Banking license Basel Accords Bank for International Settlements Financial Stability Board Deposit insurance Separation of investment and retail banking Regulation · Financial law International Financial Reporting Standards ISO 31000 Professional certification Fund governance Economic history Private equity and venture capital Recession Stock market bubble Stock market crash Accounting scandals Outline Business and Economics portal Money portal v t e An investor is a person who allocates financial capital with the expectation of a future return (profit) or to gain an advantage (interest).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Through this allocated capital the investor usually purchases some species of property.

[ 3 ] Types of investments include equity , debt , securities , real estate , infrastructure , currency , commodity , token , derivatives such as put and call options , futures , forwards , etc. This definition makes no distinction between the investors in the primary and secondary markets .  That is, someone who provides a business with capital and someone who buys a stock are both investors.  An investor who owns stock is a shareholder .

Types of investors [ edit ] There are two types of investors: retail investors and institutional investors .

[ 4 ] A retail investor is also known as an individual investor .

[ 5 ] There are several sub-types of institutional investor: Pension plans making investments on behalf of employees Businesses that make investments, either directly or via a captive fund Endowment funds used by universities, churches, etc.

Mutual funds , hedge funds , and other funds, ownership of which may or may not be publicly traded (these funds typically pool money raised from their owner-subscribers to invest in securities) Sovereign wealth funds Large money managers [ 6 ] Investors might also be classified according to their profiles . In this respect, an important distinctive investor psychology trait is risk attitude .

Investor protection through government [ edit ] Investor protection through government involves regulations and enforcement by government agencies to ensure that market is fair and fraudulent activities are eliminated.  An example of a government agency that protects investors is the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which works to protect reasonable investors in the United States .

[ 1 ] Similar protections exist in other countries, including the United Kingdom where individual investors have certain protections via the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS).

[ 7 ] Investment tax structures [ edit ] Company dividends are paid from net income , which has the tax already deducted. Therefore, shareholders are given some respite with a preferential tax rate of 15% on " qualified dividends " in the event of the company being domiciled in the United States. Alternatively, in another country having a double-taxation treaty with the US, accepted by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Non-qualified dividends paid by other foreign companies or entities; for example, those receiving income derived from interest on bonds held by a mutual fund, are taxed at the regular and generally higher rate of income tax. When applied to 2013, this is on a sliding scale up to 39.6%, with an additional 3.8% surtax for high-income taxpayers ($200,000 for singles, $250,000 for married couples).

[ 8 ] Role of the financier [ edit ] "Financier" redirects here. For other uses, see Financier (disambiguation) .

A financier ( / f ɪ n ə n ˈ s ɪər , f ə -, - ˈ n æ n -/ ) [ 9 ] [ 10 ] is a person whose primary occupation is either facilitating or directly providing investments to up-and-coming or established companies and businesses , typically involving large sums of money and usually involving private equity and venture capital , mergers and acquisitions , leveraged buyouts , corporate finance , investment banking , or large-scale asset management . A financier makes money through this process when their investment is paid back with interest, [ 11 ] from part of the company's equity awarded to them as specified by the business deal, or a financier can generate income through commission , performance, and management fees. A financier can also promote the success of a financed business by allowing the business to take advantage of the financier's reputation.

[ 12 ] The more experienced and capable the financier is, the more the financier will be able to contribute to the success of the financed entity, and the greater reward the financier will reap.

[ 13 ] The term, financier, is French , and derives from finance or payment .

Financier is someone who handles money. Certain financier avenues require degrees and licenses including venture capitalists , hedge fund managers, trust fund managers, accountants , stockbrokers , financial advisors , or even public treasurers . Personal investing on the other hand, has no requirements and is open to all using the stock market or by word-of-mouth requests for money. A financier "will be a specialized financial intermediary in the sense that it has experience in liquidating the type of firm it is lending to".

[ 11 ] Perceptions [ edit ] Economist Edmund Phelps has argued that the financier plays a role in directing capital to investments that governments and social organizations are constrained from playing: [T]he pluralism of experience that the financiers bring to bear in their decisions gives a wide range of entrepreneurial ideas a chance for insightful evaluation. And, importantly, the financier and the entrepreneur do not need the state's or social partners' approval. Nor are they accountable later on to such social bodies if the project goes badly, not even to the financier's investors. So projects that would be too opaque and uncertain for the state or social partners to endorse can be undertaken.

[ 14 ] The concept of the financier has been distinguished from that of a mere capitalist based on the asserted higher level of judgment required of the financier.

[ 15 ] However, financiers have also been mocked for their perceived tendency to generate wealth at the expense of others, and without engaging in tangible labor. For example, humorist George Helgesen Fitch described the financier as "a man who can make two dollars grow for himself where one grew for someone else before".

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Accredited investor – Investor with a special legal status Compound interest – Compounding sum paid for the use of money Crowd funding – Collection of finance from backers to fund an initiative Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Financial literacy – Ability to make informed choices about money Institutional investor – Investors who invest professionally and as their main occupation in the stock market Investor–state dispute settlement – Rules for suing countries by foreign investors Growth capital – Type of private equity investment Model audit – Colloquial term for the tasks performed when conducting due diligence on a financial model Philanthrocapitalism – Method of philanthropy that mirrors a for-profit business Real estate investing – Buying and selling real estate for profit Saving account – Type of bank account Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Securities offering – Discrete round of investment Socially responsible investing – Any investment strategy combining both financial performance and social/ethical impact Stock investor – Person or company involved in trading equity securities Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Time value of money – Conjecture that there is greater benefit to receiving a sum of money now rather than later References [ edit ] ^ a b Lin, Tom C.W. (2015). "Reasonable Investor(s)".

Boston University Law Review .

95 (461): 466.

^ "Investor" .

Cambridge English Dictionary . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved November 29, 2019 .

^ Fisher, Jonathan; Bewsey, Jane; Waters, Malcolm; Ovey, Elizabeth (2003).

The Law of Investor Protection (2nd ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell.

^ Palmer, Barclay (August 11, 2023).

"Institutional vs. Retail Investors: What's the Difference?" .

Investopedia . Retrieved October 5, 2023 .

^ Hayes, Adam.

"Retail Investor Definition" .

Investopedia . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

^ "Institutional Investor – Overview, Types, Investing Risks" .

Corporate Finance Institute . Retrieved December 17, 2020 .

^ "Investments" . Financial Services Compensation Scheme . Retrieved November 11, 2023 .

^ "Investment Tax Basics for All Investors" .

Investopedia . Retrieved December 30, 2014 .

^ "financier" .

The American Heritage Dictionary . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.

^ "financier | meaning of financier" .

Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English .

^ a b Xavier Freixas, Jean-Charles Rochet, Microeconomics of Banking (2008), p. 227.

^ Landström, Hans (2007).

Handbook of Research on Venture Capital . p. 202.

^ Neave, Edwin H. (2009).

Modern Financial Systems: Theory and Applications . p. 8.

^ Phelps, Edmund S.

(October 10, 2006).

"Dynamic Capitalism" (PDF) .

Europa-Institut .

^ Elliott, Sterling, ed. (1896).

Good Roads: Devoted to the Construction and Maintenance of Roads . Vol. 24. p. 366.

^ Fitch, George (1916).

Vest Pocket Essays . p. 123.

Further reading [ edit ] Josephson, Matthew (1972).

The Money Lords: The Great Finance Capitalists, 1925–1950 . New York: Weybright and Talley.

Graham, Benjamin; Zweig, Jason (February 21, 2006) [1949].

The Intelligent Investor: The Definitive Book on Value Investing (Revised ed.). HarperCollins.

ISBN 0-06-055566-1 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Investors at Wikimedia Commons v t e Financial markets Types of markets Primary market Secondary market Third market Fourth market Types of stocks Common stock Golden share Preferred stock Restricted stock Tracking stock Share capital Authorised capital Issued shares Shares outstanding Treasury stock Participants Broker Floor broker Inter-dealer broker Broker-dealer Market maker Trader Floor trader Proprietary trader Quantitative analyst Investor Hedger Speculator Arbitrager Scalper Regulator Trading venues Exchange List of major stock exchanges Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Alternative trading system (ATS) Multilateral trading facility (MTF) Electronic communication network (ECN) Direct market access (DMA) Straight-through processing (STP) Dark pool (private exchange) Crossing network Liquidity aggregator Stock valuation Alpha Arbitrage pricing theory (APT) Beta Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP) Book value (BV) Capital asset pricing model (CAPM) Capital market line (CML) Dividend discount model (DDM) Dividend yield Earnings yield EV/EBITDA Fed model Net asset value (NAV) Security characteristic line Security market line (SML) T-model Trading theories and strategies Algorithmic trading Buy and hold Contrarian investing Dollar cost averaging Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) Fundamental analysis Growth stock Market timing Modern portfolio theory (MPT) Momentum investing Mosaic theory Pairs trade Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT) Random walk hypothesis (RMH) Sector rotation Style investing Swing trading Technical analysis Trend following Value averaging Value investing Related terms Bid–ask spread Block trade Cross listing Dividend Dual-listed company DuPont analysis Efficient frontier Financial law Flight-to-quality Government bond Greenspan put Haircut Initial public offering (IPO) Long Mandatory offer Margin Market anomaly Market capitalization Market depth Market manipulation Market trend Mean reversion Momentum Open outcry Order book Position Public float Public offering Rally Returns-based style analysis Reverse stock split Share repurchase Short selling Short squeeze Slippage Speculation Squeeze-out Stock dilution Stock exchange Stock market index Stock split Stock swap Trade Tender offer Uptick rule Volatility Voting interest Yield Authority control databases National Germany United States Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Investor&oldid=1305777410 " Categories : Investors Finance occupations Financial services occupations Investment funds Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2024 Articles needing additional references from March 2015 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Investor 37 languages Add topic

