Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Format Toggle Format subsection 1.1 Rules 1.2 Player eligibility and benefits 1.3 Open Division and Contenders 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Concept 2.2 Buildout 2.3 Launch and expansion 2.4 Transition to online play 2.5 Overwatch 2 era 2.6 Termination 3 Teams 4 League championships 5 Broadcasting 6 Reception 7 Litigation 8 Legacy 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Overwatch League 11 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 日本語 Norsk bokmål Suomi ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Esports league Overwatch League Game Overwatch Founded 2017 First season 2018 Ceased 2024 Replaced by Overwatch Champions Series Owner(s) Blizzard Entertainment Commissioner Johanna Faries No. of teams 20 Countries United States (11) China (4) Canada (2) South Korea (2) United Kingdom (1) Last champion(s) Florida Mayhem Most titles San Francisco Shock (2) Related competitions Overwatch Champions Series Overwatch Contenders Open Division Official website overwatchleague .com The Overwatch League ( OWL ) was a professional esports league for the video game Overwatch , produced by its developer, Blizzard Entertainment . From 2018 to 2023, the Overwatch League followed the model of other traditional North American professional sporting leagues by using a set of permanent, city-based teams backed by separate ownership groups. The league used the regular season and playoffs format rather than promotion and relegation used commonly in other esports and non-North American leagues, with players on the roster being assured a minimum annual salary, benefits, and a portion of winnings and revenue-sharing based on team performance.

The Overwatch League was announced in 2016 and secured commitments from 12 teams across the United States, Europe, and Asia, each investing $20 million in franchise fees, to participate in its 2018 inaugural season . The league faced skeptics who questioned its potential success due to the lack of a proven concept and a game without a substantial esports history. For the following season, the Overwatch League brought in eight new franchises, each investing between $35 million to $60 million.

In 2020, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic led to widespread disruptions and forced the league to abandon its original homestand model and shift to an online format, where teams competed remotely from their respective regions. While the suspension of in-person events provided a temporary solution, it also raised concerns about its financial viability. However, some team owners noted that not having live events allowed them to mitigate financial losses that they would have otherwise incurred. During the 2021 season, in the wake of a lawsuit filed against Activision Blizzard , nearly all of the league's sponsors withdrew their support from the league.

In November 2022, a broken partnership with NetEase and Blizzard resulted in Overwatch 2 being banned in China. As a result, the league allowed Overwatch Contenders teams to compete in its Eastern Region for the following season, and the league saw its first team leave, as the Chengdu Hunters dissolved. In January 2023, Overwatch League teams collectively initiated a collective bargaining process, which resulted in the Overwatch League agreeing to waive all outstanding franchise fees. By November 2023, Blizzard had announced that Overwatch esports was "transitioning" from the Overwatch League into a more traditional esports structure for the title, which would become the Overwatch Champions Series (OWCS) in 2024.

Format [ edit ] The Overwatch League was owned by Blizzard Entertainment and run by Major League Gaming , which is also owned by Blizzard's parent company Activision Blizzard .

[ 1 ] The Overwatch League played out similar to most North American professional sports leagues, in which all teams played scheduled games against other teams to vie for position in the season's playoffs, rather than the approach of team promotion and relegation more commonly used in other esports leagues.

[ 2 ] The league featured twenty teams split between two conferences based on their location: East and West. The East had eight teams, while the West had twelve.

[ 3 ] The 2018 season consisted of non-regulation pre-season play, a regular season divided into four stages, and a post-season playoffs tournament to determine the championship team for the season. Each regular season stage lasted five weeks, with each stage ending with a short playoff of the top teams based on that stage's records to determine stage champions.

[ 4 ] Teams played 40 matches across the regular season, playing teams both within and outside their division. The post-season playoffs used teams' overall standings across all stages. The top standing team in both divisions received the top two seed in the playoffs, followed by a fixed number of teams determined from across both divisions.

[ 4 ] An All-Star weekend is also held, featuring two division-based teams selected by league representatives and voted on by fans.

The 2019 season format was similar to that of the previous season, though stage playoffs for the fourth stage were eliminated and the number of matches was decreased to 28, among other changes . The 2020 season introduced a number of changes, including a home-and-away format, where each team would host home games with up to eight teams per homestand event, and the elimination of the stage format. This format was eventually changed to a bimonthly tournament-based season in April due to the global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic .

Teams are awarded with monetary prizes for how they place at the end of the regular season, as well as for participating and placing high in the stage playoffs and post-season tournament. For example, the first season had a total prize pool of US$3.5 million available, with the top prize of $1 million awarded to the post-season championship team.

[ 4 ] Rules [ edit ] See also: Gameplay of Overwatch Overwatch is a five-versus-five team-based first-person shooter video game. Broadly, the goal is to work with team members to eliminate or repel opponents while attacking, defending, or competing for an objective. Players select from the game's roster of thirty-three heroes , split between classes of Damage (the main attackers), Support (providing healing and other buffs), and Tank (shielding teammates with high health amounts) each with their own pre-designed set of weapons and skill kits, though each player on a team must play a unique hero. Starting with stage four of the 2019 season, each team must be composed of two Damage heroes, two Supports, and two Tanks. A player can switch to an available hero within the same class if they are eliminated prior to respawning , or if they return to their current spawn point, which allows for teams to adjust their composition dynamically based on the current situation.

Within league play, a regular season match featured two teams (one selected as the home team, the other as the visiting team) playing a best-of-five format, with each map featuring a predetermined map type, following the same gameplay format as with normal competitive mode in Overwatch : Control maps, played on a best-of-three rounds, and Assault, Escort, and Hybrid maps, with each team having at least one chance as the attacking team. The pool of specific maps from the standard Overwatch rotation were determined periodically, allowing the teams to determine their player lineups and strategy while also changing the season's metagame .

[ 5 ] A team may have called in substitutes for players only between maps. The team that won three maps first won the match. If teams are tied after four games, a tiebreaker game played on a Control map (which cannot end in a tie) was used to break the tie and determine the match winner. Standings were based primarily on the overall match win–loss record, but ties were broken based on the total map win–loss record. Any further ties for tournament placement were broken based first on the head-to-head game win–loss record, then head-to-head match count.

Overwatch League games were played on a custom server controlled by Blizzard; this server is also available to players for practices. This version of the game received similar updates to the main commercial game, adding new maps and heroes, and altering the various hero abilities based on testing within the Public Test Realm. However, these updates were not applied immediately as they are for the commercial game, but instead no more frequent than once every six weeks. For example, a late January 2018 patch, which had significant effects on characters like Mercy and thus had potential to upset the metagame , was not applied to the league server until mid-February, at the start of the second stage.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] However, teams were given access to private servers updated to alongside the main release of Overwatch for them to practice and scrimmage against other teams to learn and develop strategies on updates and patches before experiencing them in official matches.

[ 8 ] For matches, each player was provided with an identical desktop computer, monitor, and pair of noise-cancelling headphones to play on to eliminate any handicaps related to computational or graphics processing, but players may have used their preferred keyboard and mouse.

[ 9 ] Player eligibility and benefits [ edit ] The esports training facilities for the Dallas Fuel While Overwatch is played in teams of five, Overwatch League teams could have had up to six additional players that could be swapped between maps.

[ 10 ] A team's membership was locked at the start of the season, but a mid-season signing period allowed teams to bring in new players or trade players between teams.

[ 10 ] Following the end of the season, teams had about one month to extend current player contracts, bring on players from affiliated Overwatch Contenders teams, or hold private tryout sessions. Subsequently, all unsigned players by the end of this period entered free agency during which players could negotiate with teams to become part of the roster; in the case of when expansion teams were added, there was a month-long period where expansion teams had exclusive negotiating rights before other teams can engage. A team's minimum roster was to be set prior to the season's pre-season matches, about two months prior to season play, but they could expand and change this roster up until a specified date.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The league was not region-locked, so teams could use players of any nationality to fill their ranks, as long as the team ownership was based in that city or region. For example, the London Spitfire at the onset of the first season was entirely made up of South Korean players. The only restriction on players is to be of at least 17 years old and to be able to travel internationally.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Overwatch League players, while on a team's contract, were paid an annual salary. As of the 2023 season, a player's salary was a minimum of US$54,249 set by the league.

[ 15 ] Additionally, the league offered players with health and retirement benefits, as well as housing and training support. Blizzard required team owners to provide the signed players with bonuses representing at least 50% of the team's winnings and revenue.

[ 16 ] Players could negotiate for larger amounts with their team's owners and larger portion of the bonus revenue-sharing from tournament winnings and other income. For example, in 2017, Jay "sinatraa" Won secured the league's highest salary of $150,000 for his spot on the San Francisco Shock , along with a 50% share of the team's bonuses.

[ 17 ] Players were expected to follow a code of conduct set by Blizzard while playing and representing the league, and may have face suspension and fines for violating these, in addition to any penalties the team itself may impose.

[ 18 ] A noted incident shortly after the league's launch saw Dallas Fuel 's Félix "xQc" Lengyel suspended by the league for four games and fined $2,000 for making homophobic comments about another player; the Fuel further suspended him for the remainder of the first stage of play.

[ 19 ] Following additional conduct violations in the second stage that led to further suspension, xQc was released by the Fuel.

[ 20 ] Blizzard has since started its online "discipline tracker" in December 2018 to list players who have been temporarily suspended or fined for actions related to their behavior as representatives of the Overwatch League.

[ 21 ] Players, as part of their benefits, received media training to help with speaking to the press and public about their roles, an issue that has been a problem in previous organized esport systems.

[ 22 ] Open Division and Contenders [ edit ] Professional teams in the league were given the opportunity to scout for new players through two additional competitive leagues run by Blizzard. The Open Division, first started in June 2017, allowed amateur teams to compete against each other in a structured season. Those that qualify at the end of the season were seeded into a post-season tournament with intra-regional matches. Players that complete all non-playoff games for their team could earn a small amount of credit to Blizzard's digital storefront, while regional winning teams could earn higher prize payouts. The Open division was played across seven different regions: Australia, China, Europe, Korea, North America, Pacific, and South America.

[ 23 ] Players or teams can then move up from the Open Division into Overwatch Contenders , which was a minor league to the Overwatch League. Contenders was launched in 2018 to merge existing regional tournaments into a structure to support the Overwatch League. Contenders consisted of several global divisions with a number of teams within each, which may include both professional and amateur players. Contender teams may have been affiliated with an Overwatch League team as an academy team , and up to two players per academy team could be signed to two-way contracts to be moved between their academy team and Overwatch League team.

[ 11 ] Contenders was launched in the first half of 2018 with five divisions with 12 teams each: Korea (replacing the Overwatch Apex tournament), China (replacing the Overwatch Premier Series), and Pacific (replacing Overwatch Pacific Championship for other Asian-Pacific countries), and adding in North America and European divisions. Prior to the second 2018 Contenders season, Blizzard added two additional divisions, for Australia and South America, bringing the total to seven. The top eight teams from the Open Division within each region are also invited to Contenders Trials, a weekly promotion and relegation tournament to compete in the following week of Contenders.

[ 24 ] For its second season in 2019, Blizzard adjusted the format by reducing the number of teams in each region to eight, while dividing the North American region into East and West divisions. Blizzard also added a regional limit of the number of "import players", which are those that live outside the division's region, to a maximum of three.

[ 25 ] These changes were reverted for the 2020 season.

History [ edit ] Concept [ edit ] The development of Overwatch began in approximately 2013, coinciding with the rising popularity of esports and spectator-driven video gaming, fueled by the accessibility of live streaming platforms.

[ 9 ] However, the game's development was not dedicated to esports. Lead director Jeff Kaplan , based on Blizzard's past experiences with esports, emphasized the importance of avoiding excessive commitment to esports too early in the game's lifespan. Instead, they chose to closely observe the player community and incorporate any esports-related goals based on their observations.

[ 26 ] During the beta period of Overwatch , which lasted from late 2015 to mid-2016, Blizzard observed that players were organizing ad hoc competitions and tournaments for the game. This led to Blizzard's consideration of the potential impact if they took charge of formalizing and structuring these competitions. Nate Nanzer, who later became the league's commissioner, noted that with the right approach and investment, they could monetize esports in a manner comparable to traditional sports. Building on this insight, Blizzard laid the groundwork for what would eventually become the Overwatch League.

[ 9 ] Part of this included introducing competitive features directly into the main Overwatch game, such as ranked play, allowing players to climb a rankings ladder and attract the attention of esports team organizers.

[ 1 ] In October 2016, Bobby Kotick , the CEO of Activision Blizzard , the parent company of Blizzard, first publicly mentioned the Overwatch League. Kotick highlighted the viewership of user-generated esports content, which had already reached around 100 million, surpassing the viewership of some professional NFL and NBA games. Recognizing this potential, Kotick envisioned the Overwatch League as a means to deliver "professional content" and tap into this extensive viewership.

[ 27 ] The Overwatch League was formally announced at BlizzCon in November 2016.

[ 2 ] During the announcement, Blizzard revealed their plans for the league, which would feature franchised teams employing players to compete in both live arenas and via video streaming platforms. These teams would provide players with salaries, benefits, and opportunities for team and player development.

[ 2 ] [ 28 ] Blizzard's approach to the league differed from traditional esports models that used relegation and promotion systems, such as the one employed in the League of Legends Championship Series . Instead, they opted to follow the American model prevalent in more traditional physical sports.

[ 2 ] [ 29 ] Kotick expressed his belief that the Overwatch League represented an unprecedented venture in esports, emphasizing that nothing of this scale had been attempted before.

[ 2 ] [ 28 ] He also emphasized the importance of adopting a model similar to the NFL in terms of league structure and financial opportunities to attract substantial investments and establish long-lasting franchises within the Overwatch League. He described this approach as a "forever investment".

[ 30 ] Blizzard aimed to cover the costs of running the league through traditional revenue streams commonly seen in professional sports leagues, including promotion, advertisements, and physical merchandise. Additionally, owing to the digital nature of esports, Kotick said that they had the opportunity to generate revenue from virtual league-based items offered to fans, as well as increased sales of Overwatch and other games. He also expressed that they could explore more lucrative "over-the-top advertising opportunities that wouldn't exist in traditional sports". Kotick expressed confidence in the league's future financial success. While certain revenue streams might take time to fully materialize, he noted significant traction and enthusiasm from fans before the inaugural season began.

[ 31 ] Buildout [ edit ] New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft was one of the first businesspeople approached to own an Overwatch League team.

Blizzard sought out potential team owners, with a focus on establishing localized teams tied to specific geographic areas. The company believed that having such local teams would generate greater interest in esports among spectators and potential sponsors, as it would create new opportunities for fans to engage and support their hometown teams. A meeting for prospective team owners took place at BlizzCon 2016, shortly after the league's official announcement. Notable attendees included Robert Kraft , the owner of the New England Patriots , and Stan Kroenke , the owner of the Los Angeles Rams .

[ 28 ] During the formative stages of the league, Blizzard appointed Steve Bornstein as the company's esports chair. Bornstein, formerly the president of ABC Sports and CEO of NFL Network , assumed a role in shaping the broadcast and presentation of Overwatch League games.

[ 9 ] Blizzard anticipated the Overwatch League would have a seven-figure payoff for the winning team at the end of a season. The inaugural season of the league, which was initially intended to be a shortened one, was planned to start in Q3 2017. Subsequent full-length seasons were scheduled to commence in 2018, with the league incorporating half-year long seasonal breaks beginning in Q4 of that year.

[ 29 ] Prior to the league's official start, Blizzard planned to host a combine, during which players would be invited to try out for guaranteed team contracts.

[ 32 ] After the initial announcement in November 2016, Blizzard remained tight-lipped about the Overwatch League for several months, leading to some speculation that the league might be encountering challenges. In May 2017, ESPN reported that the league was indeed facing difficulties in securing franchise deals and attributed these issues to two primary factors. Firstly, the high base cost of starting a franchise, which began at $20 million and could be even higher in more urban markets like New York City and Los Angeles, presented a significant barrier. This entry fee was substantially higher compared to buy-ins for other esports leagues. Secondly, another obstacle was the absence of revenue sharing until 2021. This meant that potential franchise owners could face difficulties in recovering their initial investment costs.

[ 33 ] However, during this time, Activision Blizzard was actively engaging with potential team owners, opting to withhold extensive announcements until they could present comprehensive details.

[ 34 ] The Kraft Group , headed by Robert Kraft, emerged as a key team owner for the league. Kraft had shown previous interest in investing in esports and had met with Bobby Kotick in 2013 when Kotick was exploring investment opportunities in an NFL franchise. During that meeting, Kraft revealed their intent to seek investment in an esports team. Over the next few years, Kraft evaluated various esports competitions but was not entirely comfortable with their grassroots nature. However, when Blizzard introduced the Overwatch League during BlizzCon 2016, it captured Kraft's attention. By March 2017, a deal was successfully struck between Kraft and Activision, securing the first team ownership group for the Overwatch League.

[ 35 ] Once the Kraft Group committed to supporting a Boston-based team, later named the Boston Uprising , this acted as a catalyst, leading to the formation of six additional teams in the league.

[ 36 ] The Kraft Group themselves helped to convince some of the other owners to buy into the Overwatch League.

[ 35 ] In July 2017, Blizzard revealed the first seven teams and their respective owners for the Overwatch League.

[ 37 ] Over the following months, additional teams were announced, eventually finalizing a total of twelve teams by mid-December.

[ 38 ] Blizzard Arena hosted nearly every Overwatch League match from 2018 to 2019.

In September 2017, Blizzard announced that they would make permanent use of Studio 1 at The Burbank Studios in Burbank, California , and would convert it into the " Blizzard Arena ".

[ 39 ] Having a dedicated arena served several purposes. Firstly, it aimed to elevate the status of the Overwatch League, presenting it as a highly orchestrated event distinct from other esports tournaments. Additionally, the Blizzard Arena provided an opportunity for players to build stronger connections with their fanbase. Blizzard conducted Overwatch Contenders events in the Blizzard Arena in October 2017. This allowed them to identify areas for improvement and make necessary adjustments ahead of the Overwatch League pre-season, which commenced in December 2017.

[ 40 ] Launch and expansion [ edit ] To support spectating on broadcast and streaming media, Blizzard implemented cosmetic modifications to the game. Each team received dedicated character skins featuring their team colors, names, and logos. These customized skins were used during matches to easily identify and represent their respective teams.

[ 41 ] To allow fans outside of the league to show their support, Blizzard introduced a special in-game currency called "OWL Tokens". Players could purchase a character's team skin using OWL Tokens. A percentage of the revenue generated from these purchases was allocated to the teams themselves, providing them with additional financial support.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Initially, OWL Tokens were obtainable through an in-game purchase with real currency. However, during the first season, viewers could receive tokens by watching the live broadcast of games through any official Overwatch League channel.

[ 44 ] Blizzard also worked to create an AI -based cameraman, capable of following the action of the game and selecting key instant replays.

[ 41 ] During regular season matches, Blizzard employed a team of approximately 80 to 100 people to manage the game and its broadcast. This team included on-screen hosts, interviewers, play-by-play announcers or " shoutcasters ", broadcasting and technical support personnel, and "observers" who used the AI cameraman to monitor matches from various angles. Additionally, there were broadcasting and technical support personnel involved in the production.

[ 9 ] For broadcasting and commentary, Blizzard enlisted individuals such as Christopher "MonteCristo" Mykles , Erik "DoA" Lonnquist , Matt "Mr. X" Morello, and Mitchell "Uber" Leslie to shoutcast the matches.

[ 45 ] Blizzard released an Overwatch League app in early January 2018, just before the first season commenced. The app provided schedules, results, highlights, and other essential details about the league's progress.

[ 46 ] Preseason play for the inaugural season of the Overwatch League commenced on December 6, 2017.

[ 47 ] The first regular season game took place on January 10, 2018, with the Los Angeles Valiant defeating the San Francisco Shock .

[ 48 ] The initial night of play through the English broadcast on Twitch garnered over 415,000 viewers, while never dropping below 285,000 once play started.

[ 49 ] Blizzard reported that during the first week, over 10 million viewers watched league play across all streaming platforms, and the Blizzard Arena was sold-out throughout the entire week.

[ 50 ] However, by the end of the season, the league faced challenges in filling seats at Blizzard Arena. According to a former esports executive, it was not uncommon to have only around 100 people in the audience. To address this issue, the company resorted to busing in employees or distributing free tickets to students when high-profile individuals like Kotick or other VIPs were expected to attend. However, this approach was seen as incentivizing undesirable behavior, as it artificially inflated attendance numbers to impress potential team owners and sell them on the promise of a thriving live audience.

[ 51 ] As the postseason began, Blizzard and Disney signed a deal to air postseason games on ABC , ESPN , and Disney XD alongside the official Twitch streams, with the partnership extending into the second season.

[ 52 ] During its first season, the league secured over $200 million in sponsorships and broadcast rights. Major sponsors included Intel , Omen by HP , Toyota , T-Mobile , and Spotify , with most deals valued at over $10 million each.

[ 53 ] The league ultimately exceeded its 2018 projected revenue of $22 million.

[ 51 ] The London Spitfire won the 2018 Grand Finals.

The London Spitfire became the first champions of Overwatch League after defeating the Philadelphia Fusion in the Grand Finals , which took place before 22,000 fans at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, New York on July 27–28.

[ 54 ] The finals were watched by more than 10.8 million people, with a viewership comparable to regular season NFL games.

[ 55 ] In March 2018, Overwatch League executives began to search for new expansion teams, particularly in international markets, as only one team, the Shanghai Dragons were owned by a foreign corporation at the time. Despite initial skepticism and doubts about the league's potential, Overwatch League's revenue had already exceeded expectations, reaching almost four times its original projection from December 2017 to February 2018. The franchise fee for expansion teams was expected to be higher than the inaugural season, estimated to be between $35 million to $60 million.

[ 56 ] In September 2018, Blizzard announced the addition of eight new teams for the second season: the Atlanta Reign , Guangzhou Charge , Hangzhou Spark , Toronto Defiant , Paris Eternal , Washington Justice , Vancouver Titans , and Chengdu Hunters . This brought the total number of teams in the league to 20.

[ 57 ] The Dallas Fuel Homestand event held at the Allen Event Center in Allen, Texas , during the 2019 season For the second season, the regular season was split into four stages, and each team played a total of 28 games, with seven games per stage. This reduced the number of games from 40, which was played in the first season, addressing concerns related to player fatigue and mental health.

[ 58 ] Most regular season games were played at the Blizzard Arena in Los Angeles, but select Homestand Weekends matches took place at locations in Dallas, Atlanta, and Los Angeles, testing the feasibility of home-and-away games for the following season.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] In May 2019, during the middle of the season, league commissioner Nate Nanzer announced that he would be leaving Blizzard to join Epic Games . Pete Vlastelica, who was the CEO and president of Activision Blizzard Esports, took over as the league commissioner following Nanzer's departure.

[ 61 ] The following month, Immortals Gaming Club (IGC), the parent company of the Los Angeles Valiant , acquired Infinite Esports, the parent company of Houston Outlaws , marking the first sale of any Overwatch League franchise.

[ 62 ] Since one company may not own more than one OWL franchise, IGC sold the Outlaws to the Beasley Media Group in November 2019.

[ 63 ] Beginning in the second season, Fanatics became the league's outfitter, responsible for producing and selling team- and OWL-related clothing and merchandise.

[ 64 ] Blizzard also signed a multi-year deal with Coca-Cola to become the official non-alcoholic beverage sponsor for various Overwatch esports events, including the Overwatch League, Overwatch Contenders, Open Division, Overwatch World Cup , and BlizzCon.

[ 65 ] Bud Light became the league's alcoholic beverage sponsor, excluding in China.

[ 66 ] Furthermore, Xfinity signed on as a sponsor for the 2019 Overwatch League playoffs and Grand Finals .

[ 67 ] Throughout the second season, the overall global viewership was estimated at 218,000 per minute on average across all games, with a majority of viewers coming from outside the United States.

[ 30 ] Transition to online play [ edit ] Ahead of the 2020 season, Blizzard signed a three-year deal with YouTube to be the exclusive broadcaster of the Overwatch League. This agreement replaced Twitch as the primary streaming platform for the league's matches. As part of the arrangement, Blizzard also established Google Cloud Platform as the preferred infrastructure provider for the game servers.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] In the third season of the Overwatch League, significant changes were made to fully adopt the away-and-home format, allowing games to take place in home arenas for each team.

[ 70 ] The home arenas were not required to be dedicated esports venues, and some teams collaborated with their local cities to develop such spaces that could also host other sports and entertainment events. For instance, the Philadelphia Fusion's owner, Comcast Spectacor , announced plans to construct the $50 million Fusion Arena by the 2021 season, [ 71 ] but during the 2020 season, they scheduled homestand games at the Metropolitan Opera House in Philadelphia and Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City.

[ 30 ] Throughout the 2020 season, there were 52 homestand events planned, with each team hosting at least two in their home arenas. Teams that already secured larger arenas were set to host additional regular season events to support the newer teams and arenas in becoming better established. For example, Dallas, Washington, and Guangzhou each had five homestand events scheduled.

[ 70 ] The initial schedules were managed by the teams, but Blizzard anticipated taking over scheduling for the 2021 season. Blizzard provided flexibility for teams to plan the 2020 schedule and develop logistics for hosting homestand events, including providing accommodations and practice areas for visiting teams during those weekends. This expansion was coordinated with the Call of Duty League (CDL), a professional esports league founded by Activision in 2020, which also followed the city-based model with many teams owned by the same entities as OWL teams. Both leagues faced similar logistics challenges and coordinated efforts when applicable.

[ 72 ] Moreover, the previously established divisions were converted into conferences, with each conference having two divisions. The stages were eliminated, and teams continued to play 28 games throughout the season with a planned mid-season All-Star break.

[ 73 ] Looking forward, League Commissioner Pete Vlastelica expressed interest in potential expansion of the league, with a primary focus on introducing more teams from Europe.

[ 70 ] Due to the restrictions imposed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic , the league had to suspend all homestand events and transitioned to online play just a month into the 2020 season.

[ 74 ] Blizzard Entertainment announced its intention to return to the homestand format as soon as it was safe and logistically feasible.

[ 75 ] With the closure of entertainment venues in Los Angeles, [ 76 ] the Overwatch League production team, including casters and analysts, moved to remote setups, with everyone working from home for the remainder of the season.

[ 77 ] As part of the adaptation to the new circumstances, the league abandoned the original conferences and instead organized teams into two regions to account for their geographical locations. Teams exclusively competed within their respective regions during the regular season, and inter-regional matches only occurred at the end of the playoffs period. Additionally, the 2020 season introduced mid-season tournaments, held three times throughout the regular season, all still split by region.

[ 78 ] According to two owners, the pandemic had an unexpected positive impact on teams as it halted the financial losses incurred from live events. However, the suspension of in-person games also challenged the league's original justification for its existence, leading some teams to contemplate not paying franchise fees in 2020. Two individuals familiar with the situation revealed that Activision Blizzard permitted teams to postpone the fees and provided a $2 million payroll credit. As part of the agreement, teams were required to sign a release stating they would not pursue legal action against the company, as reported by two other sources.

[ 51 ] At the end of the 2020 season, commissioner Pete Vlastelica stepped down to take on a new position.

[ 79 ] He was replaced by Johanna Faries, the commissioner of the Call of Duty League, who became the commissioner of both leagues.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] During the fourth season of the Overwatch League, the league continued to adopt regional, online play due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. However, some live events were initially planned to take place in China.

[ 82 ] The OWL expanded on its tournament format from the previous year, introducing four midseason tournaments throughout the regular season.

[ 83 ] In July 2021, the league announced that it would host its two postseason events live at different venues: the playoffs would be held at the Esports Stadium Arlington in Arlington, Texas, and the 2021 Grand Finals would take place at the Galen Center in Los Angeles, California.

[ 84 ] However, due to increasing risks related to COVID-19 and the Delta variant , as well as visa difficulties, these live events were later canceled and shifted to online play.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] During the season, the OWL also faced sponsor pullbacks, with many of its partners withdrawing their sponsorships following a lawsuit filed by the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH) against Activision Blizzard for sexual harassment and discrimination within the company. Sponsors, such as Coca-Cola , Kellogg's , State Farm , and T-Mobile , withdrew their support from the league.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] By mid-August 2021, the only sponsor present during Overwatch League broadcasts was voice-over-Internet Protocol software company TeamSpeak .

[ 89 ] Overwatch 2 era [ edit ] For the first time since 2019, the Grand Finals were played live in 2022.

For the fifth season of the OWL, the league played on an early release of Overwatch 2 .

[ 90 ] The season, which began in early May 2022, faced several challenges on multiple fronts. Notably, there were no known sponsors for the season as of June 9, 2022. Moreover, the league underwent significant changes in its leadership during this time, as five top executives left Activision Blizzard Esports or transitioned to other departments since the start of the season. Furthermore, the company made adjustments to its operations, deciding to outsource its broadcast and event production to a third party.

[ 51 ] During the midseason tournaments, viewership numbers experienced a significant decrease compared to the previous season, with a reduction of up to 40.5%.

[ 91 ] However, after the official release of Overwatch 2 on October 5, 2022, the league saw a surge in viewership. The 2022 playoffs reached a live average minute audience of 250,000, surpassing previous viewership records from when the league was broadcast on Twitch in 2018 and 2019. The 2022 Grand Finals were held live at the Anaheim Convention Center in Anaheim, California, marking the first time that the Grand Finals were held live since 2019.

[ 92 ] In terms of sponsorships, the league secured a deal with Butterfinger for the playoffs, marking their first new sponsorship since 2021.

[ 93 ] During the offseason leading up to the 2023 season , the league faced challenges with uncertainties about its future, as broken partnership with NetEase caused disruptions in the East Region as certain Blizzard games, including Overwatch 2 , were banned in China. To adapt to this, in the East Region, an "open ecosystem" approach was implemented, allowing Overwatch Contenders teams to compete alongside Overwatch League teams. A preseason pro-am tournament was also held in the West Region, where Overwatch Contenders teams competed against established OWL teams. The regular season was divided into two stages, Spring and Summer, and featured only one midseason tournament.

[ 94 ] Several teams underwent significant changes in branding and regions during this offseason as well. The Paris Eternal relocated to Las Vegas and rebranded as the Vegas Eternal , making them the first team in the league to switch cities.

[ 95 ] Similarly, the Philadelphia Fusion shifted their base to Seoul and adopted a new identity as the Seoul Infernal .

[ 96 ] Not all teams remained intact, as the Chengdu Hunters disbanded.

[ 97 ] In January 2023, in an effort to address operating costs and viewership challenges, Overwatch League teams collectively initiated a bargaining process. They enlisted the representation of Sheridans, a British law firm, to negotiate with Activision Blizzard. This collective bargaining process led to an agreement between OverActive Media, the owner of the Toronto Defiant, and the Overwatch League. As part of this agreement, the Toronto Defiant signed a sponsorship deal with the league, and the Overwatch League agreed to waive the outstanding franchise fees owed by all teams.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Termination [ edit ] On July 19, 2023, Activision-Blizzard released its second-quarter earnings report. According to the report, following the conclusion of the 2023 season, franchise owners voted on an updated operating agreement. Should the teams opt not to continue under the updated agreement, a termination fee of $6 million would be payable to each participating team entity, amounting to a total fee of approximately $114 million.

[ 100 ] On November 8, 2023, an OWL spokesperson confirmed that Blizzard would be transitioning away from its current model and would be working on building a new framework for competitive Overwatch , as a two-thirds majority of OWL franchisees voted to depart from the league. Reports suggested that the league might be operated by a third-party tournament organizer in 2024.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] On January 23, 2024, Blizzard announced that the Overwatch League was officially folded; on the same day, they announced a multi-year deal with ESL FACEIT Group and WDG Esports to create the Overwatch Champions Series (OWCS) to replace the OWL.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Teams [ edit ] The league launched in 2018 with twelve teams, each based in a global city . Eight additional teams were added in the league's 2019 season. Prior to the 2020 season, the teams were divided between two divisions: the Atlantic Division with the American East Coast , Eastern Canadian and European teams, and the Pacific Division with the American West Coast , Western Canadian and Asian teams.

[ 105 ] [ 4 ] [ 106 ] With the 2020 season, the two divisions were elevated to conferences, keeping the same team distributions, but with now two divisions within each conference.

[ 73 ] Additionally, teams began playing in home/away games, with each team having one or more venues to host homestand weekends.

[ 73 ] However, due to the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, all live matches were cancelled near the beginning of the 2020 season, and teams were divided into regions.

[ 107 ] Below was the region split as of the 2023 season.

Dynasty Infernal Dragons Spark Charge Eternal Titans Shock Valiant Gladiators Fuel Outlaws Reign Mayhem Justice Defiant Excelsior Uprising Spitfire East Region West Region Team Location Joined Owner [ 108 ] Academy team East Region Dallas Fuel Dallas 2018 OpTic Gaming Team Envy (inactive) Guangzhou Charge Guangzhou 2019 Nenking Group Ultra Prime Academy (inactive) Hangzhou Spark Hangzhou 2019 Bilibili Bilibili Gaming (inactive) Seoul Dynasty Seoul 2018 Gen.G Esports Gen.G Global Academy Seoul Infernal Seoul 2018 Comcast Spectacor Fusion University (inactive), T1 (inactive) Shanghai Dragons Shanghai 2018 NetEase Team CC (inactive) West Region Atlanta Reign Atlanta 2019 Atlanta Esports Ventures ATL Academy (inactive) Boston Uprising Boston 2018 Kraft Group Uprising Academy (inactive) Florida Mayhem Miami – Orlando 2018 Misfits Gaming Mayhem Academy (inactive) Houston Outlaws Houston 2018 Beasley Media Group GG Esports Academy (inactive) London Spitfire London 2018 Cloud9 British Hurricane (inactive) Los Angeles Gladiators Los Angeles 2018 Kroenke Sports & Entertainment Gladiators Legion (inactive) Los Angeles Valiant Los Angeles 2018 Immortals Gaming Club None New York Excelsior New York City 2018 NYXL NYXL Academy San Francisco Shock San Francisco 2018 NRG Esports O2 Blast Toronto Defiant Toronto 2019 OverActive Media Montreal Rebellion (inactive) Vancouver Titans Vancouver 2019 Canucks Sports & Entertainment None Vegas Eternal Las Vegas 2019 DM-Esports Eternal Academy (inactive) Washington Justice Washington, D.C.

2019 Washington Esports Ventures None League championships [ edit ] As of the 2023 season, 20 different teams have competed in the league, with five having won at least one Grand Finals title.

Season Champions Score Runners-up 2018 [ a ] London Spitfire 2–0 Philadelphia Fusion 2019 San Francisco Shock 4–0 Vancouver Titans 2020 San Francisco Shock 4–2 Seoul Dynasty 2021 Shanghai Dragons 4–0 Atlanta Reign 2022 Dallas Fuel 4–3 San Francisco Shock 2023 Florida Mayhem 4–0 Houston Outlaws Broadcasting [ edit ] Shortly prior to the beginning of the 2018 regular season, Blizzard reached a two-year deal with Twitch to be the main streaming broadcaster of the Overwatch League outside of China, reported to be valued at $90 million.

[ 109 ] The service carried streams in English, French, and Korean, while users who linked their Twitch account to their Battle.net account would also be eligible for chances to receive in-game items for Overwatch while watching broadcasts.

[ 110 ] A subscription service known as the "All-Access Pass" also allowed users access to private streams and chat rooms with players, coaches, league officials and announcers, in-game currency to purchase team skins, emotes for use on Twitch chats, and discounts at Blizzard's store.

[ 111 ] This feature was expanded for the 2019 season to include the ability for viewers to use the "command center" app introduced during the 2018 Overwatch World Cup , to be able to view matches from different camera angles in real-time.

[ 112 ] The league also posted highlights on Twitter starting with the first season's All-Star Weekend and continuing into the second season, and also produced a weekly pre-game show called Watchpoint .

[ 113 ] On July 11, 2018, Blizzard also announced a U.S. television deal with ESPN through the 2019 season, under which coverage of the 2018 playoffs would be simulcast across ESPN networks, including the semi-finals airing across ESPN2 , ESPNews , and Disney–ABC Television Group sister channel Disney XD , the first night of the final airing on the main ESPN network (marking its first-ever primetime broadcast of an esports event), continuing on Disney XD the next day, and a highlights package the following Sunday on ABC .

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] The arrangement continued into the 2019 season, with Disney XD adding regular-season broadcasts, and ABC adding broadcast television simulcasts of the Stage 1 and Stage 2 finals, and the all-star event.

[ 116 ] This partnership included broadcasting rights to the Overwatch World Cup as well.

[ 52 ] ESPN's sister Canadian network TSN also carried broadcasts on its platforms, including television encores of matches involving the league's new Canadian franchises.

[ 117 ] German sports channel Sport1 , which broadcasts to Switzerland and Austria in addition to Germany, made a two-year deal with Blizzard games live starting in the second season, partnering to form a new eSports1 sister channel.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] In early 2020, YouTube reached a three-year exclusive deal to serve as broadcaster for all Activision Blizzard esports events, including the Overwatch League, Call of Duty League , and Hearthstone , replacing Twitch. The deal was reported to be valued at $160 million.

[ 68 ] Alongside the agreement, Activision Blizzard also reached an agreement to use Google Cloud Platform as its preferred infrastructure provider for its game servers.

[ 120 ] After the expiration of the deal, the Overwatch League season would continue to be exclusively broadcast on YouTube.

[ 121 ] Reception [ edit ] Some commentators observed that of the more than 100 players selected for teams for the first season, none of them were female.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Some noted the absence of Kim "Geguri" Se-yeon , a teenage South Korean player who is recognized as one of the highest-skilled Zarya players and who was the first female player to play in the Overwatch APEX league.

[ 124 ] During the press day event prior to the start of the season, teams acknowledged they had considered signing on Geguri but noted issues with such an action. The Houston Outlaws said that there would have been a language barrier issue with her potential teammates, and complications related to co-ed housing for teams. The team also claimed that if they had brought her on board, there would have been issues from external commentators about whether it was a press stunt or an otherwise legitimate reason, and the nature of this legitimacy would shadow her career. Other teams like the London Spitfire and the New York Excelsior had looked to Geguri as a free agent but in the end desired to work from an established set of players that had already worked in leagues in the past. Team owners recognized that they want to make the player roster more diverse, but this in part requires making the community around Overwatch less toxic and more inviting.

[ 124 ] Nanzer also said he would like to see further diversity in players in the league, but was aware that there are cultures where there is a social stigma against professional video game players that can be a barrier to achieve this.

[ 18 ] By mid-February, during the Season 1 free agency window, Geguri was signed by the Shanghai Dragons , making her the first female player in the league.

[ 125 ] Additional concerns were raised following several league-issued fines and suspensions issued against a number of players based on their conduct. Journalists found that some players carried over the toxic nature from their days as YouTube or Twitch broadcasters, in which players would often routinely ridicule their opponents; many of the fines and suspensions follow from similar behavior displayed at the league level. The Overwatch player base outside of the league has also had issues of toxicity , which Blizzard has been trying to handle through better reporting tools. In addition to requiring the league players to follow the code of conduct, Blizzard is also watching how these players behave on off-league broadcasts, and would fine players if they engage in toxic or inappropriate behavior even if not part of a league session, as well as publicizing when the league takes such actions.

[ 21 ] [ 126 ] [ 20 ] [ 127 ] Some of this poor behavior had concerned at least one of the league's sponsors, HP , since the behavior becomes associated with their brand, though such problems were not unique to esports, according to HP product manager John Ludwig.

[ 128 ] After the conclusion of the first stage of the inaugural season, ESPN reported that the revenue projections for the league has exceeded its expectations, with some insiders claiming that the league's revenue was four times greater than initially planned; this was in part through its Twitch streaming deal and new advertisers, such as Toyota and T-Mobile , that came on board a few weeks into play.

[ 129 ] Due to the success of the first season of the Overwatch League, Fortune named commissioner Nate Nanzer as one of their " 40 Under 40 " in 2018.

[ 130 ] Entering the third season, concern had been raised on the stress of the league on its players. Fifty players had dropped from the league during the first two years, with several of them citing the stress the league places on them and mental health issues.

[ 131 ] Litigation [ edit ] In July 2017, a trademark dispute arose when Major League Baseball (MLB) association expressed concerns regarding the logo that Blizzard had registered for the Overwatch League. MLB argued that Blizzard's logo bore similarities to their own, raising the potential for confusion among consumers.

[ 132 ] However, following the initial complaint, no further filings were made by Major League Baseball within the required dispute period. This suggested that either MLB decided to drop the dispute, or an undisclosed understanding was reached between MLB and the Overwatch League, allowing the league to continue using the logo.

[ 133 ] In July 2021, Dot Esports reported that the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) was investigating the Overwatch League in regards to their team soft cap on players' salaries. In contrast to professional sports leagues like the NFL, where the use of player unions allows the league to implement salary caps under the Supreme Court ruling in Amalgamated Meat Cutters v. Jewel Tea Co.

, the Overwatch League currently lacks such unions, which would make salary caps potentially a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 . The league soft cap in 2020 was $1.6 million , and while a team could have salaries over that amount, they would be taxed as a luxury tax and would be considered detrimental.

[ 134 ] In October 2021, Sports Business Journal reported that the OWL would be eliminating the luxury tax and maximum salary caps.

[ 135 ] A settlement between the two parties was proposed, but according to a report by former ESPN writer Jacob Wolf in late 2022, Activision Blizzard refused to terms regarding particular requests that would endure after the proposed acquisition of Activision Blizzard by Microsoft .

[ 136 ] The Department of Justice filed a lawsuit, and Activision Blizzard agreed to settle the suit in April 2023, with provisions that would prohibit it from implementing similar measures in the future in the Overwatch League, the Call of Duty League , or any other esports league it operates.

[ 137 ] Legacy [ edit ] Activision Blizzard used the Overwatch League model to establish the Call of Duty League in 2019.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] While the Call of Duty League was to have its inaugural season in 2020 with the same planned home/away format that the Overwatch League was planning the use in its third season, the COVID-19 pandemic forced the Call of Duty League to switch to a fully online format.

[ 140 ] The league was a central plot element in the seventeenth season episode "Brave N00b World" of American Dad!

which was first broadcast in May 2020.

[ 141 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ The 2018 Grand Finals was a best-of-three series; London won 3–1 in the first match and 3–0 in the second.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Crecente, Brian (February 28, 2018).

" 'Overwatch': Birth of a Professional Esports League" .

Glixel .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2018 . Retrieved March 2, 2018 .

^ a b c d e Molina, Brett (November 5, 2016).

"Blizzard to launch pro sports league for 'Overwatch' " .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2016 . Retrieved March 14, 2016 .

^ "2021 About Page" .

overwatchleague.com .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2023 . Retrieved November 24, 2021 .

^ a b c d Horti, Samuel (November 5, 2017).

"Overwatch League will show matches four days a week, each team will play 40 times a season" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2017 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ Duwe, Scott (February 19, 2018).

"Overwatch League's second stage is set to bring new maps, players, and a different meta" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2018 .

^ Bailey, Dustin (January 9, 2018).

"Overwatch League won't change patches more than once every six weeks" .

PCGamesN .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ Carpenter, Nicole (January 31, 2018).

"Mercy nerf won't hit Overwatch League until mid-February" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2018 . Retrieved January 31, 2018 .

^ Fortier, Sam (July 27, 2018).

"Overwatch League's first Grand Finals provide a crucial esports lesson: Adapt or die" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2018 . Retrieved July 28, 2018 .

^ a b c d e Hill, Nathan (December 7, 2017).

"The Overwatch Videogame League Aims to Become the New NFL" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2017 . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ a b Carpenter, Nicole (January 3, 2018).

"Here's what you need to know about the Overwatch League" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2018 . Retrieved January 4, 2018 .

^ a b Byers, Preston (June 14, 2018).

"OWL sets free agency start date, new Contenders rules, and introduces two-way players" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Carpenter, Nicole (August 2, 2018).

"OWL commissioner Nate Nanzer: Geguri has inspired "millions of girls" around the world" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Barrett, Ben (January 12, 2018).

"Overwatch League teams, structure, schedule and, everything else we know" .

PCGamesN .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 15, 2018 .

^ Richardson, Liz (December 22, 2022).

"Overwatch League to lower player age minimum for 2023 in hopes for more "accessible" competition" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2022 . Retrieved December 22, 2022 .

^ "Roster Construction Rules for the 2023 Overwatch League Season" .

Overwatch League . November 14, 2022.

Archived from the original on August 6, 2023 . Retrieved July 19, 2023 .

^ Kim, Matt (July 26, 2017).

"Do You Want to be a Pro Overwatch Player? Here's How Much You Could Make" .

US Gamer .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2017 . Retrieved July 26, 2017 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (September 3, 2017).

"NRG signs 17-year-old Overwatch pro sinatraa for $150K" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2017 . Retrieved December 5, 2017 .

^ a b Dwan, Hannah (January 24, 2017).

"Overwatch League | Commissioner Nate Nanzer on diversity, player unions and where the league's rules are" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 24, 2017 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (January 19, 2018).

"Dallas Fuel suspend xQc for anti-gay slurs; Overwatch League fines player" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2018 .

^ a b Lawler, Richard (March 9, 2018).

" 'Overwatch' pro suspended for 'racially disparaging' emote" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2018 . Retrieved March 12, 2018 .

^ a b D'Anastasio, Cecilia (December 21, 2018).

"Blizzard Creates Official Catalog Of Overwatch Pros Who Break The Rules" .

Kotaku .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2018 . Retrieved December 21, 2018 .

^ Campbell, Colin (March 2, 2018).

"Blizzard boss Mike Morhaime talks about the future of Overwatch League" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2018 . Retrieved March 2, 2018 .

^ Chalk, Andy (June 14, 2017).

"The new Overwatch Open Division promises 'more formal' competition for aspiring amateurs" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved November 27, 2017 .

^ Chalk, Andy (November 27, 2017).

"Australia and South America will join Overwatch Contenders in 2018" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2017 . Retrieved November 27, 2017 .

^ "Blizzard confirms changes to Contenders" .

Reuters . October 30, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2018 . Retrieved October 31, 2018 – via ESPN .

^ Lahti, Evan (April 13, 2015).

"Blizzard's blueprint: Overwatch as a competitive FPS" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2016 . Retrieved June 10, 2016 .

^ Bruno, Giovanni (October 20, 2016).

"Activision Blizzard (ATVI) CEO Kotick Talks Future of VR, esports" .

The Street .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2017 . Retrieved December 13, 2017 .

^ a b c Bond, Paul (November 4, 2016).

"Activision Blizzard to Create esports League for 'Overwatch' Video Game" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2016 . Retrieved November 29, 2016 .

^ a b Kollar, Philip (November 4, 2016).

"Overwatch League is Blizzard's ambitious new esports org, includes city-based teams" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2016 . Retrieved November 4, 2016 .

^ a b c Miller, Hawken (September 30, 2019).

"For Overwatch League, the true test starts in 2020" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2019 .

^ "Activision Blizzard CEO: Overwatch League seeing a lot of traction" .

CNBC . January 10, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 11, 2018 .

^ "Blizzard Entertainment Establishes Professional Sports League for Overwatch" . Press release – Activision Blizzard. November 4, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 2, 2016 . Retrieved March 14, 2016 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (May 10, 2017).

"Sources: Teams hesitant to buy into Overwatch League due to high cost, undesirable contract terms" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on May 11, 2017 . Retrieved May 11, 2017 .

^ Magdelano, Alex (January 9, 2018).

"Blizzard's Overwatch League Isn't Aiming for Perfection" .

Bleacher Report .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 11, 2018 .

^ a b Darcy, Kieran; Wolf, Jacob (July 27, 2018).

"How Blizzard convinced sports billionaires to buy into the Overwatch League" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2018 . Retrieved July 27, 2018 .

^ "Overwatch League Season 1 – everything you need to know" .

ESPN . December 11, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 13, 2017 . Retrieved December 13, 2017 .

^ Gartenberg, Chaim (July 12, 2017).

"Blizzard announces first Overwatch League teams and owners, including Robert Kraft and Jeff Wilpon" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on July 13, 2017 . Retrieved July 12, 2017 .

^ Chalk, Andy (September 20, 2017).

"Overwatch League adds final three teams in Houston, Dallas, and Philadelphia" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2017 . Retrieved September 20, 2017 .

^ Sinclair, Brendan (September 7, 2017).

"Blizzard opening dedicated esports production facility" .

GamesIndustry.biz .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2017 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 .

^ Landa, Jeff (January 11, 2018).

"Burbank's Blizzard Arena aims to take esports to the next level" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2018 .

^ a b Marks, Tom (November 5, 2017).

"How Blizzard Made the Perfect AI Cameraman for Overwatch League" .

IGN .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2017 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ Chalk, Andy (December 4, 2017).

"Overwatch is getting a new currency exclusively for esports skins" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2017 . Retrieved December 4, 2017 .

^ Pereira, Chris (January 9, 2018).

"New Overwatch Skins Arrive Today To Mark The Start Of Overwatch League" .

GameSpot .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2023 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ Moore, Bo (February 21, 2018).

"You can now earn in-game skins by watching Overwatch League" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2018 . Retrieved February 22, 2018 .

^ Erzberger, Tyler (April 14, 2017).

"MonteCristo, DoA to depart South Korea to cast Blizzard's Overwatch League in U.S" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2017 . Retrieved December 14, 2017 .

^ Bailey, Dustin (January 8, 2018).

"Overwatch League now has an official app" .

PCGamesN .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2018 . Retrieved January 8, 2018 .

^ Alonzo, Damian (December 5, 2017).

"Overwatch League preseason power rankings" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 3, 2022 .

^ Alonzo, Damian (January 11, 2018).

"Opening day of Overwatch League lived up to the hype" .

PC Gamer .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2022 . Retrieved May 3, 2022 .

^ Benson, Julian (January 11, 2018).

"Over 400,000 viewers tuned into the Overwatch League on its first day" .

PCGamesN .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 11, 2018 .

^ Batchelor, James (January 17, 2018).

"Overwatch League attracts 10m viewers in its first week" .

GamesIndustry.biz .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2018 . Retrieved January 17, 2018 .

^ a b c d D'Anastasio, Cecilia (June 9, 2022).

"The Shaky Future of Activision's Overwatch League" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2023 . Retrieved July 20, 2023 .

^ a b "Overwatch League comes to ESPN, Disney and ABC" .

ESPN . July 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 11, 2018 . Retrieved July 11, 2018 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (July 27, 2018).

"Sources: Paris and Guangzhou teams expected to join Overwatch League" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2018 . Retrieved July 27, 2018 .

^ Pei, Annie (July 20, 2018).

"Activision Blizzard holds first-ever Overwatch League Grand Finals" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 3, 2022 .

^ Newman, Heather (December 18, 2018).

"Next year's Overwatch League tweaks will change esports — and your own gameplay" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2018 . Retrieved December 18, 2018 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (February 10, 2018).

"Overwatch League expansion will face serious stumbling blocks overseas" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2022 . Retrieved July 20, 2023 .

^ McWhertor, Michael (September 7, 2018).

"Overwatch League expands to 20 teams for 2019 season" .

Heroes Never Die .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 4, 2022 .

^ Webster, Andrew (November 2, 2018).

"Blizzard's Overwatch League is making big changes with player wellness in mind" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2018 . Retrieved November 2, 2018 .

^ Grayson, Nathan (December 5, 2018).

"Overwatch League Season Two Will Have Some Road Games" .

Kotaku .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2018 . Retrieved December 5, 2018 .

^ Goslin, Austin (December 12, 2018).

"2019 Overwatch League season two schedule" .

Heroes Never Die .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2018 . Retrieved December 12, 2018 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (May 24, 2019).

"Overwatch League commissioner Nanzer to join Epic Games" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 26, 2019 .

^ Goslin, Austen (June 12, 2019).

"Immortals Gaming acquires Infinite Esports parent company of OpTic Gaming and Houston Outlaws" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved July 2, 2019 .

^ Takahashi, Dean (November 14, 2019).

"Immortals Gaming Club sells its Houston Outlaws Overwatch team to Beasley Media Group" .

Venture Beat .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2019 . Retrieved November 14, 2019 .

^ Holt, Kris (December 3, 2018).

"Overwatch League lands major merchandise deal with Fanatics" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2018 . Retrieved December 3, 2018 .

^ Fischer, Ben (February 8, 2019).

"Activision Blizzard Signs Coca-Cola as Official Non-Alcoholic Beverage for Overwatch" .

The Esports Observer .

Archived from the original on February 9, 2019 . Retrieved February 8, 2019 .

^ Fischer, Ben (April 26, 2019).

"Overwatch League Signs Bud Light for Remainder of 2019 Season" .

The Esports Observer .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2019 . Retrieved April 26, 2019 .

^ Finch, Adam (August 28, 2019).

"Xfinity to sponsor Overwatch League playoffs and grand finals" .

Esports Insider .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2019 .

^ a b Stern, Adam (February 13, 2020).

"Sources: YouTube's Deal With Activision Blizzard Valued At $160M" .

The Esports Observer .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2020 . Retrieved June 14, 2021 .

^ Spangler, Todd (January 24, 2020).

"YouTube Scores Exclusive Streaming for Activision Blizzard's E-Sports, Including Overwatch and Call of Duty Leagues" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ a b c Stedman, Alex (September 26, 2019).

"Overwatch League's Commissioner on Grand Finals and the Big Changes for Season 3" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2019 .

^ SUNMUCKS, M. (2019). $50M esports arena coming to Philly.

Street & Smith's Sportsbusiness Journal , 21 (48), 7.

^ Webster, Andrew (September 27, 2019).

"After the Overwatch League grand finals, the league prepares to finally go global" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2019 .

^ a b c Marshall, Cass (July 16, 2019).

"Here's how the Overwatch League's 2020 season will work" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2019 . Retrieved July 16, 2019 .

^ Amenabar, Teddy (March 11, 2020).

"Overwatch League cancels live events for March and April, plans to broadcast matches" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ "Overwatch League Matches Moving Online" . Blizzard Entertainment. March 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ Ramos, Dino-Ray (March 15, 2020).

"L.A. Mayor Eric Garcetti Orders Closure Of Movie Theaters To Help Prevent Spread Of Coronavirus – Update" . Deadline.

Archived from the original on March 17, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ "Online Matches Update with Overwatch League VP Jon Spector" . Blizzard Entertainment. March 27, 2020.

Archived from the original on March 28, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .

^ Webster, Andrew (October 7, 2020).

"After a rough 2020 season, the Overwatch League aims to end on a high note" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2022 . Retrieved May 4, 2022 .

^ Hitt, Kevin (October 1, 2020).

"Sources: Pete Vlastelica Steps Down as Overwatch League Commissioner" .

The Esports Observer .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Richardson, Liz (October 2, 2020).

"Call of Duty League commissioner Johanna Faries reportedly named "Head of Leagues," will also run Overwatch League" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2021 . Retrieved April 26, 2021 .

^ Stedman, Alex (October 2020).

"Pete Vlastelica Exits Post as Overwatch League Commissioner" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2020 . Retrieved October 20, 2020 .

^ Webster, Andrew (April 14, 2021).

"The Overwatch League is bringing back some live matches with a trio of events in China" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 14, 2021 .

^ Richardson, Liz (February 20, 2021).

"The Overwatch League returns on April 16" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2021 . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ "2021 Playoffs" .

overwatchleague.com .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2021 . Retrieved July 29, 2021 .

^ Collins, Sean (August 25, 2021).

"Overwatch League playoffs no longer in North Texas, moving back to online" .

The Dallas Morning News .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2021 . Retrieved August 25, 2021 .

^ Parrish, Ash (August 26, 2021).

"Overwatch League cancels its in-person playoff events" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2021 .

^ Amenabar, Teddy (August 6, 2021).

"Amid harassment lawsuit, advertisers pull back from Blizzard's Overwatch League" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2021 .

^ McWhertor, Michael (August 6, 2021).

"Kellogg's pulls Overwatch sponsorship over 'troubling' Blizzard allegations" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2021 .

^ Parrish, Ash (August 18, 2021).

"The Overwatch League's 2021 regular season was full of drama amid an uncertain future" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2021 .

^ Amenabar, Teddy (September 3, 2021).

"Overwatch League will play on 'early build' of 'Overwatch 2' next season starting in April" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 28, 2021 .

^ Miceli, Max (September 15, 2022).

"Overwatch League posts declining viewership averages for Summer Showdown" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ Miller, Hawken (November 5, 2022).

"Dallas Fuel beat San Francisco Shock 4-3 in Overwatch League Grand Final" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ Parrish, Ash (November 11, 2022).

"At the Overwatch League grand finals, a candy bar was the real winner" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ Richardson, Liz (February 8, 2023).

"Overwatch League returns in March with 'open ecosystem' and pro-am tournament" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ "Eternal make move from Paris to Vegas official" .

Reuters . Field Level Media. December 10, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 17, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Fragen, Jordan (December 30, 2022).

"OWL's Philadelphia Fusion relocate and rebrand to Seoul Infernal" .

VentureBeat .

Archived from the original on June 1, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Robertson, Scott (June 20, 2023).

"Chengdu Hunters officially leave Overwatch League" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Lee, Jonathan (January 19, 2023).

"It cost millions to join the Overwatch League. Teams are pushing for a break" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Cooke, Hunter; Hitt, Kevin (June 5, 2023).

"OWL teams' outstanding entry fees waived" .

Sports Business Journal .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2023 . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Parrish, Ash (July 19, 2023).

"Activision Blizzard lays off esports staff as it faces potential dramatic changes for the Overwatch League" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 19, 2023 .

^ Fudge, James (November 8, 2023).

"Teams Vote to Exit Overwatch League" .

The Esports Advocate . Retrieved November 8, 2023 .

^ Esguerra, Tyler (November 8, 2023).

"Blizzard confirms Overwatch League is officially dead" .

Dot Esports . Retrieved November 8, 2023 .

^ Miller, Sean (January 23, 2024).

"Thank you, Overwatch League" .

overwatchleague.com . Retrieved January 24, 2024 .

^ Gardner, Matt (January 23, 2024).

" 'Overwatch 2' Esports Returns With All-New Champions Series For 2024" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 23, 2024 .

^ Sinclair, Brendan (September 20, 2017).

"Overwatch League finalizes season 1 teams" .

GamesIndustry.biz .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2017 . Retrieved October 26, 2017 .

^ Marshall, Cass (October 10, 2018).

"The Overwatch League season 2 format for 2019 has been revealed" .

Heroes Never Die .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved October 10, 2018 .

^ Amenabar, Ted (March 27, 2020).

"Overwatch League teams face a reset after pandemic spoils its grand plans" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2022 . Retrieved March 24, 2022 .

^ Daniel, Tom (May 2, 2023).

"Who owns every Overwatch League franchise?" .

Esports Insider .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2023 . Retrieved May 5, 2023 .

^ Fischer, Ben (January 9, 2018).

"Sources: Overwatch League-Twitch Deal Worth At Least $90M" .

Sports Business Daily .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ Concepcion, Miguel (January 9, 2018).

"At The Last Minute, Blizzard Strikes Overwatch League Deal With Twitch" .

GameSpot .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ Arif, Shabana (April 3, 2018).

"Overwatch League All-Access Pass Includes Twitch Emotes, in-Game Skins, and More for $30" .

IGN .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2019 . Retrieved January 31, 2019 .

^ Webster, Andrew (January 31, 2019).

"Blizzard's Overwatch League has a robust new spectator tool if you pay for an all-access pass" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2019 . Retrieved January 31, 2019 .

^ Locklear, Mallory (August 23, 2018).

"An Overwatch League preview show is coming to Twitter" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2018 . Retrieved August 23, 2018 .

^ "Disney-Activision Deal Will Put Overwatch League On ESPN, ABC" .

Sports Business Journal . July 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 15, 2020 . Retrieved March 2, 2020 .

^ "Disney signs multi-year deal to broadcast Overwatch League across ESPN and ABC platforms" .

Awful Announcing . July 11, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 2, 2020 .

^ "Overwatch League to air on ESPN, Disney XD, ABC" .

ESPN.com . February 7, 2019.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 2, 2020 .

^ "TSN Teams Up with the OVERWATCH LEAGUE™ To Deliver Live Coverage of the Stage 2 Playoffs, May 9–12 – Bell Media" .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 2, 2020 .

^ Shah, Saqib (January 29, 2019).

"Overwatch League will air on live TV in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2019 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ Wicks, Alisha (January 29, 2019).

"Esports1 partners with Blizzard to broadcast the Overwatch League" .

Esports Insider .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2020 . Retrieved March 2, 2020 .

^ Spangler, Todd (January 24, 2020).

"YouTube Scores Exclusive Streaming for Activision Blizzard's E-Sports, Including Overwatch and Call of Duty Leagues" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ Martinello, Eva (April 21, 2023).

"Overwatch League fans disappointed 2023 Opening Weekend won't be on major streaming platform" .

Dot Esports . Retrieved July 19, 2023 .

^ Green, Holly (January 11, 2018).

"No Girls Allowed: Dissecting The Gender Divide in Overwatch League" .

Paste .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2018 .

^ Reed, Chris (January 11, 2018).

"Women esports players face an uphill battle in Overwatch League" .

The Daily Dot .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2018 .

^ a b Grayson, Nathan (January 10, 2018).

"No Overwatch League Team Signed The Game's Most Notable Female Pro To Their Roster" .

Kotaku .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2018 .

^ Webster, Andrew (February 14, 2018).

"The Overwatch League signs its first female player" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2018 . Retrieved February 14, 2018 .

^ Alexander, Julia (March 6, 2018).

"Overwatch League needs to figure out what it means to be a professional player" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2018 . Retrieved March 12, 2018 .

^ Alexander, Julia (March 12, 2018).

"Overwatch casters, players point to Twitch chat toxicity in wake of xQc departure" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2018 . Retrieved March 12, 2018 .

^ Calvin, Alex (March 27, 2018).

"Overwatch League sponsor HP Omen says bad player behaviour does make it nervous" .

PC Games Insider .

Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 27, 2018 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (February 11, 2018).

"Overwatch League expansion will face serious stumbling blocks overseas" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2018 . Retrieved February 12, 2018 .

^ "40 Under 40 – #37: Nate Nanzer, 39" .

Fortune . July 19, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Castello, Jay (January 28, 2020).

"Don't worry about the Overwatch League, worry about its workers" .

Polygon . Retrieved January 28, 2020 .

^ Saed, Sharif (July 19, 2017).

"Major League Baseball could oppose Blizzard's logo trademark for Overwatch League because it believes they're too similar" .

VG247 .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2017 . Retrieved July 19, 2017 .

^ Carpenter, Nicole (July 27, 2017).

"Major League Baseball won't oppose Overwatch League logo" .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 11, 2018 .

^ Wolf, Jacob; Richardson, Liz (July 2, 2021).

"U.S. Department of Justice opens antitrust inquiry into Overwatch League's soft salary cap, 'competitive balance tax' " .

Dot Esports .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2023 . Retrieved July 2, 2021 .

^ Hitt, Kevin (October 14, 2021).

"Sources: Overwatch, Call of Duty League dump competitive balance tax and maximum player salary cap" .

Sports Business Journal .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

^ Sinclair, Brendan (November 8, 2022).

"Activision Blizzard settlement talks in esports antitrust case break down" .

GamesIndustry.biz .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2022 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ Parrish, Ash (April 3, 2023).

"Activision settles with Justice Department for limiting esports players' salaries" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2023 . Retrieved April 4, 2023 .

^ Wolf, Jacob (February 12, 2019).

"Activision Blizzard announces layoffs, Call of Duty league geolocation" .

ESPN .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 26, 2020 .

^ Fitch, Adam (October 29, 2019).

"Call of Duty League's inaugural season commences on January 24" .

Esports Insider .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 25, 2020 .

^ "Call of Duty League announce event cancellations and online play" .

Call of Duty League . March 12, 2020.

Archived from the original on March 13, 2020 . Retrieved March 15, 2020 .

^ Parrish, Ash (May 19, 2020).

"Someone At American Dad Is A Big Fan Of The Overwatch League" .

Kotaku .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2020 . Retrieved May 19, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Overwatch League .

Official website v t e Overwatch League West Atlanta Reign Boston Uprising Florida Mayhem Houston Outlaws London Spitfire Los Angeles Gladiators Los Angeles Valiant New York Excelsior San Francisco Shock Toronto Defiant Vancouver Titans Vegas Eternal Washington Justice East Chengdu Hunters Dallas Fuel Guangzhou Charge Hangzhou Spark Seoul Dynasty Seoul Infernal Shanghai Dragons Seasons 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Notable players Alarm birdring Carpe ChoiHyoBin dafran Fearless Fissure Fleta Gamsu Geguri Haksal Jake JJonak Leave Pine Profit ryujehong Saebyeolbe Seagull sinatraa Space Striker super xQc Related Win–loss records Overwatch World Cup 2016 2017 2018 2019 2023 Overwatch Contenders Dennis Hawelka Category Commons Overwatch v t e Overwatch Media Games Overwatch development Overwatch 2 Other Animated media Genesis Digital comics Lego Overwatch Seasonal events Loverwatch Characters Damage Ashe Bastion Cassidy Hanzo Junkrat Mei Pharah Sojourn Soldier: 76 Sombra Symmetra Tracer Widowmaker Tank D.Va Doomfist Junker Queen Orisa Ramattra Reinhardt Roadhog Sigma Wrecking Ball Zarya Support Ana Brigitte Juno Kiriko Lifeweaver Lúcio Mercy Moira Zenyatta Esports Overwatch Champions Series Overwatch League Overwatch Contenders Overwatch World Cup Overwatch Apex People Jeff Kaplan Chris Metzen Alyssa Wong Related Blizzard Entertainment Heroes of the Storm Titan Pornography Category Commons v t e Blizzard Entertainment A subsidiary of Activision Blizzard Diablo Diablo (1997) Diablo II (2000) Resurrected Diablo III (2012) Diablo Immortal (2022) Diablo IV (2023) Overwatch Overwatch (2016) Overwatch 2 (2023) StarCraft StarCraft (1998) Remastered StarCraft II (2010) Warcraft Warcraft: Orcs & Humans (1994) Warcraft II: Tides of Darkness (1995) Warcraft III: Reign of Chaos (2002) Reforged World of Warcraft (2004) Hearthstone (2014) Warcraft Rumble (2023) Other games RPM Racing (1991) The Lost Vikings (1992) Rock n' Roll Racing (1993) The Death and Return of Superman (1994) Blackthorne (1994) Justice League Task Force (1995) The Lost Vikings 2 (1997) Heroes of the Storm (2015) Esports Overwatch World Cup League Contenders StarCraft competition Korea StarCraft League StarCraft II competition StarCraft II World Championship Series Warcraft III competition People Allen Adham Aaron Boulding Leonard Boyarsky David Brevik Russell Brower Samwise Didier Rod Fergusson Stieg Hedlund Jeff Kaplan Mark Kern Sam Lantinga Chris Metzen Michael Morhaime Josh Mosqueira Michio Okamura Rob Pardo Bill Roper Greg Street Matt Uelmen Alyssa Wong Patrick Wyatt Related Battle.net Blitzchung controversy Blizzard Albany Blizzard North BlizzCon California Department of Fair Employment and Housing v. Activision Blizzard Echoes of War Proletariat Vivendi Games Xbox Game Studios ZeniMax Media ABK Workers Alliance Microsoft and unions § United States v t e Esports and competitive video gaming Games Leagues and tournaments Players Cheating Betting Fighting Capcom Cup CEO Evolution Championship Series Killer Instinct World Cup Super Smash Bros.

Apex The Big House Genesis Smash World Tour Super Smash Con MOBA Dota 2 Pro Circuit The International League of Legends World Championship Mid-Season Invitational First Stand Champions Korea Championship Pacific Championship of The Americas EMEA Championship Pro League Pacific Championship Series Vietnam Championship Series other Mobile Legends: Bang Bang Mid Season Cup World Championship Smite World Championship Real-time strategy StarCraft StarCraft II Global League Warcraft III championships Shooter Apex Legends Global Series Call of Duty Championship League Counter-Strike BLAST Premier ESL Pro League Flashpoint Majors Fortnite World Cup Overwatch Apex Champions Series Contenders League World Cup QuakeCon Six Invitational Valorant Champions Tour PUBG Mobile Sports eFootball.Open eSailing Inshore Worlds Offshore (Virtual Vendee) Gran Turismo World Series FIFAe World Cup FIFAe Nations Cup Formula One Esports Series Formula E: Accelerate iRacing eNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series eNASCAR iRacing Pro Invitational Series EuroNASCAR Esports Series INDYCAR iRacing Challenge NBA 2K League Rocket League Championship Series eRacing 2017 Vegas eRace Other genres Classic Tetris World Championship Hearthstone Online chess Chess.com Pokémon World Championships Multi-genre Asian Games Asian Indoor and Martial Arts Games Commonwealth Esports Championships DreamHack ELeague ESEA League ESL Intel Extreme Masters Esports World Convention Esports World Cup Major League Gaming list of National Championships Nintendo World Championships Campus Challenge Olympic Esports Games Olympic Esports Series Southeast Asian Games Twin Galaxies World Cyber Games World Electronic Sports Games World Series of Video Games Governing bodies Amazon University Esports Armenian Esports Federation Asian Electronic Sports Federation Bangladesh Youth Development and Electronic Sports Association British Esports Esports Integrity Commission Esports World Federation Global Esports Federation International Esports Federation Korea e-Sports Association National Association of Collegiate Esports Professional Esports Association Saudi Esports Federation Tespa Thailand E-Sports Federation Russian eSports Federation World Esports Association Defunct organizations Championship Gaming Series Cyberathlete Professional League eGames G7 Teams MBCGame StarCraft League Ongamenet Starleague Professional Gamers League Tougeki – Super Battle Opera United Kingdom eSports Association World e-Sports Games World League eSport Bundesliga XLEAGUE.TV By country Philippines United Arab Emirates Years 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐5x946
Cached time: 20250818083619
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.651 seconds
Real time usage: 1.844 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14790/1000000
Revision size: 132773/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 434000/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16004/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 569246/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.023/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7868960/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1566.886      1 -total
 61.22%  959.322      2 Template:Reflist
 34.36%  538.412     84 Template:Cite_web
 17.51%  274.302     48 Template:Cite_news
  9.10%  142.579      1 Template:Infobox_sports_league
  7.12%  111.558      6 Template:Navbox
  6.01%   94.193      2 Template:Ubl
  5.29%   82.823      1 Template:Overwatch_League
  4.76%   74.649      1 Template:Short_description
  3.65%   57.138      1 Template:OWL_labelled_map Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:52194851:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818083619 and revision id 1306537930. Rendering was triggered because: diff-page Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Overwatch_League&oldid=1306537930 " Categories : Overwatch League Sports leagues established in 2017 Sports leagues disestablished in 2024 2017 establishments in the United States 2024 disestablishments in the United States Professional sports leagues in the United States Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 08:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Overwatch League 11 languages Add topic

