Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Varieties 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Overview 2.2 Pre-WWII academic thought 2.3 Post-WWII academic thought 2.4 Social movements 3 By region Toggle By region subsection 3.1 Latin America 3.2 Africa 3.3 Europe 4 Debate 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle External links subsection 8.1 Topic 8.2 Organisations 8.3 Courses Toggle the table of contents Agroecology 40 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kapampangan Қазақша Kurdî Latviešu मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of ecological processes in agriculture Agroecology is an academic discipline that studies ecological processes applied to agricultural production systems. Bringing ecological principles to bear can suggest new management approaches in agroecosystems . The term can refer to a science, a movement, or an agricultural practice.

[ 1 ] Agroecologists study a variety of agroecosystems. The field of agroecology is not associated with any one particular method of farming , whether it be organic , regenerative , integrated , or industrial , intensive or extensive , although some use the name specifically for alternative agriculture.

Definition [ edit ] Agroecology is defined by the OECD as "the study of the relation of agricultural crops and environment." [ 2 ] Dalgaard et al . refer to agroecology as the study of the interactions between plants, animals, humans and the environment within agricultural systems.

[ 3 ] Francis et al . also use the definition in the same way, but thought it should be restricted to growing food.

[ 4 ] Agroecology is a holistic approach that seeks to reconcile agriculture and local communities with natural processes for the common benefit of nature and livelihoods.

[ 5 ] Agroecology is inherently multidisciplinary, including sciences such as agronomy , ecology , environmental science , sociology , economics , history and others.

[ 3 ] Agroecology uses different sciences to understand elements of ecosystems such as soil properties and plant-insect interactions, as well as using social sciences to understand the effects of farming practices on rural communities, economic constraints to developing new production methods, or cultural factors determining farming practices.

[ citation needed ] The system properties of agroecosystems studied may include: productivity , stability , sustainability and equitability .

[ 6 ] Agroecology is not limited to any one scale; it can range from an individual gene to an entire population, or from a single field in a given farm to global systems.

[ 3 ] Paul Wojtkowski differentiates the ecology of natural ecosystems from agroecology inasmuch as in natural ecosystems there is no role for economics, whereas in agroecology, focusing as it does on organisms within planned and managed environments, it is human activities, and hence economics, that are the primary governing forces that ultimately control the field.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Wojtkowski discusses the application of agroecology in agriculture , forestry and agroforestry in his 2002 book.

[ 7 ] Varieties [ edit ] Frederick Buttel identifies four varieties of agroecology in a 2003 conference paper. The main varieties he calls ecosystem agroecology , which he claims derives from the ecosystem ecology of Howard T. Odum and focuses less on rural sociology, and agronomic agroecology , which he identifies as being oriented towards developing knowledge and practices that will make agriculture more sustainable . The third long-standing variety Buttel calls ecological political economy , which he defines as critiquing the politics and economy of agriculture and weighted to radical politics. The smallest and newest variety Buttel terms agro-population ecology , which he says is very similar to the first, but is derived from the science of ecology, primarily based on the more modern theories of population ecology , such as population dynamics of constituent species, their relationships to climate and biogeochemistry , and the role of genetics .

[ 9 ] Dalgaard et al . identify different points of view: what they call early "integrative" agroecology, such as the investigations of Henry Gleason or Frederic Clements . The second version they cite Hecht (1995) as coining "hard" agroecology which they identify as more reactive to environmental politics but rooted in measurable units and technology. They themselves name "soft" agroecology which they define as trying to measure agroecology in terms of "soft capital" such as culture or experience.

[ 3 ] The term agroecology may used by people for a science, movement or practice.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Using the name as a movement became more common in the 1990s, especially in the Americas.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Miguel Altieri , whom Buttel groups with the "political" agroecologists, [ 9 ] has published prolifically in this sense.

[ 10 ] He has applied agroecology to sustainable agriculture , [ 13 ] alternative agriculture [ 14 ] [ 15 ] and traditional knowledge .

[ 16 ] History [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] The history of agroecology depends on whether you are referring to it as a body of thought or a method of practice, as many indigenous cultures around the world historically used and currently use practices we would now consider utilizing knowledge of agroecology. Examples include Maori , Nahuatl , and many other indigenous peoples.

[ 17 ] The Mexica people that inhabited Tenochtitlan pre-colonization of the Americas used a process called chinampas that in many ways mirrors the use of composting in sustainable agriculture today.

[ 18 ] The use of agroecological practices such as nutrient cycling and intercropping occurs across hundreds of years and many different cultures.

[ 19 ] Indigenous peoples also currently make up a large proportion of people using agroecological practices, and those involved in the movement to move more farming into an agroecological paradigm.

[ 20 ] Pre-WWII academic thought [ edit ] According to Gliessman and Francis et al ., agronomy and ecology were first linked with the study of crop ecology by Klages in 1928. This work is a study of where crops can best be grown.

[ 4 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Wezel et al . say the first mention of the term agroecology was in 1928, with the publication of the term by Basil Bensin.

[ 10 ] Dalgaard et al . claim the German zoologist Friederichs was the first to use the name in 1930 in his book on the zoology of agriculture and forestry, [ 3 ] [ 23 ] followed by American crop physiologist Hansen in 1939, both using the word for the application of ecology within agriculture.

[ 3 ] Post-WWII academic thought [ edit ] Tischler's 1965 book Agrarökologie may be the first to be titled 'agroecology'. He analyzed the different components (plants, animals, soils and climate) and their interactions within an agroecosystem as well as the impact of human agricultural management on these components.

[ 24 ] Gliessman describes that post-WWII ecologists gave more focus to experiments in the natural environment, while agronomists dedicated their attention to the cultivated systems in agriculture, but in the 1970s agronomists saw the value of ecology, and ecologists began to use the agricultural systems as study plots, studies in agroecology grew more rapidly.

[ 21 ] More books and articles using the concept of agroecosystems and the word agroecology started to appear in 1970s.

[ 10 ] According to Dalgaard et al ., it probably was the concept of "process ecology" such as studied by Arthur Tansley in the 1930s which inspired Harper's 1974 concept of agroecosystems , which they consider the foundation of modern agroecology.

[ 3 ] Dalgaard et al . claim Frederic Clements 's investigations on ecology using social sciences, community ecology and a "landscape perspective" is agroecology, as well as Henry Gleason 's investigations of the population ecology of plants using different scientific disciplines.

[ 3 ] Ethnobotanist Efraim Hernandez X.'s work on traditional knowledge in Mexico in the 1970s led to new education programs in agroecology.

[ 4 ] Works such as Silent Spring and The Limits to Growth caused the public to be aware of the environmental costs of agricultural production, which caused more research in sustainability starting in the 1980s.

[ 3 ] The view that the socio-economic context are fundamental was used in the 1982 article Agroecologia del Tropico Americano by Montaldo, who argues that this context cannot be separated from agriculture when designing agricultural practices.

[ 4 ] In 1985 Miguel Altieri studied how the consolidation of the farms and cropping systems impact pest populations, and Gliessman how socio-economic, technological, and ecological components gave rise to producer choices of food production systems.

[ 4 ] In 1995, Edens et al . in Sustainable Agriculture and Integrated Farming Systems considered the economics of systems, ecological impacts, and ethics and values in agriculture.

[ 4 ] Social movements [ edit ] Several social movements have adopted agroecology as part of their larger organizing strategy. Groups like La Via Campesina have used agroecology as a method for achieving food sovereignty .

[ 25 ] Agroecology has also been utilized by farmers to resist global agricultural development patterns associated with the green revolution .

[ 25 ] By region [ edit ] Latin America [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Agroecology in Latin America .

[ edit ] Agroecology is an applied science that involves the adaptation of ecological concepts to the structure, performance, and management of sustainable agroecosystems.

[ 26 ] In Latin America , agroecological practices have a long history and vary between regions but share three main approaches or levels: plot scale, farm scale, and food system scale.

[ 27 ] Agroecology in Latin American countries can be used as a tool for providing both ecological, economic, and social benefits to the communities that practice it, [ 28 ] as well as maintaining high biodiversity and providing refuges for flora and fauna in these countries.

[ 29 ] Due to its broad scope and versatility, it is often referred to as "a science, a movement, a practice." [ 27 ] Overlooking a large shade cacao plantation where the Ixcacao Mayan Belizean Chocolate company grows and produces chocolate using Mayan techniques.

Africa [ edit ] Garí wrote two papers for the FAO in the early 2000s about using an agroecological approach which he called "agrobiodiversity" to empower farmers to cope with the impacts of the AIDS on rural areas in Africa.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In 2011, the first encounter of agroecology trainers took place in Zimbabwe and issued the Shashe Declaration.

In Ethiopia, the Private Sector Incentives and Investments (PSii) project, following in the footprints of the Alliance of Bioversity International and CIAT (International Center for Tropical Agriculture), exemplifies the practical application of agroecology in developing nations. In October 2024, a PSii project in the Doyogena region of Ethiopia was awarded praise from local and agricultural officials. The project stressed the importance of practices such as rotation of faba beans and wheat to help enhance soil health, reduce chemical reliance, and increase productivity. These initiatives were put in place to promote climate resilient methods of agriculture and to diversify the many clusters of wheat farms in the area. The project has shown signs of immense success in both improvements in soil quality and crop yields, which has sparked conversations about possibilities of wider adoption in similar regions throughout the local area and throughout Africa.

[ 32 ] Europe [ edit ] The European Commission supports the use of sustainable practices, such as precision agriculture , organic farming , agroecology, agroforestry and stricter animal welfare standards through the Green Deal and the Farm to Fork Strategy.

[ 33 ] Debate [ edit ] Academic research areas that focus on topics related to agriculture or ecology, such as agronomy, veterinary science, environmental science, and others, are heatedly debating which model of agriculture or agroecology should be supported through policy. Agricultural departments of different countries support agroecology to varying degrees, with the UN perhaps its most prominent proponent.

See also [ edit ] Agriculture and agronomy portal Ecology portal Agricultural biodiversity Agriculture in Concert with the Environment Agriculture effluent Agroecological restoration Agroecology in Latin America Agroecology in West Africa Agroecosystem Agrophysics Effects of climate change on agriculture Community development Conventional agriculture Climate change adaptation Edaphology Ecological economics Ecosystem services Environmental economics Environmental impact of agriculture Food-feed system Genetic erosion Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture International volunteering Landscape ecology Life cycle analysis Nutrient management Pollinator decline Push–pull agricultural pest management Regenerative agriculture Rural development Seed saving Soil science Sustainable agriculture System of Rice Intensification Sustainable development References [ edit ] ^ a b Wezel, A., Bellon, S., Doré, T., Francis, C., Vallod, D., David, C. (2009).

Agroecology as a science, a movement or a practice Archived 2019-10-30 at the Wayback Machine . A review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development ^ "Agro-ecology" .

Glossary of Statistical Terms . OECD. February 22, 2003.

^ a b c d e f g h i Dalgaard, Tommy, and Nicholas Hutchings, John Porter. " Agroecology, Scaling and Interdisciplinarity ." Agriculture Ecosystems and Environment 100(2003): 39-51.

^ a b c d e f Francis; et al. (2003).

"Agroecology: the ecology of food systems" .

Journal of Sustainable Agriculture .

22 (3): 99– 118.

Bibcode : 2003JSusA..22c..99F .

doi : 10.1300/J064v22n03_10 .

S2CID 4138242 .

^ Ewert, Frank; Baatz, Roland; Finger, Robert (5 October 2023).

"Agroecology for a Sustainable Agriculture and Food System: From Local Solutions to Large-Scale Adoption" .

Annual Review of Resource Economics .

15 (1): 351– 381.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-resource-102422-090105 .

hdl : 20.500.11850/621594 .

ISSN 1941-1340 . Retrieved 5 June 2024 .

^ Conway, Gordon R. 1985. Agroecosystem analysis. Agricultural Administration, 20, 31-55.

^ a b Wojtkowski, Paul A. (2002) Agroecological Perspectives in Agronomy, Forestry and Agroforestry. Science Publishers Inc., Enfield, New Hampshire, 356p.

^ Wojtkowski, Paul A. (2006) Introduction to Agroecology: Principles and Practices. Haworth Press, Binghamton, NY, 404p.

^ a b Buttel, Frederick H. (2003).

"Envisioning the Future Development of Farming in the USA: Agroecology between Extinction and Multifunctionality?" (PDF) .

New Directions in Agroecology Research and Education . University of Wisconsin-Madison. pp.

1– 14.

^ a b c d e Wezel, A., Soldat, V. (2009).

A quantitative and qualitative historical analysis of the scientific discipline agroecology . International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability 7 (1): 3-18. |doi=10.3763/ijas.2009.040 ^ Wibblemann et al. (2013) Mainstreaming Agroecology: Implications for Global Food and Farming Systems.

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-05-22 . Retrieved 2015-05-19 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Vandermeer, J. 1995. The ecological basis of alternative agriculture. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 26: 201-224 ^ "Agroecology.org" . Archived from the original on April 22, 2006.

^ Altieri, M.A. 1987. Agroecology: the scientific basis of alternative agriculture. Boulder: Westview Press ^ Altieri, M.A. 1992. Agroecological foundations of alternative agriculture in California. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 39: 23-53 ^ Miguel Altieri Applying Agroecology to Enhance the Productivity of Peasant Farming Systems in Latin America ^ "Indigenous Agroecology" .

Maramatanga .

^ "Chinampa Agricultural System of Mexico City" (PDF) . FAO.org. July 7, 2017.

^ Garí, Josep (2001).

"Biodiversity and Indigenous Agroecology in Amazonia: The Indigenous Peoples of Pastaza" .

Etnoecologica .

5 : 21– 37.

^ Suárez-Torres, J., Suárez-López, J. R., López-Paredes, D., Morocho, H., Cachiguango-Cachiguango, L. E., & Dellai, W. (2017, June 1). Agroecology and Health: Lessons from Indigenous Populations. Current Environmental Health Reports.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-017-0146-z ^ a b Gliessman, Stephen. R Agroecology: Ecological Processes in Sustainable Agriculture. Ann Arbor: Sleeping Bear Press, 1998.

^ Klages, K.H.W. 1928.

Crop ecology and ecological crop geography in the agronomic curriculum . J. Amer. Soc. Agron. 20:336-353.

^ Friederichs, K. (1930) Die Grundfragen und Gesetzmäßigkeiten der land- und forstwirtschaftlichen Zoologie. Vol. 1: Ökologischer Teil, Vol. 2: Wirtschaftlicher Teil. Verlagsbuchhandlung Paul Parey, Berlin, Germany, 417 and 443 pp.

^ Tischler, W. (1965). Agrarökologie. Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena, Germany, 499 pp.

^ a b Giraldo, Omar Felipe; Rosset, Peter M. (2018-03-19). "Agroecology as a territory in dispute: between institutionality and social movements".

The Journal of Peasant Studies .

45 (3): 545– 564.

doi : 10.1080/03066150.2017.1353496 .

ISSN 0306-6150 .

S2CID 149061121 .

^ Altieri, Miguel A., Peter Rosset, and Lori Ann Thrupp. "The Potential of Agroecology to Combat Hunger in the Developing World." A 2020 Vision for Food, Agriculture, and the Environment.(1998). Brief 55. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United States.

^ a b Wezel, A.; Bellon, S.; Doré, T.; Francis, C.; Vallod, D.; David, C. (2009).

"Agroecology as a science, a movement and a practice. A review" .

Agronomy for Sustainable Development .

29 (4): 503– 515.

doi : 10.1051/agro/2009004 .

S2CID 22947720 .

^ Perfecto, Ivette; Rice, Robert A.; Greenberg, Russell; Van Der Voort, Martha E. (1996).

"Shade Coffee: A Disappearing Refuge for Biodiversity" .

BioScience .

46 (8): 598– 608.

doi : 10.2307/1312989 .

JSTOR 1312989 .

^ Altieri, Miguel A. "Part 1." Agroecological Innovations: Increasing Food Production with Participatory Development. By Norman Thomas. Uphoff. London: Earthscan Publications. (2002): 3-71.

^ Garí, Josep A. (2003).

Agrobiodiversity strategies to combat food insecurity and HIV/AIDS impact in rural Africa Archived 2019-07-30 at the Wayback Machine . FAO / Population and Development Service, Rome.

^ Garí, Josep A. (2004). Plant diversity, sustainable rural livelihoods and the HIV/AIDS crisis. Bangkok: UNDP & FAO, 2004. Published in English and Chinese.

ISBN 974-92021-4-7 .

^ "Capacity-building for sustainable agricultural production" .

Alliance Bioversity International - CIAT . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "EUR-Lex - 52019DC0640 - EN - EUR-Lex" .

eur-lex.europa.eu . Retrieved 2020-06-24 .

Further reading [ edit ] Buttel, F.H. and M.E. Gertler 1982. Agricultural structure, agricultural policy and environmental quality. Agriculture and Environment 7: 101–119.

Carrol, C. R., J.H. Vandermeer and P.M. Rosset. 1990. Agroecology. McGraw Hill Publishing Company, New York.

Paoletti, M.G., B.R. Stinner, and G.G. Lorenzoni, ed. Agricultural Ecology and Environment. New York: Elsevier Science Publisher B.V., 1989.

Robertson, Philip, and Scott M Swinton. "Reconciling agricultural productivity and environmental integrity: a grand challenge for agriculture." Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 3.1 (2005): 38–46.

Moore Lappé, Frances (April 2016).

"Farming for a Small Planet: Agroecology Now" .

Great Transition Initiative .

Monbiot, George. 2022. "Regenesis: Feeding the World without Devouring the Planet." Advances in Agroecology Book Series Soil Organic Matter in Sustainable Agriculture (Advances in Agroecology) by Fred Magdoff and Ray R. Weil (Hardcover - May 27, 2004) Agroforestry in Sustainable Agricultural Systems (Advances in Agroecology) by Louise E. Buck, James P. Lassoie, and Erick C.M. Fernandes (Hardcover - Oct 1, 1998) Agroecosystem Sustainability: Developing Practical Strategies (Advances in Agroecology) by Stephen R. Gliessman (Hardcover - Sep 25, 2000) Interactions Between Agroecosystems and Rural Communities (Advances in Agroecology) by Cornelia Flora (Hardcover - Feb 5, 2001) Landscape Ecology in Agroecosystems Management (Advances in Agroecology) by Lech Ryszkowski (Hardcover - Dec 27, 2001) Integrated Assessment of Health and Sustainability of Agroecosystems (Advances in Agroecology) by Thomas Gitau, Margaret W. Gitau, David Waltner-ToewsClive A. Edwards June 2008 | Hardback: 978-1-4200-7277-8 (CRC Press) Multi-Scale Integrated Analysis of Agroecosystems (Advances in Agroecology) by Mario Giampietro 2003 | Hardback: 978-0-8493-1067-6 (CRC Press) Soil Tillage in Agroecosystems (Advances in Agroecology) edited by Adel El Titi 2002 | Hardback: 978-0-8493-1228-1 (CRC Press) Tropical Agroecosystems (Advances in Agroecology) edited by John H. Vandermeer 2002 | Hardback: 978-0-8493-1581-7 (CRC Press) Structure and Function in Agroecosystem Design and Management (Advances in Agroecology) edited by Masae Shiyomi, Hiroshi Koizumi 2001 | Hardback: 978-0-8493-0904-5 (CRC Press) Biodiversity in Agroecosystems (Advances in Agroecology) edited by Wanda W. Collins, Calvin O. Qualset 1998 | Hardback: 978-1-56670-290-4 (CRC Press) Sustainable Agroecosystem Management: Integrating Ecology, Economics and Society. (Advances in Agroecology) edited by Patrick J. Bohlen and Gar House 2009 | Hardback: 978-1-4200-5214-5 (CRC Press) External links [ edit ] Topic [ edit ] Agroecology Agroecology by Project Regeneration International Agroecology Action Network Spain The 10 elements of Agroecology Organisations [ edit ] Agroecology Europe - A European association for Agroecology Agroecology Map One Million Voices of Agroecology Courses [ edit ] University of Wisconsin–Madison Montpellier, France Archived 2021-02-24 at the Wayback Machine University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign European Master Agroecology Norwegian University of Life Sciences UC Santa Cruz Center for Agroecology & Sustainable Food Systems v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Cannabis cultivation Dairy farming Desert farming Dryland farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Transhumance Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Monoculture Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Rainfed agriculture Orchards Subsistence agriculture Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Branches of ecology Methodology Field ecology Quantitative ecology Theoretical ecology Spatial scale Microecology Macroecology Organisation or scope Autecology Synecology Population ecology Community ecology Ecosystem ecology Taxonomy or taxon Microbial ecology Plant ecology Insect ecology Human ecology Biome or biogeographical Polar ecology Arctic ecology Desert ecology Forest ecology Soil ecology Tropical ecology Urban ecology Ecological phenomena Behavioral ecology Chemical ecology Disease ecology Ecophysiology Ecotoxicology Evolutionary ecology Fire ecology Functional ecology Genetic ecology Landscape ecology Molecular ecology Paleoecology Social ecology Spatial ecology Thermal ecology Interdisciplinarity Agroecology Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Ecological engineering Political ecology Systems ecology Other History of ecology Glossary of ecology Applied ecology Restoration ecology Ecosophy Natural history Biogeography v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agroecology&oldid=1300795906 " Categories : Agroecology Sustainable agriculture Agronomy Agriculture Agricultural soil science Environmental social science Organic farming Habitat management equipment and methods Sustainable food system Environmental conservation Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 13:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agroecology 40 languages Add topic

