Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Patient.info 2 Awards 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Patient UK 7 languages العربية Català Français Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Website providing medical information Patient Industry Medicine and Healthcare Founded 1996 Headquarters London , United Kingdom Area served United Kingdom (Patient Access) Worldwide (Patient.info) Key people Sarah Jarvis (Clinical Director) Owner Navigate Health Website patient .info Patient is a subsidiary of Navigate Health. First launching in 1996 [ 1 ] as a directory of UK websites providing health related information, the company now provides digital healthcare products to the public in the form of Patient.info.

Patient.info [ edit ] Patient.info is an online resource providing information on health , lifestyle , disease and other medical related topics. The website's aim is to provide members of the public with up-to-date information on health related topics in the form of comprehensive leaflets (which can be read online or printed), blogs, wellbeing advice and videos. Leaflets are compiled and reviewed by qualified medical practitioners with several years of experience in the medical profession. Users also have access to a symptom checker where they may attempt to self-diagnose any health condition they may have. As well as these resources, there is also a community forum to discuss any health topics with other users of the website, however healthcare professionals do not actively review this section.

[ 2 ] Another section of the website contains articles and content geared towards medical professionals . These professional articles are typically written in a more technical manner, going into more specific detail and using more industry-specific language and jargon .

There is also a paid-for service called Patient Pro, where users may pay a monthly subscription fee in order to gain access to enhanced site capability.

[ 3 ] Information on Patient.info is updated to keep abreast of the latest medical evidence, with each leaflet reviewed every two years or earlier when necessary (whichever comes first).

[ 4 ] In 2013, the site appeared in a "Top 50 websites" feature published in The Times .

[ 5 ] In 2025, the site was acquired by Navigate Health.

In June 2025, Which named Patient.info as one of the trusted health websites that GPs recommend. The independent consumer champion said: "if you want to find out more info about a condition or check health symptoms, Patient.info is one of the trusted sources of medical info the GPs we spoke to recommend.Patient.info is a comprehensive site which offers user-friendly advice and information on conditions, medications, and procedures - all approved by clinicians." Awards [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Patient claims to have won several awards for its content over several years from different award bodies.

[ 6 ] Which Joint Top Health Website - November 2010 BMA Highly Commended Resource Award - BMA Patient Information Awards 2012 The Times Top Health Website -  January 2013 Website of the Year Awards 2014 - Best Health Website - November 2014 Medilink Yorkshire and Humber Healthcare Business Awards 2013 - Harrison Goddard Innovation Award for Patient Access app - March 2014 References [ edit ] ^ "About Us" . Patient . Retrieved 19 October 2010 .

^ "Patient.info terms of use" . Patient . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

^ "PatientPro" . Patient . Retrieved 18 October 2018 .

^ "Our editorial policy and practice" . Patient . Retrieved 19 October 2018 .

^ Lewy, Ruth (25 January 2013).

"50 top websites you can't live without" .

The Times .

^ "Patient.info Awards and Achievements" .

patient.info . Retrieved 2021-03-09 .

External links [ edit ] patient.info Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patient_UK&oldid=1303324086 " Categories : Medical and health organisations based in the United Kingdom British medical websites Internet properties established in 1997 1997 establishments in the United Kingdom Patient Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 09:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patient UK 7 languages Add topic

