Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Events 2 Festivals 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Bhadrapada 20 languages Afrikaans বাংলা भोजपुरी डोटेली ગુજરાતી हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा ଓଡ଼ିଆ ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский संस्कृतम् தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bhaadra ) Sixth month of the Hindu lunar calendar This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bhadrapada" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bhadrapada Immersion of Ganesha murti s in Mumbai Native name भाद्रपद ( Sanskrit ) Calendar Hindu calendar Month number 6 Season Autumn Gregorian equivalent August–September Significant days Ganesha Chaturthi Madhu Purnima Teej Krishna Janmashtami (Purnimanta/Solar) Onam ← Shravana Ashvin → Bhadrapada or Bhadra is a month of the Hindu calendar , which falls in August and September of the Gregorian calendar .

[ 1 ] In India's national civil calendar (Shaka calendar), Bhadra is the sixth month of the year, beginning on middle of August and ending on middle of September (date varies). In Hindu astrology , Bhadra begins with the Sun 's entry into Leo and is the sixth month of the year.

In lunar religious calendars, Bhadra begins on the new moon or full moon in August or September and is the sixth month of the year. The festival of Ganesha Chaturthi , which celebrates the birthday of Ganesha , is observed from 4-10 Bhadrapada in the bright fortnight ( Shukla Paksha ) and is the main holiday of the year in Maharashtra . Per the Shaka calendar, the dark fortnight ( Krishna Paksha ) of Bhadrapada is reserved for the veneration of the dead . This period is known as Pitru Paksha .

In the Vaishnava calendar, Hrishikesha governs this month.

Krishna was born on the eighth day of Krishna Paksha of Bhadrapada (according to the purnimanta tradition) and Radha was born on the eighth day of Shukla Paksha of Bhadrapada. Vaishnavas and some Shaivas fast during the month of Purattasi in Tamil Nadu and visit Vaishnava temples on Saturday.

Events [ edit ] Shukla Paksha Krishna Paksha 1.

Prathama 1. Prathama 2.

Dvitiya 2. Dvitiya 3.

Tritiya 3. Tritiya 4.

Chaturthi 4. Chaturthi 5.

Panchami 5. Panchami 6.

Shashthi 6. Shashthi 7.

Saptami 7. Saptami 8.

Ashtami 8. Ashtami 9.

Navami 9. Navami 10.

Dashami 10. Dashami 11.

Ekadashi 11. Ekadashi 12.

Dvadashi 12. Dwadashi 13.

Trayodashi 13. Trayodashi 14.

Chaturdashi 14. Chaturdashi 15.

Purnima 15.

Amavasya Festivals [ edit ] Krishna Janmashtami ( purnimanta tradition) Radhastami / Radha Janmashtami Haritalika Tritiya Ganesh Chaturthi Karam Rishi Panchami Shukla Chaturdashi : Anant Chaturdashi Purnima : Madhu Purnima Kush Amavasya See also [ edit ] Hinduism portal Astronomical basis of the Hindu calendar Hindu units of measurement Hindu astronomy Jyotish References [ edit ] ^ Henderson, Helene. (Ed.) (2005) Holidays, festivals, and celebrations of the world dictionary Third edition. Electronic edition. Detroit: Omnigraphics, p. xxix.

ISBN 0-7808-0982-3 v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna This article about Hindu religious studies , scripture or ceremony is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bhadrapada&oldid=1305594918 " Categories : Months of the Hindu calendar Hindu theology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 00:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bhadrapada 20 languages Add topic

