Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Notable examples 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Libertarian science fiction 7 languages فارسی Français 日本語 Português Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre of science fiction This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e One of the authors associated with libertarian science fiction is Robert Heinlein , whose book The Puppet Masters is about alien invasion, an allegory about the dangers of totalitarianism.

Libertarian science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction that focuses on the politics and social order implied by right-libertarian (especially American libertarian ) philosophies with an emphasis on individualism and private ownership of the means of production—and in some cases anti-statism and anarcho-capitalism .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] As a category, libertarian fiction is unusual because the vast majority of its authors are self-identified as science fiction authors.  This contrasts with the authors of much other social criticism who are largely academic or mainstream novelists who tend to dismiss any genre classification. The identification between libertarianism and science fiction is so strong that the Libertarian Party in the United States often has representatives at science fiction conventions [ citation needed ] and one of the highest profile authors currently in the subgenre of libertarian science fiction, L. Neil Smith , was the Arizona Libertarian Party 's 2000 candidate for the President of the United States .

[ 2 ] As a genre, it can be seen [ vague ] as growing out of the 1930s and 1940s when the science-fiction pulp magazines were reaching their peak at the same time as fascism and communism .  While this environment gave rise to dystopian novels, in the pulps, this influence more often give rise to speculations about societies (or sub-groups) arising in direct opposition to " totalitarianism ".

Ayn Rand 's novel Atlas Shrugged is a strong (perhaps the strongest) influence with an anti-socialist attitude and an individualist ethic that echoes throughout the genre.

[ 3 ] Of more direct relevance to the science fiction end of this genre is the work of Robert A. Heinlein , particularly his novel The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , which is highly regarded even by non-libertarian science fiction readers. Some other prominent libertarian science fiction authors include S. Andrew Swann [ 4 ] and Michael Z. Williamson .

[ 5 ] In 1979, L. Neil Smith founded an award for libertarian science fiction, the Prometheus Award . Since 1982, the award has been given out by the Libertarian Futurist Society  "to provide encouragement to science fiction writers whose books examine the meaning of freedom". Some winners of the award identify as libertarians ( L. Neil Smith , Victor Koman , and Brad Linaweaver ), while others do not ( Terry Pratchett and Charles Stross ).

Notable examples [ edit ] Poul Anderson , No Truce with Kings (1963) Robert A. Heinlein , The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress [ a ] (1966) Dani & Eitan Kollin, The Unincorporated Man (2009).

Victor Koman , Kings of the High Frontier (1996) Ira Levin , This Perfect Day (1970) Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle , Lucifer's Hammer (1977) Peterson, Roy C.

, Nationalist Revolution Series (2012-2023) Ayn Rand , Atlas Shrugged (1957) Kenneth W. Royce , Molon Labe!

(2004) Eric Frank Russell , ... And Then There Were None , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Great Explosion (1962) J. Neil Schulman , Alongside Night (1979) L. Neil Smith , The Probability Broach (1979) Neal Stephenson , Cryptonomicon (1999) Jack Vance , Emphyrio (1969) F. Paul Wilson , Wheels Within Wheels (1978) See also [ edit ] Libertarianism portal Science fiction portal Anarcho-capitalist literature Notes [ edit ] ^ In the novel , the inhabitants of the Lunar colony start a revolution against Earth rule and declare independence on July 4 , 2076, the 300th anniversary of the United States' Declaration of Independence . The Lunar revolutionaries heavily base their Luna declaration of independence on it. A common expression on Luna that states one of the main ideas of the book's political system is " There Ain't No Such Thing As A Free Lunch!

".

References [ edit ] ^ Raymond, Eric.

"A Political History of SF" . Retrieved December 4, 2007 .

^ "Presidential Elections Statistics 2000 Popular Votes for L. Neil Smith (most recent) by state" . Retrieved December 4, 2007 .

^ Snider, John C.

"But Is It Science Fiction? – Ayn Rand's Atlas Shrugged" . Retrieved December 4, 2007 .

^ "S. Andrew Swann" . Spectrum Literary Agency. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008 . Retrieved April 2, 2008 .

^ Wagner, T. M. (2004).

"Freehold / Michael Z. Williamson" . sfreviews.net . Retrieved April 2, 2008 .

^ "... And Then There Were None" .

^ "... And Then There Were None (audiobook)" .

External links [ edit ] "Essential Science Fiction and Fantasy for Libertarians" by Dan Clore Speech by author David Brin to 2002 Libertarian Party National Convention (U.S.) Speech by author L. Neil Smith at the Colorado Libertarian Party Annual Convention The Libertarian Futurist Society Website 10 Greatest Libertarian Science Fiction Stories , by Alasdair Wilkins for io9 Riggenbach, Jeff (February 11, 2011).

"Libertarianism and Science Fiction: What's the Connection?" .

Mises Daily .

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Riggenbach, Jeff (March 11, 2011).

"Some Further Notes on Libertarian Science Fiction" .

Mises Daily .

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐2v4dz
Cached time: 20250814235742
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.469 seconds
Real time usage: 0.618 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1795/1000000
Revision size: 7377/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151608/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2886/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50871/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.271/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8449265/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  461.957      1 -total
 28.21%  130.323      1 Template:Libertarianism_US
 27.67%  127.805      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 25.38%  117.228      2 Template:Reflist
 21.99%  101.569      7 Template:Cite_web
 14.64%   67.645      1 Template:Short_description
 14.56%   67.265      6 Template:Navbox
 12.73%   58.828      1 Template:Science_fiction
  8.23%   38.017      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.22%   28.747      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1863087:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814235742 and revision id 1293407980. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Libertarian_science_fiction&oldid=1293407980 " Categories : Libertarian science fiction Science fiction genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from November 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2020 This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 14:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Libertarian science fiction 7 languages Add topic

