Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In Aristotle Toggle In Aristotle subsection 1.1 Telos vs techne 2 In modern philosophy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Telos 14 languages Català Dansk Ελληνικά Español 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Slovenčina کوردی Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aristototelian concept of an object's final cause For other uses, see Telos (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Talos .

Telos ( / ˈ t ɛ l ɒ s , ˈ t iː l ɒ s / ; [ 1 ] Ancient Greek : τέλος , romanized : télos , lit.

'end, purpose, goal') [ 2 ] is a term used by philosopher Aristotle to refer to the final cause of a natural organ or entity, or of human art.

Telos is the root of the modern term teleology , the study of purposiveness or of objects with a view to their aims, purposes, or intentions. Teleology is central in Aristotle's work on plant and animal biology , and human ethics , through his theory of the four causes . Aristotle's notion that everything has a telos also gave rise to epistemology .

[ 3 ] In Aristotle [ edit ] Telos has been consistently used in the writings of Aristotle, in which the term, on several occasions, denotes 'goal'.

[ 4 ] It is considered synonymous to teleute ('end'), particularly in Aristotle's discourse about the plot-structure in Poetics .

[ 4 ] The philosopher went as far as to say that telos can encompass all forms of human activity.

[ 5 ] One can say, for instance, that the telos of warfare is victory, or the telos of business is the creation of wealth . Within this conceptualization, there are telos that are subordinate to other telos , as all activities have their own respective goals.

For Aristotle, these subordinate telos can become the means to achieve more fundamental telos .

[ 5 ] Through this concept, for instance, the philosopher underscored the importance of politics and that all other fields are subservient to it. He explained that the telos of the blacksmith is the production of a sword, while that of the swordsman's, which uses the weapon as a tool, is to kill or incapacitate an enemy.

[ 6 ] On the other hand, the telos of these occupations are merely part of the purpose of a ruler, who must oversee the direction and well-being of a state.

[ 6 ] Moreover, it can be understood as the "supreme end of man's endeavour".

[ 7 ] "Pleasure and pain moreover supply the motives of desire and of avoidance, and the springs of conduct generally. This being so, it clearly follows that actions are right and praiseworthy only as being a means to the attainment of a life of pleasure. But that which is not itself a means to anything else, but to which all else is a means, is what the Greeks term the Telos, the highest, ultimate or final Good. It must therefore be admitted that the Chief Good is to live agreeably." — Cicero , De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum , Book I [ 8 ] Telos vs techne [ edit ] Telos is associated with the concept called techne , which is the rational method involved in producing an object or accomplishing a goal or objective. In the Theuth/Thamus myth, for instance, the section covering techne referred to telos and techne together.

[ 9 ] The two methods are, however, not mutually exclusive in principle. These are demonstrated in the cases of writing and seeing, as explained by Martin Heidegger : the former is considered a form of techne , as the end product lies beyond ( para ) the activity of producing; whereas, in seeing, there is no remainder outside of or beyond the activity itself at the moment it is accomplished.

[ 10 ] Aristotle, for his part, simply designated sophia (also referred to as the arete or excellence of philosophical reflection) as the consummation or the final cause ( telos ) of techne .

[ 11 ] Heidegger attempted to explain the Aristotelian conceptualization outlined in the Nicomachean Ethics , where the eidos – the soul of the maker – was treated as the arche of the thing made ( ergon ).

[ 12 ] In this analogy, the telos constitutes the arche but in a certain degree not at the disposition of techne .

[ 12 ] In modern philosophy [ edit ] The notion of purpose, or telos, has formed the foundation of cybernetics , and is now part of the modern analysis of social media platforms as intelligent social machines .

[ 13 ] Action theory also makes essential use of teleological vocabulary. From Donald Davidson 's perspective, an action is just something an agent does with an intention – i.e., looking forward to some end to be achieved by the action.

[ 14 ] Action is considered just a step that is necessary to fulfill human telos, as it leads to habits.

[ 14 ] According to the Marxist perspective , historical change is dictated by socio-economic structures (or "laws"), which are simultaneously preconditions and limitations of the realization of the telos of the class struggle .

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Conatus Dysteleology Metaphysics Plato Polytely Teleological argument Teleonomy References [ edit ] ^ "telos" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ "Teleological ethics" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2008 [1998].

^ Eagles, Munroe (2008).

Politics: An Introduction to Modern Democratic Government . Ontario: Broadview Press. p. 87.

ISBN 978-1551118581 .

^ a b Nyusztay, Ivan (2002).

Myth, Telos, Identity: The Tragic Schema in Greek and Shakespearean Drama . New York: Rodopi. p. 84.

ISBN 9042015403 .

^ a b Baggini, Julian (2016).

Philosophy: Key Texts . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0333964859 .

^ a b Grayling, A. C. (2019).

The History of Philosophy . Penguin UK.

ISBN 978-0241980866 .

^ " Introduction to 'de Finabus' ." Cicero: de Finibus XVII (2nd ed.).

Loeb Classical Library .

Harvard University Press (1931), transcribed by B. Thayer.

^ Rackham, H. Harris, trans. 1931. " Book I ." In Cicero: de Finibus XVII (2nd ed.). Loeb Classical Library, Harvard University Press , transcribed by B. Thayer.

p. 42 .

^ Griswold, Charles (2010).

Self-Knowledge in Plato's Phaedrus . University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 160.

ISBN 978-0271016184 .

^ McNeill, William (2012).

Time of Life, The: Heidegger and Ethos . Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0791467831 .

^ Rojcewicz, Richard (2006).

The Gods and Technology: A Reading of Heidegger . Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0791466414 .

^ a b Radloff, Bernhard (2007).

Heidegger and the Question of National Socialism: Disclosure and Gestalt . Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 354.

ISBN 978-0802093158 .

^ Cristianini, Nello (2023).

The shortcut : why intelligent machines do not think like us (1st ed.). Boca Raton.

ISBN 978-1-003-33581-8 .

OCLC 1352480147 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Altshuler, Roman; Sigrist, Michael J. (2016).

Time and the Philosophy of Action . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1317819479 .

^ Fløistad, Guttorm (2012).

Volume 3: Philosophy of Action . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 10.

ISBN 978-9024732999 .

External links [ edit ] Teleological Notions in Biology , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Alexander, Victoria N.

Narrative Telos: The Ordering Tendencies of Chance .

Dactyl Foundation .

v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Telos&oldid=1301233861 " Categories : Action (philosophy) Aristotelianism Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Concepts in social philosophy Philosophy of Aristotle Teleology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Use Oxford spelling from February 2018 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Telos 14 languages Add topic

