Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Endangered species Toggle Endangered species subsection 1.1 Spruce-fir moss spider ( Microhexura montivaga ) 1.2 Kauaʻi cave wolf spider ( Adelocosa anops ) 1.3 Katipō ( Latrodectus katipo ) 2 Vulnerable species Toggle Vulnerable species subsection 2.1 Dolloff cave spider ( Meta dolloff ) 2.2 Great raft spider ( Dolomedes plantarius ) 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents List of endangered spiders 1 language ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia An endangered species is "a species at risk of extinction because of human activity, changes in climate, changes in predator-prey ratios, etc., especially when officially designated as such by a governmental agency such as the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ".

[ 1 ] A spider is a member of the order Araneae, one of many orders within the class arachnida , meaning it has a body consisting of two segments, a cephalothorax and an abdomen , as well as eight legs. All spiders are predators that feed off insects , and some larger species have been known to catch small reptiles , birds , and amphibians (Levi and Levi, 2002). Until recently, insects and arachnids have not been considered for inclusion on threatened and endangered species lists. It was not until 1994 that most invertebrates were recognized as being as vulnerable as other fauna . Because of this, there are very few species of spiders listed as threatened or endangered and many are simply classified as "undetermined".

Endangered species [ edit ] While many organizations agree completely on which spiders are endangered or threatened, a few commonly listed species are listed below.

Spruce-fir moss spider ( Microhexura montivaga ) [ edit ] The spruce-fir moss spider is listed as endangered under the U.S.

Endangered Species Act of 1973. This spider resembles a tiny tarantula with adults measuring in at only 14.3 to 3.8 millimeters. It inhabits high-elevation forests in western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee . The species is extremely vulnerable to desiccation , causing it to shelter in damp shady areas such as shaded moss. The spider builds a tube shaped web between the moss and a rock or fir tree, [ 2 ] hence the name.

Kauaʻi cave wolf spider ( Adelocosa anops ) [ edit ] The Kauaʻi cave wolf spider is found only on the island of Kauai in the U.S. state of Hawaii . As of 2006, this species can be found in a single cave and only 16 to 28 individuals have been encountered. Compared to other spider species, the Kauaʻi cave wolf spider has a low reproductive rate and due to habitat constraints, has little access to food sources.

[ 3 ] This spider is one of the largest documented cave-dwelling organisms measuring up to 8 centimeters. Because it spends its life in the darkness of a cave, this spider has no need for sight and is therefore completely eyeless.

[ 4 ] Katipō ( Latrodectus katipo ) [ edit ] The katipō spider is related to the Australian redback and other widow spiders . This spider can be found in New Zealand in burrows or trees. The name means "night-stinger" in native Māori language . This species is listed as endangered due to habitat loss, as well as non-native spider introduction . It is estimated that only a few thousand of these spiders remain in the wild.

Vulnerable species [ edit ] A vulnerable species is one listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as likely to become endangered unless the circumstances threatening its survival and reproduction improve.

Dolloff cave spider ( Meta dolloff ) [ edit ] While not listed as endangered, this spider is considered to be vulnerable to extinction . Much larger than Microhexura montivaga , this spider ranges in size from 10 to 15 millimeters. This species makes large orb shaped webs at the entrance of caves and as of 2001 has only been found in caves located in Santa Cruz, California .

[ 5 ] Great raft spider ( Dolomedes plantarius ) [ edit ] The great raft spider is a declining species and is listed as vulnerable . It occurs throughout Europe but a lack of records make assessment of the species difficult. In the UK there are only three known populations, one stable, one threatened and one not assessed. This spider is a semi-aquatic species and its dependence on water may have led to the population's decline. The information on the great raft spider is very recent and due to a lack of historical records, the level of decline cannot be accurately measured.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Endangered arthropods List of U.S. federally endangered arthropods List of extinct arachnids Notes [ edit ] ^ "Dictionary.com | Meanings & Definitions of English Words" .

Dictionary.com . 2023-05-31.

Archived from the original on 2022-10-11 . Retrieved 2023-05-31 .

^ Fish and Wildlife service, 1995 ^ Fish and Wildlife service, 2006 ^ Krajick, 2001 ^ Ubick, 2001 ^ Smith, 2000 References [ edit ] Krajick, K. 2001. "Cave Biologists Unearth Buried Treasure".

Science . Vol. 293. pp. 2378–2381.

Levi, Herbert W. and Lorna R. Levi. 2002.

Spiders and Their Kin . St. Martin's Press. New York, U.S.

Smith, Helen. 2000. "The status and conservation of the fen raft spider ( Dolomedes plantarius ) at Redgrave and Lopham Fen National Nature Reserve, England".

Biological Conservation . Vol. 95. Issue 2. pp. 153–164.

Ubick, Darrell. 2001.

Cavernicolous Invertebrates of Cave Gulch, Santa Cruz County, California . Department of Entomology, California Academy of Sciences. San Francisco.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2006.

Recovery Plan for the Kauai Cave Arthropods: the Kauai Cave Wolf Spider ( Adelocosa anops ) and the Kauai Cave Amphipod ( Spelaeorchestia koloana ) . U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Portland, Oregon. 64 pp.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1995.

Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Spruce-Fir Moss Spider Determined To Be Endangered . Federal Register. Vol.60. No. 24. pp. 6968–6974 v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_endangered_spiders&oldid=1183068100 " Categories : Spiders Endangered animals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 November 2023, at 00:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of endangered spiders 1 language Add topic

