Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 2.1 Silver Spring Campus 2.2 Administrator 2.3 Independent agency proposal 2.4 Services 2.4.1 National Weather Service 2.4.2 National Ocean Service 2.4.3 National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service 2.4.4 National Marine Fisheries Service 2.4.5 Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research 2.4.6 Office of Marine and Aviation Operations 2.4.7 National Geodetic Survey 2.4.8 National Integrated Drought Information System 2.4.9 NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps 2.5 List of agencies and programs 3 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 4 Hurricane Dorian controversy 5 Flag 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 44 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration ) US government scientific agency National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Agency overview Formed October 3, 1970 ; 54 years ago ( 1970-10-03 ) Preceding agencies United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Environmental Science Services Administration Jurisdiction Federal government of the United States Headquarters Silver Spring, Maryland [ 1 ] [ 2 ] 38°59′32″N 77°01′50″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.99222°N 77.03056°W ﻿ / 38.99222; -77.03056 Employees 321 NOAA Commissioned Corps (2018) 12,000 civilian employees (2021) [ 3 ] Annual budget $6.9 billion ( est.

2022 ) Agency executive Laura Grimm, Acting NOAA Administrator and Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere Parent agency US Department of Commerce Child agencies National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service National Marine Fisheries Service National Ocean Service National Weather Service Office of Marine and Aviation Operations Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Office of Space Commerce Website www .noaa .gov Footnotes [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Part of a series on the United States space program NASA U.S. Space Force Human spaceflight programs Mercury Gemini Apollo Skylab Space Shuttle Shuttle– Mir International Space Station Commercial Crew Constellation Artemis Lunar Gateway Robotic spaceflight programs CRS Explorers GLS Large Strategic Lunar Orbiter Lunar Precursor Mariner Mars Exploration New Millennium Pioneer Planetary Missions Discovery New Frontiers Solar System Exploration Planetary Observer Ranger Surveyor Vanguard Viking Voyager X-37 NASA Astronaut Corps Mercury Gemini Apollo Space Shuttle Spaceports Eastern Range Cape Canaveral Space Force Station Kennedy Space Center Wallops Flight Facility Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport Pacific Spaceport Complex – Alaska Western Range Vandenberg Space Force Base Space launch vehicles Alpha Antares Atlas V Electron Falcon 9 Falcon Heavy LauncherOne Minotaur I III IV V C New Glenn New Shepard Pegasus Space Launch System Starship Vulcan Centaur National security space United States Space Force National Reconnaissance Office United States Space Command Civil space Department of Energy national laboratories Federal Aviation Administration Office of Commercial Space Transportation National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service Office of Space Commerce Space Weather Prediction Center Department of State Office of Space Affairs Office of Science and Technology Policy Commercial space industry Astra Ball Aerospace Bigelow Aerospace Blue Origin Boeing Firefly Aerospace Lockheed Martin Raytheon Rocket Lab Northrop Grumman Sierra Nevada Corporation SpaceX SSL United Launch Alliance Virgin Galactic Virgin Orbit v t e The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA / ˈ n oʊ .

ə / NOH -ə ) is an American scientific and regulatory agency charged with forecasting weather , monitoring oceanic and atmospheric conditions, charting the seas , conducting deep-sea exploration , and managing fishing and protection of marine mammals and endangered species in the US exclusive economic zone . The agency is part of the United States Department of Commerce and is headquartered in Silver Spring, Maryland .

Under the second presidency of Donald Trump , NOAA has experienced severe funding and staff cuts.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] NOAA traces its history back to multiple agencies, [ 9 ] some of which are among the earliest in the federal government: [ 10 ] United States Coast and Geodetic Survey , formed in 1807 Weather Bureau of the United States , formed in 1870 Bureau of Commercial Fisheries , formed in 1871 (research fleet only) Coast and Geodetic Survey Corps , formed in 1917 The most direct predecessor of NOAA was the Environmental Science Services Administration (ESSA), into which several existing scientific agencies such as the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey , the Weather Bureau , and the uniformed Corps were absorbed in 1965.

[ 10 ] NOAA was established within the Department of Commerce via the Reorganization Plan No. 4, [ 10 ] and formed on October 3, 1970, after U.S. President Richard Nixon proposed creating a new agency to serve a national need for "better protection of life and property from natural hazards... for a better understanding of the total environment... [and] for exploration and development leading to the intelligent use of our marine resources".

[ 11 ] NOAA is a part of the Department of Commerce rather than the Department of Interior , because of a feud between President Nixon and his interior secretary, Wally Hickel , over the Nixon Administration's Vietnam War policy. Nixon did not like Hickel's letter urging Nixon to listen to the Vietnam War demonstrators, [ 12 ] and punished Hickel by not putting NOAA in the Interior Department.

[ 13 ] In 2007, NOAA celebrated 200 years of service in its role as successor to the U.S.

Survey of the Coast .

[ 14 ] NOAA was officially formed in 1970.

[ 15 ] In 2021, NOAA had 11,833 civilian employees.

[ 6 ] Its research and operations are further supported by 321 uniformed service members, who make up the NOAA Commissioned Corps .

[ 16 ] Project 2025 has proposed to get rid of the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research , which would "dismantle" NOAA's research division.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] NOAA has experienced numerous changes under the second presidency of Donald Trump . On February 27, 2025, several hundred NOAA staffers, mainly probationary, were laid off after staffers from the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) entered the headquarters of NOAA.

[ 19 ] By early March, 1,300 NOAA staff members (roughly 10% of the total workforce) were laid off.

[ 20 ] In June, 2025, the Department of Defense announced it would no longer provide critical weather data to scientists and forecasters, including to NOAA staff.

[ 21 ] Organizational structure [ edit ] Silver Spring Campus [ edit ] Since 1993, NOAA's administrative headquarters has been located at the Silver Spring Metro Center office complex in downtown Silver Spring, Maryland .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The consolidated 1.2 million sq ft (110,000 m 2 ), four-building campus was constructed in 1993 and is home to over 40 NOAA sub-agencies and offices, including the National Weather Service .

[ citation needed ] Administrator [ edit ] Main article: Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere NOAA Chief of Staff Laura Grimm has been the Acting Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator since March 31, 2025.

Nancy Hann had previously held this role since January 20, 2025, following the resignation of Rick Spinrad .

[ 24 ] From February 25, 2019, to January 20, 2021, Neil Jacobs , Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Environmental Observation and Prediction, served as acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere at the US Department of Commerce and as NOAA's interim administrator.

[ 25 ] Jacobs succeeded Timothy Gallaudet , who succeeded Benjamin Friedman. The three served in series as NOAA's interim administrator throughout the first Trump Administration .

[ 26 ] In October 2017, Barry Lee Myers , CEO of AccuWeather , was proposed to be the agency's administrator by the Trump Administration.

[ 27 ] After two years in the nomination process, on November 21, 2019, Myers withdrew his name from consideration due to health concerns.

[ 28 ] Independent agency proposal [ edit ] NOAA was created by an executive order in 1970 and has never been established in law, despite its critical role. In January 2023, The Washington Post reported that Congressman Frank Lucas , the new chair of the House Science, Space and Technology Committee, had released draft legislation to make NOAA an independent agency, rather than it being part of the Commerce Department. Lucas' push was in response to Republican leaders who had signaled plans to slash funding for agencies and programs that continued to receive annual appropriations, but had not been reauthorized by Congress. "It's been made quite clear in the Republican conference that my friends don't want to fund programs that are not properly authorized," said Lucas. "NOAA is very important, so we need to get it authorized." [ 29 ] Services [ edit ] NOAA works toward its mission through six major line offices: the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS), the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), the National Ocean Service (NOS), the National Weather Service (NWS), the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR) and the Office of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO).

[ 30 ] NOAA has more than a dozen staff offices, including the Office of the Federal Coordinator for Meteorology, the NOAA Central Library , the Office of Program Planning and Integration (PPI).

[ 30 ] National Weather Service [ edit ] Main article: National Weather Service The National Weather Service (NWS) is tasked with providing "weather, hydrologic and climate forecasts and warnings for the United States, its territories, adjacent waters and ocean areas, for the protection of life and property and the enhancement of the national economy", according to NOAA.

[ 31 ] This is done through a collection of national and regional centers, 13 river forecast centers (RFCs), and more than 120 local weather forecast offices (WFOs).

[ 32 ] They are charged with issuing weather and river forecasts , advisories, watches, and warnings on a daily basis. They issue more than 734,000 weather and 850,000 river forecasts, and more than 45,000 severe weather warnings annually. NOAA data is also relevant to the issues of climate change and ozone depletion .

[ 33 ] The NWS operates NEXRAD , a nationwide network of Doppler weather radars which can detect precipitation and their velocities. Many of their products are broadcast on NOAA Weather Radio , a network of radio transmitters that broadcasts weather forecasts, severe weather statements, watches and warnings 24 hours a day.

[ 34 ] National Ocean Service [ edit ] Main article: National Ocean Service The National Ocean Service (NOS) focuses on ensuring that ocean and coastal areas are safe, healthy, and productive. NOS scientists, natural resource managers, and specialists serve America by ensuring safe and efficient marine transportation, promoting innovative solutions to protect coastal communities, and conserving marine and coastal places.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The National Ocean Service is composed of eight program offices: the Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, [ 37 ] the Office for Coastal Management, [ 38 ] the National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science, [ 39 ] the Office of Coast Survey , [ 40 ] the Office of National Geodetic Survey , [ 41 ] the Office of National Marine Sanctuaries , [ 42 ] the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management, [ 43 ] and the Office of Response and Restoration .

[ 44 ] There are two NOS programs, the Mussel Watch Contaminant Monitoring Program and the NOAA Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS). There are two staff offices, the International Program Office and the Management and Budget Office.

National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service [ edit ] Main article: National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service A NOAA engineer at work The National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) was created by NOAA to operate and manage the US environmental satellite programs, and manage NWS data and those of other government agencies and departments.

[ 45 ] NESDIS's National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) archives data collected by the NOAA, United States Navy , United States Air Force , the Federal Aviation Administration , and meteorological services around the world. It comprises the Center for Weather and Climate, previously NOAA's National Climatic Data Center , the National Coastal Data Development Center (NCDDC), the National Oceanographic Data Center (NODC), and the National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC)).

In 1960, TIROS-1 , NASA's first owned and operated geostationary satellite, was launched. Since 1966, NESDIS has managed polar orbiting satellites (POES). Since 1974, it has operated geosynchronous satellites (GOES). In 1979, NOAA's first polar-orbiting environmental satellite was launched. Current operational satellites include NOAA-15 , NOAA-18 , NOAA-19 , GOES 13 , GOES 14 , GOES 15 , Jason-2 and DSCOVR . In 1983, NOAA assumed operational responsibility for the Landsat satellite system.

[ 46 ] Since May 1998, NESDIS has operated the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites on behalf of the Air Force Weather Agency .

[ 47 ] New generations of satellites are developed to succeed the current polar orbiting and geosynchronous satellites, the Joint Polar Satellite System , and GOES-R , which launched in November 2016.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] NESDIS runs the Office of Projects, Planning, and Analysis (OPPA) formerly the Office of Systems Development, [ 50 ] the Office of Satellite Ground Systems (formerly the Office of Satellite Operations) [ 51 ] the Office of Satellite and Project Operations, [ 52 ] the Center for Satellite Applications and Research (STAR)], [ 53 ] the Joint Polar Satellite System Program Office [ 54 ] the GOES-R Program Office, the International & Interagency Affairs Office, the Office of Space Commerce [ 55 ] and the Office of System Architecture and Advanced Planning.

National Marine Fisheries Service [ edit ] Main article: National Marine Fisheries Service The National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), also known as NOAA Fisheries, was initiated in 1871 with a primary goal of the research, protection, management, and restoration of commercial and recreational fisheries and their habitat, and protected species. The NMFS operates twelve headquarters offices, five regional offices, six fisheries science centers, and more than 20 laboratories throughout the United States and U.S. territories, which are the sites of research and management of marine resources. The NMFS operates the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries Office of Law Enforcement in Silver Spring, Maryland , which is the primary site of marine resource law enforcement.

Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research [ edit ] Main article: Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research NOAA's research, conducted through the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR), is the driving force behind NOAA environmental products and services that protect life and property and promote economic growth. Research, conducted in OAR laboratories and by extramural programs, focuses on enhancing our understanding of environmental phenomena such as tornadoes, hurricanes, climate variability, solar flares, changes in the ozone, air pollution transport and dispersion , [ 56 ] [ 57 ] El Niño / La Niña events, fisheries productivity, ocean currents, deep sea thermal vents, and coastal ecosystem health. NOAA research also develops innovative technologies and observing systems.

The NOAA Research network consists of seven internal research laboratories, extramural research at 30 Sea Grant university and research programs, six undersea research centers, a research grants program through the Climate Program Office, and 13 cooperative institutes with academia. Through NOAA and its academic partners, thousands of scientists, engineers, technicians, and graduate students participate in furthering our knowledge of natural phenomena that affect the lives of us all.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] The Air Resources Laboratory (ARL) is one of the laboratories in the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research. It studies processes and develops models relating to climate and air quality, including the transport, dispersion, transformation and removal of pollutants from the ambient atmosphere. The emphasis of the ARL's work is on data interpretation, technology development and transfer. The specific goal of ARL research is to improve and eventually to institutionalize prediction of trends, dispersion of air pollutant plumes , air quality , atmospheric deposition, and related variables.

[ 60 ] [ self-published source ] [ 61 ] The Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML), is part of NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, located in Miami , Florida . AOML's research spans hurricanes, coastal ecosystems, oceans, and human health, climate studies, global carbon systems, and ocean observations. AOML's organizational structure consists of an Office of the Director and three scientific research divisions, Physical Oceanography, Ocean Chemistry and Ecosystems, and Hurricane Research. The Office of the Director oversees the Laboratory's scientific programs, as well as its financial, administrative, computer, outreach/education, and facility management services.

[ 62 ] Research programs are augmented by the Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies (CIMAS), a joint enterprise with the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science. CIMAS enables AOML and university scientists to collaborate on research areas of mutual interest and facilitates the participation of students and visiting scientists. AOML is a member of a unique community of marine research and educational institutions located on Virginia Key in Miami, Florida.

[ 62 ] In 1977, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (PMEL) deployed the first successful moored equatorial current meter – the beginning of the Tropical Atmosphere Ocean , TAO, array. In 1984, the Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere program (TOGA) program began.

The Arctic Report Card is the annual update charts of the ongoing impact of changing conditions on the environment and community by NOAA. In 2019, it was compiled by 81 scientists from 12 nations.

[ 63 ] Office of Marine and Aviation Operations [ edit ] Main article: Office of Marine and Aviation Operations The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations is responsible for the fleet of NOAA ships, aircraft, and diving operations. It is the largest research fleet in the Federal government. Its personnel is made up of federal civil service employees and NOAA Corps Commissioned Officers .

[ 64 ] The office is led by a NOAA Corps two-star Rear Admiral , who also commands the NOAA Corps.

[ 65 ] National Geodetic Survey [ edit ] Main article: National Geodetic Survey The National Geodetic Survey (NGS) is a major surveying organization in the United States.

[ 66 ] National Integrated Drought Information System [ edit ] Main article: National Integrated Drought Information System The National Integrated Drought Information System is a program within NOAA with an interagency mandate to coordinate and integrate drought research, building upon existing federal, tribal, state, and local partnerships in support of creating a national drought early warning information system.

[ 67 ] NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps [ edit ] The NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps is a uniformed service of men and women who operate NOAA ships and aircraft , and serve in scientific and administrative posts.

[ 68 ] List of agencies and programs [ edit ] National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) National Climatic Data Center (NCDC); Dissolved In 2015 National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS or NOAA Fisheries) NOAA Fisheries Office of Law Enforcement (NOAA OLE) Seafood Inspection Program Central Florida Lot Seafood Inspection Office (CFLSIO) Pacific Islands Regional Office Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center (PIFSC) Human Capital Management Office (NMFS HCMO) National Ocean Service (NOS) Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services (CO-OPS) National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS) Office of Coast Survey (OCS) Office for Coastal Management (OCM) National Geodetic Survey (NGS) Office of National Marine Sanctuaries (ONMS) Monitor National Marine Sanctuary (MNMS) Office of Response and Restoration (OR&R) Marine Debris Program (MDP) National Weather Service (NWS) List of National Weather Service Weather Forecast Offices ; 122 Weather Forecast Offices (NWS WFO) National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Aviation Weather Center (AWC) Climate Prediction Center (CPC) Environmental Modeling Center (EMC) National Hurricane Center (NHC) Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program (HFIP) Ocean Prediction Center (OPC) Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC) Storm Prediction Center (SPC); inside the National Weather Center (NWC) Hydrometeorological Prediction Center (HPC); Dissolved in 2013 Weather Prediction Center (WPC) Radar Operations Center (ROC); partly inside the National Weather Center (NWC) River Forecast Centers (RFC) Center Weather Service Units (CWSU) National Data Buoy Center (NDBC) Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research (OAR or NOAA Research) Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory (AOML) Hurricane Research Division (HRD) Air Resources Laboratory (ARL) Earth System Research Laboratories (ESRL) Physical Sciences Laboratory (PSL) Forecast Informed Reservoir Operations (FIRO) Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory (GLERL) National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL); inside the National Weather Center (NWC) VORTEX projects TOtable Tornado Observatory (TOTO) Automated NonContact Hydrologic Observation in Rivers (ANCHOR) Mid-latitude Continental Convective Clouds Experiment (MC3E); Dissolved 2011 Hydrological cycle in the Mediterranean EXperiment (HyMeX); Dissolved 2012 Dynamics of the Madden-Julian Oscillation experiment (DYNAMO); Dissolved 2012 Plains Elevated Convection At Night (PECAN); Dissolved 2015 Hazardous Weather Testbed (HWT) Warn-on-Forecast (WoF or WoFS) Targeted Observation by Radars and UAS of Supercells (TORUS) Propagation, Evolution, and Rotation in Linear Storms (PERiLS) Forecasting a Continuum of Environmental Threats (FACETs); Proposed office Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (PMEL) Climate Program Office (CPO) Uncrewed Systems Research Transition Office (UxSRTO); Dissolved in March 2024 Cooperative Institutes; partially funded/operated by NOAA OAR Cooperative Institute for Climate Science (CICS-P) Cooperative Institute for Climate and Satellites (CICS-M) Cooperative Institute for Arctic Research (CIFAR) Cooperative Institute for Limnology and Ecosystems Research (CILER) Cooperative Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Studies (CIMAS) Cooperative Institute for Marine Ecosystems and Climate (CIMEC) Cooperative Institute for Severe and High-Impact Weather Research and Operations (CIWRO); inside the National Weather Center (NWC) Cooperative Institute for Marine Resources Studies (CIMRS) Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies (CIMSS) Cooperative Institute for the North Atlantic Region (CINAR) Cooperative Institute for Ocean Exploration, Research, and Technology (CIOERT) Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere (CIRA) Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences (CIRES) Joint Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Research (CIPIR/JIMAR) Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean (JISAO) Northern Gulf Institute (NGI) NOAA Nursing Mothers Program (NOAA NMP) Office of Marine and Aviation Operations (OMAO) U.S. National Geodetic Survey (NGS) NOAA Commissioned Officer Corps (NOAA Corps) Aircraft Operations Center (AOC) National Integrated Drought Information System (NIDIS) U.S. National Ice Center (USNIC); Jointly owned and operated by the Department of Defense (DOD) and Department of Homeland Security (DHS) Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [ edit ] In 2001, the chair of the of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 's working group on climate science became Susan Solomon , an atmospheric chemist at NOAA's Boulder, Colorado offices.

[ 69 ] With co-chair Qin Dahe of Working Group 1 she produced the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4, 2007). She and other IPCC scientists, along with Vice President Al Gore , received the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize .

[ 70 ] Hurricane Dorian controversy [ edit ] Main articles: Hurricane Dorian and Hurricane Dorian-Alabama controversy Hurricane Dorian was an extremely powerful and destructive tropical cyclone that devastated the northwestern Bahamas and caused significant damage to the Southeastern United States and Atlantic Canada in September 2019. By September 1, NOAA had issued a statement saying that the "current forecast path of Dorian does not include Alabama". However, on that date, President Donald Trump tweeted that Alabama, among other states, "will most likely be hit (much) harder than anticipated".

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Shortly thereafter, the Birmingham, Alabama office of the National Weather Service issued a tweet that appeared to contradict Trump, saying that Alabama "will NOT see any impacts from Dorian". On September 6, NOAA published a statement from an unidentified spokesperson supporting Trump's September 1 claim. The statement also labelled the Birmingham, Alabama branch of the National Weather Service's contradiction of Trump as incorrect.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] The New York Times reported that the NOAA September 6 statement was prompted by a threat from U.S. Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross to fire high-level NOAA staff unless they supported Trump's claim. The Department of Commerce described this report as "false".

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Meanwhile, The Washington Post reported that NOAA had twice ordered National Weather Service employees not to provide "any opinion" on Hurricane Dorian and to "only stick with official National Hurricane Center forecasts". The first order came after Trump's September 1 comments and the Birmingham, Alabama National Weather Service's contradiction of Trump. The second order came on September 4 after Trump displayed an August 29 map that was altered with a black marker to show that Hurricane Dorian may hit Alabama.

[ 76 ] On September 9, speaking at an Alabama National Weather Service (NWS) meeting the Director of the National Weather Service gave a speech supporting Birmingham NWS and said the team "stopped public panic" and "ensured public safety". He said that when Birmingham issued their instructions they were not aware that the calls they were receiving were a result of Trump's tweet. The acting chief scientist and assistant administrator for the ocean and atmospheric research said he is "pursuing the potential violations" of the agency's scientific integrity policy.

[ 77 ] Flag [ edit ] Flag of NOAA The NOAA flag is a modification of the flag of one of its predecessor organizations, the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey . The Coast and Geodetic Survey's flag, authorized in 1899 and in use until 1970, was blue, with a white circle centered in it and a red triangle centered within the circle. It symbolized the use of triangulation in surveying , and was flown by ships of the Survey.

[ 78 ] When NOAA was established in 1970 and the Coast and Geodetic Survey's assets became a part of NOAA, NOAA based its own flag on that of the Coast and Geodetic Survey. The NOAA flag is, in essence, the Coast and Geodetic Survey flag, with the NOAA logo—a circle divided by the silhouette of a seabird into an upper dark blue and a lower light blue section, but with the "NOAA" legend omitted—centered within the red triangle. NOAA ships in commission display the NOAA flag; those with only one mast fly it immediately beneath the ship's commissioning pennant or the personal flag of a civilian official or flag officer if one is aboard the ship, while multimasted vessels fly it at the masthead of the forwardmost mast.

[ 79 ] NOAA ships fly the same ensign as United States Navy ships but fly the NOAA flag as a distinguishing mark to differentiate themselves from Navy ships.

See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Spaceflight portal Center for Environmental Technology ( CET ) Climate Mirror – Movement to preserve primarily government-hosted data sets Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Earth Science Information Partners ( ESIP Federation ) – Earth science and data management List of auxiliaries of the United States Navy Marine Mammal Protection Act – Act of the United States Congress in 1972 NOAA National Operational Model Archive and Distribution System (NOMADS) – Climate and weather data provider Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets NOAA's Environmental Real-time Observation Network – US weather observation network SciLands , also known as NOAA's Virtual World Program – Area in the virtual world Second Life Office of Naval Research – Office within the United States Department of the Navy Title 15 of the Code of Federal Regulations United States Fish and Wildlife Service – United States federal government agency United States Naval Research Laboratory – U.S. Navy research laboratory University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System Volcanic Ash Advisory Center – Expert group providing information on atmospheric volcanic ash clouds hazardous for airplanes Weather Modification Operations and Research Board – Act of intentionally altering or manipulating the weather Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Former: Environmental Science Services Administration – Former U.S. government scientific agency Minerals Management Service – Former United States government agency United States Coast and Geodetic Survey – Former U.S. government scientific agency United States Fish Commission – Former U.S. government fisheries agency References [ edit ] ^ "NOAA in Your State – Maryland; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" (PDF) .

noaa.gov . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ "Contact Us" .

Noaa.gov . Retrieved August 19, 2023 .

^ "About our agency | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

Noaa.gov . Retrieved February 28, 2022 .

^ Celebrating 200 Years , NOAA website, 2007.

^ "About Our Agency | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

NOAA.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ a b "BestPlacesToWork.org Agency Report" . Best Places to Work . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "Organizational Structure" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . March 5, 2018. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018 . Retrieved July 13, 2018 .

^ McKoy, Jillian (June 13, 2025).

"Loss of NOAA, FEMA Expertise 'Will Be Really Difficult to Rebuild' | SPH" .

Boston University School of Public Health . Retrieved July 29, 2025 .

^ "Our history | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

Noaa.gov . Retrieved May 10, 2024 .

^ a b c "Reorganization Plan 4 – 197 – NOAA Central Library" .

Lib.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "REORGANIZATION PLANS NOS. 3 AND 4 OF 1970" (PDF) .

Archive.epa.gov . p. 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ "The Battle for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)" .

Steven Eli Schanes . May 22, 2008 . Retrieved December 9, 2019 .

^ "Why NOAA Is in the Commerce Department" . Retrieved December 9, 2019 .

^ Shea, Eileen.

"A History of NOAA" . Department of Commerce Historical Council . Retrieved May 30, 2013 .

^ "Our history | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

NOAA.gov . Retrieved June 13, 2017 .

^ "About | Office of Marine and Aviation Operations" .

NOAA.gov . Retrieved February 19, 2018 .

^ Noor, Dharna (April 26, 2024).

"Trump will dismantle key US weather and science agency, climate experts fear" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved August 4, 2024 .

^ Smith, Hayley (July 28, 2024).

"Project 2025 plan calls for demolition of NOAA and National Weather Service" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 28, 2024 .

^ Sherwood, Courtney; Haas, Ryan; Dake, Lauren (February 27, 2025), NOAA, federal weather and research agency, is firing workers in Oregon and Washington , OPB ^ Kives, Bartley (March 7, 2025).

"Cuts to U.S. weather forecasting, climate science create dark clouds for Canadian counterparts" .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation .

^ Hersher, Rebecca (July 1, 2025).

"Defense Department will stop providing crucial satellite weather data" .

NPR . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ "Maryland Federal Facilities Profile – NOAA; Maryland Department of Commerce" (PDF) .

commerce.maryland.gov . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ "Silver Spring Metro Center; Foulger-Pratt" .

foulgerpratt.com . Retrieved June 22, 2023 .

^ "Vice Admiral Nancy Hann | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

www.noaa.gov . Retrieved January 25, 2025 .

^ "Dr. Neil Jacobs" .

U.S. Department of Commerce . Archived from the original on December 13, 2019 . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ "Benjamin Friedman" .

NOAA . Archived from the original on June 28, 2017 . Retrieved June 13, 2017 .

^ "Trump administration nominates AccuWeather CEO Barry Myers to head NOAA" .

Geospatial World . October 25, 2017.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2017 . Retrieved October 25, 2017 .

^ Freedman, Andrew; Samenow, Jason (November 20, 2019).

"White House pick to lead NOAA withdraws nomination, citing health concerns" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2019 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Washington Post . "This Republican wants to make NOAA an independent agency" by Maxine Joselow. January 27, 2023.

^ a b "Organization | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

Noaa.gov . March 30, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Weather | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

noaa.gov . September 24, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2019 .

^ "NWS: Forecasts and Service" .

Weather.gov . Retrieved September 24, 2019 .

^ "4 ways the ozone hole is linked to climate, and 1 way it isn't" .

Climate.gov . Archived from the original on December 8, 2016 . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ "NOAA Weather Radio" .

US Department of Commerce, NOAA, National Weather Service- Weather.gov . Retrieved January 30, 2017 .

^ "National Ocean Service | United States agency" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved October 12, 2021 .

^ "NOS: About Us" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on September 8, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2019 .

^ "NOAA Tides & Currents" .

tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

^ NOAA Office for Coastal Management ADS Group.

"NOAA Office for Coastal Management" .

Csc.noaa.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Home – NOAA Tides & Currents" .

Tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov . October 15, 2013 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Nautical Charts & Pubs" .

Nauticalcharts.noaa.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "National Geodetic Survey – Home" .

Geodesy.noaa.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "NOAA National Marine Sanctuaries" .

Sanctuaries.noaa.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "NOAA Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management" . Archived from the original on October 27, 2006 . Retrieved October 25, 2006 .

^ "Our role is stewardship; our product is science" .

Response.restoration.noaa.gov . March 24, 1989 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ Read "Future of the National Weather Service Cooperative Observer Network" at NAP.edu . 1998.

doi : 10.17226/6197 .

ISBN 978-0-309-06146-9 .

^ Landsat Data Data Sheet (Report). United States Geological Survey. 1997. p. 2.

doi : 10.3133/fs08497 .

^ "Department of Commerce" .

history.nasa.gov . Retrieved May 28, 2017 .

^ "NASA Successfully Launches NOAA Advanced Geostationary Weather Satellite" .

nasa.gov . November 19, 2016.

^ Jenner, Lynn (March 10, 2015).

"GOES Overview and History" .

NASA . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ "NOAA/NESDIS Office of Systems Development Homepage" .

Osd.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Office of Satellite Operation Website" . Archived from the original on November 10, 2013 . Retrieved July 22, 2015 .

^ "Home Page – Office of Satellite Data Processing and Distribution" . Archived from the original on May 28, 2015 . Retrieved July 22, 2015 .

^ "NOAA Star : Center for Satellite Applications and Research" .

Star.nesdis.noaa.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Joint Polar Satellite System(JPSS)" . Archived from the original on July 29, 2012 . Retrieved July 22, 2015 .

^ Office of Space Commerce.

"Office of Space Commerce | Helping U.S. businesses use the unique medium of space to benefit our economy" .

Space.commerce.gov . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ Turner, D.B. (1994).

Workbook of atmospheric dispersion estimates: an introduction to dispersion modeling (2nd ed.).

CRC Press .

ISBN 1-56670-023-X .

CRCpress.com Archived November 5, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Beychok, M.R. (2005).

Fundamentals of Stack Gas Dispersion (4th ed.). author-published.

ISBN 0-9644588-0-2 .

www.air-dispersion.com ^ "NOAA News Online (Story 235)" .

Noaanews.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on December 15, 2016 . Retrieved May 28, 2017 .

^ "About Our Agency | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

Noaa.gov . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ Pan, Jock (2010).

The United States Outer Executive Departments and Independent Establishments & Government Corporations . Xlibris.

ISBN 978-1-4500-8674-5 .

[ self-published source ] ^ "Home" .

Air Resources Laboratory . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ a b "About Us – NOAA's Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory" . Retrieved May 16, 2020 .

^ "Arctic Report Card: Record territory for warm temperatures, loss of snow and ice | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

Noaa.gov . December 10, 2019 . Retrieved February 9, 2020 .

^ "About OMAO – Office of Marine and Aviation Operations" .

Omao.noaa.gov . Archived from the original on August 8, 2017 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

^ "Leadership | Office of Marine and Aviation Operations" . Archived from the original on April 20, 2017 . Retrieved April 19, 2017 .

^ Kaula, W. M. (1986).

"National Geodetic Survey Policy on the Role of Government in Geodesy" .

Journal of Surveying Engineering .

112 (2): 74– 78.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9453(1986)112:2(74) .

ISSN 0733-9453 .

^ "What is NIDIS? | U.S Drought Portal" .

Drought.gov . Retrieved May 28, 2017 .

^ Pan, Jock Lul (2010).

United States outer executive departments and independent establishments & government corporations . [Philadelphia]: Xlibris Corp.

ISBN 978-1-4500-8674-5 .

OCLC 741273359 .

^ Pearce, Fred (2010).

The climate files: the battle for the truth about global warming . London: Guardian Books. p. 194.

ISBN 978-0-85265-229-9 .

^ "Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change – Nobel Lecture" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved July 29, 2025 .

^ a b Feldscher, Kyle.

"NOAA slams weather service tweet that refuted Trump's Alabama claim" . CNN . Retrieved September 7, 2019 .

^ a b Embury-Dennis, Tom (September 5, 2019).

"Trump forced to deny personally doctoring hurricane map after sharpie spotted on his desk" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2022 . Retrieved September 5, 2019 .

^ a b " 'Sharpiegate': meteorologists upset as weather agency defends Trump's Alabama claim" .

The Guardian . September 7, 2019 . Retrieved September 7, 2019 .

^ "Trump Dorian tweets: Weather staff 'faced sacking threat' over Alabama" . BBC News. September 10, 2019 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ "Commerce Chief Threatened Firings at NOAA After Trump's Dorian Tweets, Sources Say" .

The New York Times . September 9, 2019 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ Freedman, Andrew; Itkowitz, Colby; Samenow, Jason (September 7, 2019).

"NOAA staff warned in Sept. 1 directive against contradicting Trump" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 9, 2019 .

^ "NOAA scientist: agency likely broke science integrity rules" . Associated Press. September 9, 2019 . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ Lul Pan Chuol, Jock (April 29, 2010).

The United States Outer Executive Departments and Independent Establishments and Government Corporations . Xlibris.

ISBN 978-1-4500-8674-5 .

^ "National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Flags" . Archived from the original on December 24, 2008 . Retrieved January 10, 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .

Library resources about National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website NOAA in the Federal Register v t e United States Department of Commerce Headquarters: Herbert C. Hoover Building Howard Lutnick , Secretary of Commerce Jeremy Pelter , Acting Deputy Secretary of Commerce Deputy Secretary of Commerce Economic Development Administration National Technical Information Service Minority Business Development Agency National Telecommunications and Information Administration Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs Bureau of the Census Federal Audit Clearinghouse Bureau of Economic Analysis Under Secretary of Commerce for Industry and Security Bureau of Industry and Security Office of Export Enforcement Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property United States Patent and Trademark Office Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade International Trade Administration Commercial Service Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service Marine Fisheries Service Ocean Service Weather Service Marine & Aviation Operations Oceanic & Atmospheric Research Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology National Institute of Standards and Technology v t e Federal research and development agencies of the United States ( list ) Independent agencies National Science Foundation (NSF) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) Smithsonian Institution research centers and programs Agriculture Agricultural Research Service (ARS) National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) Economic Research Service (ERS) United States Forest Service Research and Development (R&D) Commerce National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Defense Army Army Combat Capabilities Development Command (CCDCOM) Army Research Laboratory (ARL) Combat Capabilities Development Command Soldier Center (CCDCSC) CCDC Armaments Center (CCDCAC) Picatinny Arsenal Benét Laboratories Watervliet Arsenal Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) United States Army Medical Research and Development Command (USAMRDC) Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) Marine Corps Marine Corps Combat Development Command (MCCDC) Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL) Marine Corps Operational Test and Evaluation Activity (MCOTEA) Navy Office of Naval Research (ONR) Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) Naval Medical Research Center (NMRC) Naval Warfare Centers Air (NAWC) Surface (NSWC) Undersea (NUWC) Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance (NCCOSC) Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake (NAWS) Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) Operational Test and Evaluation Force (OPTEVFOR) Air Force Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC) Air Armament Center (AAC) Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Air Force Life Cycle Management Center (AFLCMC) Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center (NWC) Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center (AFOTEC) Space Force Space Systems Command (SSC) Other Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USU) Education Institute of Education Sciences (IES) National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR) Energy Office of Science (DOE SC) Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) National Laboratories Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Food and Drug Administration science and research programs Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (ARPA-H) Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) Coast Guard Research and Development Center (CG RDC) Interior United States Geological Survey (USGS) Justice National Institute of Justice (NIJ) FBI Science and Technology Branch Transportation Research and Innovative Technology Administration Federal Aviation Administration Research, Engineering, and Development Federal Highway Administration Research and Technology Treasury Office of Financial Research (OFR) Veterans Affairs Veterans Health Administration Office of Research and Development (ORD) Executive Office of the President Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program (NITRD) National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) Legislative branch House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) (defunct) Judicial branch Federal Judicial Center v t e United States government agencies involved in environmental science Environmental Protection Agency Global Change Research Program National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Science Foundation Smithsonian Institution Department of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Reclamation National Park Service United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geodetic Survey Marine Fisheries Service Ocean Service Oceanic and Atmospheric Research UxSRTO Weather Service Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Environmental Management Office of Science National Laboratories and Technology Centers Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Farm Service Agency Food and Nutrition Service Foreign Agricultural Service Natural Resources Conservation Service ( National Water and Climate Center ) Rural Utilities Service Forest Service Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate United States Coast Guard Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Department of Defense Air Force Research Laboratory Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Joint Typhoon Warning Center Office of Naval Research Combat Capabilities Development Command Executive Office of the President Climate Policy Office Clean Energy Innovation and Implementation U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Council on Environmental Quality Defunct Environmental Science Services Administration United States Fish Commission United States Coast and Geodetic Survey White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Richard Nixon 37th President of the United States (1969–1974) 36th Vice President of the United States (1953–1961) U.S. Senator from California (1950–1953) U.S. Representative for CA–12 (1947–1950) Presidency Transition First inauguration Second inauguration Nixon Doctrine " Bring Us Together " Economic policies Nixon shock Tar Baby Option Environmental Protection Agency creation National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Space exploration 1971 National Cancer Act Vietnam War Cambodian bombing Paris Peace Accords " Peace with Honor " Vietnamization Silent majority Cold War period Linkage policy Drug  Abuse Prevention and Control Act 1970 Lincoln Memorial visit 1972 visit to China Shanghai Communiqué Détente 1972 Moscow Summit Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty SALT I Treaty Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement Threshold Test Ban Treaty Endangered Species Act National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse War on drugs Drug Enforcement Administration Cannabis policy Enemies List list of opponents Operation CHAOS Watergate timeline White House tapes United States v. Nixon Senate Watergate Committee impeachment process " I am not a crook " Resignation speech Pardon State of the Union Address 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 Wilson desk Judicial appointments Supreme Court controversies Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Life and politics Richard Nixon Foundation Presidential Library and Museum Birthplace and boyhood home Checkers speech 1958 motorcade attack Kitchen Debate Operation 40 "Last press conference" Florida White House " La Casa Pacifica " Nixon Center Nixon v. General Services Administration Death and state funeral Books Six Crises (1962) Bibliography Elections U.S. House of Representatives: 1946 1948 U.S. Senate: 1950 California gubernatorial election: 1962 GOP presidential primaries: 1960 1964 1968 1972 GOP national conventions: 1952 1956 1960 campaign 1968 campaign 1972 campaign Presidential elections: 1952 transition 1956 1960 debates Kennedy transition 1968 1972 Popular culture " Nixon goes to China " Millhouse (1971 film) An Evening with Richard Nixon (1972 play) Richard (1972 film) Another Nice Mess (1972 film) Four More Years (1972 film) Impeach the President (1973 song) The Werewolf of Washington (1973 film) White House Madness (1975 film) All the President's Men (1976 film) The Public Burning (1977 novel) Washington: Behind Closed Doors (1977 miniseries) Secret Honor (1984 film) Nixon in China (1987 opera) The Final Days (1989 film) Nixon (1995 film) Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film) Futurama (1999 TV series) Dick (1999 film) Nixon's China Game (2000 film) Dark Side of the Moon (2002 film) The Assassination of Richard Nixon (2004 film) Frost–Nixon interviews ( 2006 play , 2008 film ) Black Dynamite (2009 film) " The Impossible Astronaut " (2011 TV episode) Our Nixon (2013 film) X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014 film) Crooked (2015 novel) Elvis & Nixon (2016 film) The Post (2017 film) Watergate (2019 board game) U.S. postage stamp Related Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Presidential Townhouse Richard Nixon mask Nixon diamond Staff Jack Brennan (aide de camp) Murray Chotiner (early campaign manager) Manolo Sanchez (valet) Rose Mary Woods (secretary) Family Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife) Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter) Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter) Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson) Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter) Francis A. Nixon (father) Hannah Milhous Nixon (mother) Donald Nixon (brother) Edward Nixon (brother) ← Lyndon B. Johnson Gerald Ford → Category Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Greece Korea Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8vlm2
Cached time: 20250818053000
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.719 seconds
Real time usage: 2.152 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11356/1000000
Revision size: 53035/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 799336/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10242/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 334966/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.995/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27355946/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1599.735      1 -total
 33.21%  531.342      1 Template:Reflist
 21.51%  344.110     55 Template:Cite_web
 16.88%  269.956     19 Template:Annotated_link
 10.91%  174.462     40 Template:Navbox
  7.11%  113.766      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  6.84%  109.464      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
  6.75%  108.015      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.47%  103.504      1 Template:Infobox
  5.46%   87.362      1 Template:United_States_space_program_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37876:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818053000 and revision id 1305732793. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Oceanic_and_Atmospheric_Administration&oldid=1305732793 " Categories : National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 1970 establishments in the United States Climate change policy in the United States Earth sciences organizations Government agencies established in 1970 Governmental meteorological agencies in North America Hydrology organizations Oceanographic organizations Satellite operators Scientific organizations based in the United States Scientific organizations established in 1970 United States Department of Commerce agencies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2025 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 20:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 44 languages Add topic

