Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood 2 Education 3 Work 4 Legacy 5 Death 6 References Toggle the table of contents Martha E. Bernal 4 languages Español Euskara Hausa Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist (1931–2001) Martha E. Bernal Born April 13, 1931 San Antonio, Texas , U.S.

Died September 28, 2001 (2001-09-28) (aged 70) Black Canyon City, Arizona , U.S.

Nationality American Alma mater Texas Western College, Syracuse University , Indiana University Bloomington Occupation Clinical psychologist Martha E. Bernal (April 13, 1931 – September 28, 2001) was  an American clinical psychologist .

[ 1 ] She earned her doctoral degree at Indiana University Bloomington in 1962. She was the first Hispanic woman to receive a doctorate in psychology in the United States.

[ 1 ] Although Bernal's clinical work focused on the assessment and treatment of children with behavioral problems, she also developed organizations with a strong focus on minority ethnic groups.

Childhood [ edit ] Born to Mexican immigrants in San Antonio, Texas in 1931,  Bernal was raised in Mexican culture while experiencing life as a Mexican American. At first her father, Enrique de Bernal, did not want her to continue her educational pursuits, but with the support of her older sister, Cristina, and her mother, Alicia, her father eventually relented.

[ 2 ] Education [ edit ] Bernal began school in 1937 at a time when students at her school were prohibited from speaking Spanish.

[ 2 ] Additionally, she and her sisters were discouraged from taking academically advanced courses.

[ 3 ] [ unreliable source ] Bernal recalled this environment as leading her to feel shame about her ethnicity and native tongue.

[ 1 ] In 1952, Bernal received a bachelor's degree from Texas Western College, which is now the University of Texas at El Paso . Later, she attended Syracuse University and graduated with a Master of Arts degree in 1955. Moving on to Indiana University, she struggled with sexism. While white men were welcome to conduct faculty-supervised research, women were denied such opportunities and often subject to sexual advances from professors.

[ 3 ] Bernal was ready to quit Indiana University until one of her teachers, Harry Yamaguchi, persuaded her to finish her doctorate. She eventually earned her doctorate in psychology with the additional support of other faculty members Roland C. Davis , Arnold Binder , and Leon.

[ 1 ] Bernal earned her degree during a time where less than 2% of doctorate degrees were being earned by Hispanic individuals.

[ 4 ] Work [ edit ] After obtaining her doctoral degree from Indiana University in 1962, Bernal applied for various faculty jobs. Unable to get a faculty position, she obtained a U.S. Public Health Service Postdoctoral Fellowship at UCLA and conducted research for two years.

[ 1 ] Eventually, she became a faculty member at Arizona State University where she would study ethnic identity development among Mexican American children. During this time she developed her interest in the behavioral principles and methods for the treatment of childhood psychopathology, mainly children with conduct disorders, [ 1 ] as well as developed mechanisms used for measuring ethnic identity and the development of ethnic identity among Mexican American children. Eventually she became known nationally for displaying how behavioral interventions for children operate and the interventions' ability to operate over time, as well as for developing the Ethnic Identity Questionnaire. Bernal and her colleagues adapted the Ethnic Identity Questionnaire to measure ethnic identity development among young Mexican American children. She worked from 1964 to 1971 in the UCLA's Neuropsychiatric Institute developing behavioral interventions and then continued her work at the University of Denver from 1971 to 1986.

[ 1 ] Some of the interventions involved training parents by giving them lesson plans to help with their children's conduct problems.

[ 3 ] Legacy [ edit ] Shortly after she started research in minority mental health, Bernal became the lead researcher on the topic of training minority psychologists. As a recipient of the NIMH National Research Service Award in 1979, Bernal published her research in American Psychologist [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and The Counseling Psychologist showing the paucity of courses in multicultural health and the gross underrepresentation of minority students and faculty across clinical psychology programs in the United States.

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] Bernal advocated for the preparation of mental health professionals to provide services to the growth of ethnic minorities in the United States. Bernal was outspoken about the need to recruit and train more ethnic minorities in the field of psychology, and worked to incorporate specific organizations into the APA that had a focus on ethnic issues. Her research convinced many people in the APA to form the Board of Ethnic Minority Affairs (BEMA).

[ 1 ] Bernal made numerous contributions to the field of psychology, and received several awards for her developments in pediatric clinical psychology as well as minority mental health. Informed by her personal experiences with structural and social prejudice, Bernal was instrumental in expanding access to care for minority groups and increasing recruitment of Hispanics into the field of psychology the United States.

[ 8 ] Among her awards, Bernal received the Distinguished Life Achievement Award from APA's Division 45, and APA's Distinguished Contribution to Psychology in the Public Interest Award in 2001.

[ 8 ] She also contributed much to the establishment of the National Hispanic Psychology Association, now known as the National Latino Psychological Association, where she became the second president and eventually the treasurer.

[ 9 ] One of Bernal's most notable accomplishments was the education and mentoring of numerous students. She helped her students navigate issues that she herself had struggled with throughout her life and academic career. Today, several scholarships have been created in her name to offset the costs of higher education for minority students, with a particular focus on women. She wanted to help students have equal opportunities for advancement in psychology. She has gained extensive acknowledgments from the people she has interacted with, becoming an inspiration to many of her followers and peers.

[ 9 ] On April 13, 2024, a Google Doodle was posted to celebrate “the 93rd birthday of Mexican American psychologist, Dr. Martha Bernal”.

[ 10 ] Death [ edit ] In her later years, Bernal battled cancer and was eventually forced to stop her work due to declining health. However, she continued to be an influential leader by working with the Commission on Ethnic Minority in the fields of recruitment, retention, and training, remaining an active member until her death.

[ 3 ] After recovering from cancer three times, she was diagnosed with lung cancer and died at the age of 70 on September 28, 2001.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Hispanic and Latino Americans portal ^ a b c d e f g h i j Vasquez, M. T., & Lopez, S. (2002). Martha E. Bernal (1931-2001). American Psychologist, 57(5), 362.

^ a b Martha Bernal. (2001). American Psychologist, 56(11), 922.

^ a b c d "Martha Bernal: Life and Contributions" .

faculty.webster.edu . Retrieved November 20, 2018 .

^ https://www.taylorfrancis.com/reader/read-online/10ffe147-d6aa-4feb-bf9f-d086c19ef5d8/chapter/pdf?context=ubx ^ Bernal, M. E.; Castro, F. E. (1994).

"Are clinical psychologists prepared for service and research with ethnic minorities? Report of a decade of progress" .

American Psychologist .

49 (9): 797– 805.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.49.9.797 .

PMID 7978667 .

^ Bernal, M. E.; Padilla, A. M. (1982).

"Status of minority curricula and training in clinical psychology" .

American Psychologist .

37 (7): 780– 787.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.37.7.780 .

PMID 7137696 .

^ "Martha E. Bernal, PhD" .

apa.org . American Psychological Association . Retrieved 13 April 2024 .

^ a b George, M. (2012). Profile of Martha Bernal. Psychology's Feminist Voices Multimedxia Internet Archive. Retrieved from: http://www.feministvoices.com/martha-bernal/ Archived 2020-02-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Petrillo, A. (2012). Psychologist of the week- Martha Bernal. Retrieved from: http://psychologistoftheweek.blogspot.com/2012/10/martha-bernal.html ^ "Celebrating Dr. Martha Bernal Doodle - Google Doodles" .

doodles.google .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martha_E._Bernal&oldid=1293567988 " Categories : 1931 births 2001 deaths American clinical psychologists American people of Mexican descent Indiana University Bloomington alumni University of Texas at El Paso alumni Syracuse University alumni Arizona State University faculty University of Denver faculty Deaths from lung cancer in Arizona Health professionals from San Antonio People from El Paso, Texas Hispanic and Latino American social scientists 20th-century American psychologists Hispanic and Latino American women scientists American women psychologists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2021 This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martha E. Bernal 4 languages Add topic

