Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roiphe, Wolf and "power feminism" 2 "Agency-affirming" feminism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Victim feminism 4 languages فارسی Hausa 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term used to critique certain forms of feminist activism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Victim feminism is a term that has been used by some conservative postfeminist writers such as Katie Roiphe [ 1 ] and Naomi Wolf [ 1 ] to critique forms of feminist activism which they see as reinforcing the idea that women are weak or lacking in agency.

[ 2 ] : 393 [ 3 ] Roiphe, Wolf and "power feminism" [ edit ] Self-described feminist Naomi Wolf uses the term victim feminism in her 1993 book Fire With Fire .

Wolf contrasts victim feminism with power feminism . In her view, victim feminists present women as "beleaguered, fragile, intuitive angels" thus preventing women from taking responsibility for the power they actually have. Among various attributes of victim feminism, Wolf writes that it projects violence and competitiveness onto men or their patriarchy , while disregarding these qualities in women.

[ 4 ] Religious scholar Colin Grant describes Wolf's power vs. victim dichotomy as being rooted in differences in how feminists address the liabilities that women suffer: while victim feminism simply dwells on them, power feminism seeks to identify them, with the purpose to challenge and overcome them. Grant also mentions that Wolf herself appears to have embraced both sides: her book The Beauty Myth seems to be from the victim feminism camp, but with Fire with Fire Wolf transitions to the power feminism side.

[ 5 ] This dichotomy of "victim" vs "power" was criticized by other feminist scholars, such as Elizabeth M. Schneider , for being defined too broadly so that Wolf's argument became lost.

[ 6 ] In addition, it lumps together diverse and radically different feminist schools, and this confusion aids anti-feminists in their rhetoric.

[ 7 ] Wolf's Fire With Fire and Katie Roiphe 's The Morning After garnered considerable media attention. They formed part of a backlash against the perceived domination of the feminist theme of victimization in the contemporary popular culture.

[ 8 ] Victim feminism was viewed as a negative tendency by Wolf and those who built on her analysis.

[ 5 ] The more positive tendency recognizes the distinctiveness of women's experience and views (regarding sex, morality, etc.) as a positive alternative in contrast to that imposed by the "patriarchal" views of men.

[ 5 ] One of Wolf's and Roiphe's arguments is that emphasis on victimization reinforces the stereotype of women being fragile and vulnerable. However, it was argued that their solution in the form of "power feminism" is simplistic, because it fails to take into an account the systemic nature of women's subordination. Overall, the "victim vs. power" dichotomy was described as false and fundamentally inadequate, and leading to "problematic extremes".

[ 9 ] Schneider criticizes the dichotomy of feminism in the form of  "victimhood vs. agency" from the legal standpoint, arguing that the view of women as either victims or agents is incomplete and static. She points out that, first, both concepts are too narrow and incomplete, and second, they are not the opposite poles of a spectrum, they are independent, but interrelated dimensions of women's experience.

[ 2 ] "Agency-affirming" feminism [ edit ] Gender studies scholar Rebecca Stringer writes that besides Wolf and Roiphe, other feminist authors have criticized the representation of women as victims and promoted a brand of agency-affirming feminism . These include Camille Paglia , Christina Hoff Sommers , Natasha Walter , and Rene Denfeld .

[ 10 ] Each of these authors wrote popular books in the 1990s about feminism framed as calls to action, like earlier works by Betty Friedan and Germaine Greer .

[ 10 ] According to Stringer, this trend of 1990s agitation against "victim feminism" is tied to the concurrent rise of neoliberalism .

[ 10 ] At the same time, in her book Knowing Victims Stringer argues that these critiques of "victim feminism" do not affirm women's agency, but rather problematize women's capacity for agency and declare a lack of women's personal responsibility, which is, in Stringer's view, akin to victim blaming .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Antifeminism Gender equality List of feminist theories References [ edit ] ^ a b Heywood, Leslie; Drake, Jennifer, eds. (1997).

"Introduction" .

Third Wave Agenda: Being Feminist, Doing Feminism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. pp.

1– 2.

ISBN 978-0-8166-3005-9 .

^ a b Schneider, Elizabeth M.

(1993).

"Feminism and the False Dichotomy of Victimization and Agency" (PDF) .

New York Law School Law Review .

38 : 387– 399.

ISSN 0145-448X .

Also available at HeinOnline .

^ Primary sources : Goldberg, Carole (29 December 1993).

"Feminist War Is Won" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

Fire announces a 'genderquake' – a resurgence of female political power. And it says it's time to reject the 'victim' feminism that casts women as powerless objects of male malevolence in favor of a new "power" feminism that enables women Beck, Joan (23 January 1994).

"Feminist Indifference to Children a Key Weakness" .

The Buffalo News . Buffalo, N.Y. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

most women don't fully understand yet that a 'genderquake' has occurred. The time has come to shuck 'victim feminism' and its sexist whining and embrace 'power feminism,' the better for women to reach out and claim their fair share Pollitt, Katha (21 February 1994).

"Subject to Debate" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 3 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

The current attack on 'victim feminism' is partly a class phenomenon, a kind of status anxiety.

Abrams, Kathryn (April 1994).

"Review: Songs of Innocence and Experience: Dominance Feminism in the University" (PDF) .

The Yale Law Journal .

103 (6): 1533– 1560.

doi : 10.2307/797093 .

ISSN 1939-8611 .

JSTOR 797093 .

If these movements are not to work at cross-purposes, feminists in both genres ought to give thought to their inter-relations: writers like Roiphe, Paglia, and Naomi Wolf might have had more difficulty making a target out of victim feminism, for example, if academic feminists had ...

Raven, Arlene (Summer 1994).

"Judy Chicago: The Artist Critics Love to Hate" .

On the Issues .

Naomi Wolf, in her Fire with Fire, defines victim feminism as women seeking power 'through an identity of powerlessness.' Two features of victim feminism according to Wolf are: identifying with powerlessness even at the expense of taking responsibility for the power women do possess; and putting community first, hence being hostile toward individual achievement ^ Cole, Alyson Manda (2007). "Victims on a pedestal: anti-'victim feminism' and women's oppression".

The cult of true victimhood: from the war on welfare to the war on terror . Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 978-0-8047-5461-3 .

^ a b c Grant, Colin (1998).

"A sex myth" .

Myths we live by . Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press. pp.

121– 124.

ISBN 978-0-7766-0444-2 .

^ Henry, Astrid (2004). "Daughterhood is powerful: the emergence of feminism's third wave".

Not my mother's sister: generational conflict and third-wave feminism . Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0-253-11122-7 .

^ Hammer, Rhonda (2002).

"Culture wars over feminism: Paglia, Wolf, and Hoff Sommers" .

Antifeminism and family terrorism: a critical feminist perspective . Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1049-4 .

^ Schneider, Elizabeth M.

(2000). "Beyond victimization and agency".

Battered women & feminist lawmaking . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press. pp.

74– 75.

ISBN 978-0-300-12893-2 .

^ Schneider, Elizabeth M. (1993).

"Feminism and the False Dichotomy of Victimization and Agency" .

New York Law School Law Review .

38 (1): 387– 399.

^ a b c Stringer, Rebecca (2014). "Victims left, right and centre: constructing 'victim feminism' ".

Knowing Victims: Feminism, agency and victim politics in neoliberal times . Hoboken, N.J.: Taylor and Francis. pp.

17– 18.

ISBN 978-1-134-74601-9 .

^ Stringer (2014) , p. 20.

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Victim_feminism&oldid=1236886426 " Categories : Feminism Victimology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 27 July 2024, at 02:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Victim feminism 4 languages Add topic

