Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career and political views Toggle Career and political views subsection 2.1 Early activism 2.2 Publishing career 2.3 Ideology 2.3.1 Eurasianism, and views on geopolitics 2.3.2 Russian Orthodoxy and Rodnovery 2.3.3 Other views 2.4 Political parties 2.4.1 National Bolshevik Party 2.4.2 Eurasia Party 2.5 Stance on Ukraine and role in Russian politics 2.5.1 Influence on Putin 2.5.2 Relationships with radical groups in other countries 2.6 Fifth column 2.7 Loss of departmental headship 2.8 Chief editorship of Tsargrad TV 3 Personal life 4 Sanctions 5 Bibliography 6 Filmography 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Works cited 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Aleksandr Dugin 56 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian political activist and philosopher (born 1962) In this name that follows East Slavic naming customs , the patronymic is Gelyevich and the family name is Dugin .

Aleksandr Dugin Александр Дугин Dugin in 2023 Born Aleksandr Gelyevich Dugin ( 1962-01-07 ) 7 January 1962 (age 63) Moscow , Russian SFSR, Soviet Union [ 1 ] Spouses Evgenia Debryanskaya Natalya Melentyeva Children 2, including Darya Education Education Moscow Aviation Institute (dropped out) Novocherkassk State Academy of Melioration Rostov State University (PhD, 2000) Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Russian philosophy School Neo-Eurasianism Eurasia Movement Neo-Stalinism National Bolshevism Institutions Moscow State University (2008–2014) Ivan Ilyin Higher School of Politics at the Russian State University for the Humanities (since 2023) Main interests Geopolitics , political philosophy , conservative revolution , sociology Notable ideas Neo-Eurasianism The Fourth Political Theory Tellurocracy – thalassocracy distinction [ 2 ] Aleksandr [ a ] Gelyevich Dugin ( Russian : Александр Гельевич Дугин ; born 7 January 1962) is a Russian far-right political philosopher.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] He is the leading theorist of Russian neo-Eurasianism .

Born into a military intelligence family, Dugin was an anti-communist dissident during the 1980s, [ 5 ] and joined the far-right Pamyat organization. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union , he co-founded the National Bolshevik Party , which espoused National Bolshevism , with Eduard Limonov in 1993 before leaving in 1998.

[ 6 ] In 1997, Dugin published his most well-known work, Foundations of Geopolitics , in which he called on Russia to rebuild its influence through alliances and conquest in order to challenge a purported rival Atlanticist empire led by the United States.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Dugin founded the Eurasia Party in 2002, and continued to develop his ideology in books including The Fourth Political Theory (2009).

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] His views have been characterized as fascist or neo-fascist , although he explicitly rejects fascism along with liberal democracy and Marxism , [ 9 ] instead advocating a " conservative revolution" against Enlightenment ideas in Russia. He has drawn on the writings of René Guénon , Julius Evola , Carl Schmitt , and Martin Heidegger .

Dugin was an early advisor to Gennadiy Seleznyov and later Sergey Naryshkin .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] He served as head of the Department of Sociology of International Relations at Moscow State University from 2009 to 2014, when he lost his post due to backlash after he called for the death of pro- Maidan Ukrainians.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Since 2023, he has served as the director of the Ivan Ilyin Higher School of Politics [ ru ] at the Russian State University for the Humanities .

[ 14 ] Dugin is a strong supporter of Russian president Vladimir Putin .

[ 7 ] Although he has no official ties to the Kremlin, [ 15 ] he is often referred to in foreign media as "Putin's brain"; [ 16 ] others say that his influence has been greatly exaggerated.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Dugin vocally supported the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea and the 2022 invasion of Ukraine .

[ b ] His daughter, Darya , was assassinated in a car bombing in 2022.

[ 21 ] The assassination is widely believed to have been conducted by Ukraine, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] though the exact relation of the assassins to the Ukrainian government is undetermined.

Early life and education Dugin was born in Moscow, into the family of a colonel-general in the GRU , a Soviet military intelligence agency, and candidate of law , Geliy Aleksandrovich Dugin, and his wife Galina, a doctor and candidate of medicine.

[ 24 ] His father left the family when he was three, but ensured that they had a good standard of living, and helped Dugin out of trouble with the authorities on occasion.

[ 25 ] He was transferred to the customs service due to his son's behaviour in 1983.

[ 26 ] In 1979, Aleksandr entered the Moscow Aviation Institute . He was expelled without a degree either because of low academic achievement, dissident activities or both.

[ 27 ] Afterwards, he began working as a street cleaner. He used a forged reader's card to access the Lenin Library and continue studying. However, other sources claim he instead started working in a KGB archive, where he had access to banned literature on Masonry, fascism, and paganism.

[ 28 ] In 1980, Dugin joined the " Yuzhinsky circle [ ru ] ", an avant-garde dissident group which dabbled in Satanism , esoteric Nazism and other forms of the occult .

[ 29 ] The Yuzhinsky circle gained a reputation for Satanism, for séances, a devotion to all things esoteric – mysticism, hypnotism, Ouija boards, Sufism, trances, pentagrams and so forth.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In the group, he was known for his embrace of Nazism which he attributes to a rebellion against his Soviet upbringing, as opposed to genuine sympathy for Hitler .

[ 32 ] He adopted an alter ego with the name of "Hans Sievers", a reference to Wolfram Sievers , a Nazi researcher of the paranormal .

[ 33 ] Under the pseudonym, transcribed as Hans Zievers in Cyrillic, he recorded a musical album in 1981-1984.

[ 34 ] Studying by himself, he learned to speak Italian, German, French, English, [ 35 ] and Spanish.

[ 36 ] He was influenced by René Guénon and by the Traditionalist School . In the Lenin Library, he discovered the writings of Julius Evola , whose book Pagan Imperialism he translated into Russian.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Career and political views This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Russia Ideologies Eurasianism Duginism Monarchism Tsarism Populism Putinism Russian nationalism All-Russian Christian Ultra Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Traditionalist conservatism Principles Authority Autocracy Bureaucracy Byzantinism Duty Economic interventionism Familialism Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Orthodox values Nuclear Orthodoxy Moscow, third Rome Patriotism Reactionism Russian culture Russification Sobornost Social hierarchy Social order Sovereign democracy Statism History Black Hundreds Great Russia Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality Russian Empire White movement White Army White émigré Zemstvo Intellectuals Aksakov Boot Chudinova Danilevsky Dostoevsky Dugin Frank Ilyin Karamzin Katkov Khomyakov Leontiev von Lilienfeld Obolensky Pobedonostsev Prokhanov Rozanov Semyonov Shafarevich Shcherbatov Solovyov Solzhenitsyn Sorokin Strakhov Surkov Tarkovsky Tikhomirov Tikhon Trubetskoy Uvarov Vikulov von Wrangel Yuryev Zhukovsky Literature St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) The Organic Theory of Societies (1873) Sociology of Revolution (1925) The Gulag Archipelago (1973) Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The Notre Dame de Paris Mosque (2005) The Fourth Political Theory (2009) Politicians Alexander I Alexander III Butina Dubrovin Durnovo Gryzlov Kolchak Kornilov von Lilienfeld Luzhkov Malyshkin Mizulina Nicholas I Nicholas II Pikhno Pobedonostsev Putin Rodzianko Rogozin Rostopchin Sadovnichiy Shulgin Slutsky Surkov Tolstoy von Ungern Uvarov Vladimir Volodin Yuryev Zhirinovsky Parties Active Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Monarchist Party of Russia Rodina Russian All-People's Union Union of Right Forces United Russia Defunct For Truth Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union People's Union Pamyat Society Union of the Russian People Organisations All-Russia People's Front Izborsky Club Krepostniki National Alliance of Russian Solidarists Union of the Russian People Media Elementy (Defunct) Kievlyanin Kozma Minin Nash Sovremennik Russkoye Znamya Zavtra Znamya Related topics Anti-communism Anti-socialism Anti-Islamism Anti-national sentiments American Chechen Jew Polish Romanian Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Opposition to LGBTQ rights Politics of Russia Liberalism Russia for Russians Russia under Vladimir Putin Serfdom in Russia Silovik Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Part of a series on National Bolshevism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-Western sentiment Bolshevism Class conflict Dasein Eurasianism Nationalism Revolutionary Ultra- Querfront Neo-Sovietism Prussianism Social interventionism Social revolution Traditionalism People Ayo Bose Binet Bouchet Christensen Clémenti Dmitriev Dugin Elsässer Eltzbacher Ewert Freda Gubarev von Hentig Heimbach Kitsikis Koth Kurginyan Laufenberg Letov Limonov Linderman Michel Niekisch Reventlow Paetel Perinçek Prokhanov Soral Thiriart Ustryalov Wolffheim Media Widerstand The Fourth Political Theory Foundations of Geopolitics Sankya The Revolution That Wasn't Da, smert Limonka Compact Organizations Combat League of German Socialists Essence of Time Ethnocacerism Eurasia Party Eurasian Youth Union French National-Collectivist Party For the Native Language!

Jeune Europe Lehi Mladorossi National Bolshevik Party National Bolshevik Front National Party of Germany National Salvation Front New Resistance Nouvelle Résistance National-European Communitarian Party European Communitarian Party The Other Russia Interbrigades Traditionalist Worker Party Popular Resistance Association Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Smenovekhovtsy Spiritual Heritage Workers' Party of Germany Related topics Anti-Americanism Ba'athism Communism Conservative Revolution Economic antisemitism Ethnocacerism Feudal Fascism Juche Left-wing nationalism MAGA Communism National-anarchism National communism in Romania Nasakom Nazi-Maoism National syndicalism Neo-fascism Neosocialism Neo-Sovietism Populism left-wing right-wing Putinism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Revolutionary nationalism Russian invasion of Ukraine Russian nationalism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet patriotism Stalinism Comparison of Nazism and Stalinism Stalinism and antisemitism Neo-Stalinism Strasserism Syncretic politics Tankie Third Position Totalitarianism Ulusalcılık Politics portal v t e Early activism In the 1980s, Dugin was a dissident [ 39 ] and an anti-communist.

[ 40 ] Dugin worked as a journalist before becoming involved in politics just before the fall of communism . In 1988, he and his friend Geydar Dzhemal were involved in the ultranationalist and antisemitic group Pamyat ("Memory").

[ 27 ] For a brief period at the beginning of the 1990s he was close to Gennady Zyuganov , leader of the newly formed Communist Party of the Russian Federation , and probably had a role in formulating its nationalist communist ideology.

[ 37 ] [ 41 ] In 1993 he co-founded, together with Eduard Limonov , the National Bolshevik Party , whose nationalistic interpretation of Bolshevism was based on the ideas of Ernst Niekisch . He left the party in 1998 following disputes with Limonov.

[ 27 ] Publishing career Dugin published Foundations of Geopolitics in 1997. The book was published in multiple editions, and is used in university courses on geopolitics, [ 28 ] reportedly including the Academy of the General Staff of the Russian military.

[ 42 ] It alarmed political scientists in the US, [ 43 ] and is sometimes referenced by them as being "Russia's Manifest Destiny ".

[ 44 ] In 1997, his article, "Fascism – Borderless and Red", described "national capitalism" as pre-empting the development of a "genuine, true, radically revolutionary and consistent, fascist fascism" in Russia. He believes that it was "by no means the racist and chauvinist aspects of National Socialism that determined the nature of its ideology. The excesses of this ideology in Germany are a matter exclusively of the Germans ... while Russian fascism is a combination of natural national conservatism with a passionate desire for true changes." [ 45 ] The " Waffen-SS and especially the scientific sector of this organization, Ahnenerbe ," was "an intellectual oasis in the framework of the National Socialist regime", according to him.

[ 45 ] Dugin soon began publishing his own journal entitled Elementy , which initially began by praising Franco-Belgian Jean-François Thiriart , belatedly a supporter of a "Euro- Soviet empire which would stretch from Dublin to Vladivostok and would also need to expand to the south, since it require(s) a port on the Indian Ocean." [ 46 ] Consistently glorifying both Tsarist and Stalinist Soviet Russia , Elementy also indicated his admiration for Julius Evola . Dugin also collaborated with the weekly journal Den (The Day), previously directed by Alexander Prokhanov .

[ 41 ] In the journal he obtained the last interview of the Belgian Nazi collaborator Leon Degrelle six months before his death.

[ 47 ] Ideology Dugin disapproves of liberalism and the West, particularly US hegemony .

[ 12 ] He asserts: "We are on the side of Stalin and the Soviet Union ".

[ 48 ] He describes himself as being a conservative: "We, conservatives, want a strong, solid state, want order and healthy family, positive values, the reinforcing of the importance of religion and the Church in society". He adds: "We want patriotic radio, TV, patriotic experts, patriotic clubs. We want the media that expresses national interests".

[ 49 ] According to political scientist Marlène Laruelle , the thinking of Dugin, main manufacturer of a fascism à-la-russe , could be described as a series of concentric circles, with far-right ideologies underpinned by different political and philosophical traditions ( Esoteric Nazism , Traditionalism / Perennialism , the German Conservative Revolution and the European New Right ) at its backbone.

[ 50 ] Dugin adapts Martin Heidegger 's notion of Dasein (Existence) and transforms it into a geo–philosophical concept.

[ 51 ] According to Dugin, the forces of liberal and capitalist Western civilization represent what the ancient Greeks called ὕβρις (hubris) , "the essential form of titanism" (the anti-ideal form), which opposes Heaven ("the ideal form—in terms of space, time, being"). In other words, the West would summarize "the revolt of the Earth against Heaven". To what he calls the West's "atomizing" universalism , Dugin contrasts an apophatic universalism, expressed in the political idea of "empire".

[ 51 ] Values of democracy, human rights and individualism are considered by him not to be universal but uniquely Western.

[ 52 ] In 2019, Dugin engaged in a debate with French intellectual Bernard-Henri Lévy on the theme of what has been called "the crisis of capitalism" and the insurrection of nationalist populisms.

[ 53 ] Eurasianism, and views on geopolitics Part of a series on Eurasianism Concepts Anti-Americanism Anti-British sentiment Anti-Western sentiment Neo-Stalinism Nomad studies Nuclear Orthodoxy Primakov doctrine Russian civilization Russian messianism [ ru ] Russian world Scythianism [ ru ] Pochvennichestvo Tellurocracy Thalassocracy Traditionalist conservatism Intellectuals Chkheidze Dugin Dugina Efron Eskin Gumilev Karsavin Kholmogorov Mackinder Mirsky Panarin Savitsky Suvchinsky Trubetzkoy Vernadsky Politicians Karaganov Nazarbayev Perinçek Putin Zyuganov Works The Geographical Pivot of History New Chronology Foundations of Geopolitics The Fourth Political Theory Organisations Amanat Eurasia Party Eurasian Youth Union Falanga Left Opposition Nashi Party of Peace and Unity Patriotic Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Proryv Smenovekhovtsy Youth Union of Turkey Related topics Conservative Revolution Ethnopluralism Geopolitics Hellenoturkism Intermediate Region National Bolshevism Nouvelle Droite Neo-Sovietism Pan-Slavism Ruscism Russian imperialism Russian irredentism Russian nationalism Turanism Politics portal Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Dugin has theorized the foundation of a "Euro-Asian empire" capable of fighting the US-led Western world.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] In this regard, he was the organizer and the first leader of the ultranationalist National Bolshevik Party from 1993 to 1998 (along with Eduard Limonov ) and, subsequently, of the National Bolshevik Front and of the Eurasia Party , which then became a non-governmental association. Dugin's Eurasitic ideology therefore aims at the unification of all Russian-speaking peoples in a single country.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] His views have been characterised as fascist by critics.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] In the early 1990s, Dugin's work at the National Bolshevik Front included research into the roots of national movements and the activities of supporting esoteric groups in the first half of the 20th century. Partnering with Christian Bouchet , [ 61 ] a then-member of the French branch of Ordo Templi Orientis , and building on Nationalist and migratory - integrative interest groups in Asia and Europe, they contribute in bringing international politics closer to Russia's Eurasian geopolitical concept.

Dugin spent two years studying the geopolitical, semiotic and esoteric theories of the controversial Dutch thinker Herman Wirth (1885–1981), one of the founders of the German Ahnenerbe . This resulted in the book Hyperborean Theory (1993), in which Dugin largely endorsed Wirth's ideas as a possible foundation for his Eurasianism .

[ 62 ] Apparently, this is "one of the most extensive summaries and treatments of Wirth in any language".

[ 63 ] According to the Moldovan anthropologist Leonid Mosionjnik, Wirth's overtly wild ideas fitted perfectly well in the ideological void after the demise of communism, liberalism and democracy.

[ 64 ] Dugin also promoted Wirth's claim to have written a book on the history of the Jewish People and the Old Testament, the so-called Palestinabuch , which could have changed the world had it not been stolen.

[ 65 ] At the end of the Second Chechen War , Dugin was apparently requested by the Chechen side to come and negotiate, in addition he has met with the former president of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev , and the ambassadors of Iran and Syria.

[ 66 ] Dugin's ideas, particularly those on "a Turkic – Slavic alliance in the Eurasian sphere", have begun to receive attention among certain nationalistic circles in Turkey, most notably among alleged members of the Ergenekon network , which is the subject of a high-profile trial (on charges of conspiracy).

[ citation needed ] Dugin's Eurasianist ideology has also been linked to his adherence to the doctrines of the Traditionalist School . (Dugin's Traditionalist beliefs are the subject of a book length study by J. Heiser, The American Empire Should Be Destroyed—Aleksandr Dugin and the Perils of Immanentized Eschatology.

[ 67 ] ) Dugin also advocates for a Russo-Arab alliance.

[ 68 ] In principle, Eurasia and our space, the heartland Russia, remain the staging area of a new anti-bourgeois, anti-American revolution ... The new Eurasian empire will be constructed on the fundamental principle of the common enemy: the rejection of Atlanticism , strategic control of the USA, and the refusal to allow liberal values to dominate us. This common civilizational impulse will be the basis of a political and strategic union.

— Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The reborn Russia, according to Dugin's concept, is said by Charles Clover of the Financial Times to be a slightly remade version of the Soviet Union with echoes of Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell , where Eurasia was one of three continent-sized super states including Eastasia and Oceania as the other two and was participating in endless war between them.

[ 39 ] In the Eurasian public discourse sphere, the totalitarian communist policy deployed in over three decades of works by various international groups that are part of the movement, is "a version of reintegration of the post-Soviet space into a 'Eurasian' sphere of influence for Russia".

[ 69 ] The North American program "works with a wide range of partners from all sectors of civil society" and "is advanced through grant making, advocacy and research, regional initiatives, and close engagement".

[ 70 ] The Kremlin invited Dugin to speak at its Anti-Orange Rally in Moscow in February 2012. There, Dugin addressed tens of thousands with this message: [ 71 ] Dear Russian people! The global American empire strives to bring all countries of the world together under its control. They intervene where they want, asking no one's permission. They come in through the fifth column, which they think will allow them to take over natural resources and rule over countries, people, and continents. They have invaded Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya. Syria and Iran are on the agenda. But their goal is Russia. We are the last obstacle on their way to building a global evil empire. Their agents at Bolotnaya Square and within the government are doing everything to weaken Russia and allow them to bring us under total external control. To resist this most serious threat, we must be united and mobilized! We must remember that we are Russian! That for thousands of years we protected our freedom and independence. We have spilled seas of blood, our own and other people's, to make Russia great. And Russia will be great! Otherwise it will not exist at all. Russia is everything! All else is nothing!

[ 71 ] Russian Orthodoxy and Rodnovery Dugin was baptized at the age of six in the Russian Orthodox church of Michurinsk by his great-grandmother Elena Mikhailovna Kargaltseva. Since 1999, he formally embraced a branch of the Old Believers , a Russian religious movement which rejected the 1652–1666 reforms of the official Russian Orthodox Church .

[ 72 ] Dugin's Eurasian philosophy owes much to Traditional Integralism and Nouvelle Droite movements, and as such it resonates with Neopaganism , [ 73 ] a category which in this context means the movement of Slavic Native Faith (Rodnovery), especially in the forms of Anastasianism and Ynglism .

Dugin's Eurasianism is often cited as belonging to the same spectrum of these movements, [ 74 ] as well as also having influences from Hermetic , Gnostic and Eastern traditions.

[ 75 ] He calls to rely upon "Eastern theology and mystical currents" for the development of the Fourth Political Theory .

[ 76 ] According to Marlene Laruelle , Dugin's adherence to the Old Believers allows him to stand between Paganism and Orthodox Christianity without formally adopting either of them. His choice is not paradoxical, since, according to him—in the wake of René Guénon —Russian Orthodoxy and especially the Old Believers have preserved an esoteric and initiatory character which was utterly lost in Western Christianity. As such, the Russian Orthodox tradition may be merged with Neopaganism and may host "Neopaganism's nationalist force, which anchors it in the Russian soil, and separates it from the two other Christian confessions".

[ 72 ] Other views In Foundations of Geopolitics , Dugin advocated for the dismantling of the People's Republic of China , with Xinjiang , Tibet , Inner Mongolia , and Manchuria becoming buffer states .

[ 43 ] After the loss of leadership in Russia, Zhang Weiwei , director of the China Institute of Fudan University , invited Dugin for lectures, which caused a shift in Dugin's attitude towards China. Originally advocating "territorial disintegration, division, and political and administrative partition" of China, Dugin has since supported China's " Tianxia " and believes that a Russian-Chinese alliance would help counter Atlanticism. Dugin has been appointed as a senior fellow at Fudan University, and Chinese public opinion considers Dugin to be the most important thinker around Putin.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Dugin wrote a 1997 essay in which he described Soviet-era serial killer Andrei Chikatilo as a mystic and "a practitioner of Dionysian "sacraments" in which the killer/torturer and the victim transcend their "metaphysical dualism" and become one".

[ 79 ] Political parties National Bolshevik Party In 1992, Eduard Limonov founded the National Bolshevik Party as an amalgamation of six minor groups.

[ 80 ] Aleksandr Dugin was among its earliest members and was instrumental in convincing Limonov to enter politics, and signed the declaration of the founding of the party in 1993.

[ 81 ] The party first attracted attention in 1992 when two members were arrested for possessing grenades . The incident gave the NBP publicity for a boycott campaign they were organizing against Western goods.

[ 82 ] The NBP joined forces with the National Salvation Front (a broad coalition of Russian communists and nationalists ).

[ 83 ] In 1998, Dugin left the NBP as a result of a conflict with other members of the party.

[ 84 ] This led to the party moving further left in Russia's political spectrum, and led to members of the party denouncing Dugin and his group as fascists.

[ 85 ] Eurasia Party Dugin (left) at the International Conference "New Horizon" in May 2018 in Mashhad , Iran The Eurasia Party , which advances neo-Eurasianist ideas, was launched in April 2001. Dugin was reported as the group's founder. He said the movement would stress cultural diversity in Russian politics, and oppose "American style globalisation, and would also resist a return to communism and nationalism." It was officially recognized by the Ministry of Justice on 31 May 2001.

[ 41 ] The Eurasia Party claims support in some military circles and by leaders of the Orthodox Christian faith in Russia. The party hopes to play a key role in attempts to resolve the Chechen problem, setting the stage for Dugin's objective of a Russian strategic alliance with European and Middle Eastern states, primarily Iran.

In 2005, Dugin founded the Eurasian Youth Union of Russia as the youth wing of the International Eurasia Movement .

[ 86 ] Stance on Ukraine and role in Russian politics "It is impossible to do without the mobilization of the Russian people, without explaining to them its historical mission, without awakening its deepest beginning, without these words "brothers and sisters". Get up, Russian people , wake up, you are called to accomplish great deeds... All your ancestors, all generations were moving towards this moment, towards this clash with our ontological enemy... We are fighting absolute Evil, embodied in Western civilization , its liberal - totalitarian hegemony, in Ukrainian Nazism . We were created for this mission. That's what is needed now - a call is needed." — Dugin demanding a full-scale Russian societal mobilization in the Russian invasion of Ukraine , March 2022 [ 87 ] Dugin supports Russian President Vladimir Putin and his foreign policies but has opposed the Russian government's economic policies. He stated in 2007: "There are no more opponents of Putin's course and, if there are, they are mentally ill and need to be sent off for clinical examination. Putin is everywhere, Putin is everything, Putin is absolute, and Putin is indispensable". It was voted number two in flattery by readers of Kommersant .

[ 88 ] [ clarification needed ] In the Kremlin , Dugin represents the "war party", a division within the leadership over Ukraine.

[ 89 ] Dugin is an author of Putin's initiative for the annexation of Crimea by Russia .

[ 90 ] He considered the war between Russia and Ukraine to be inevitable and appealed for Putin to intervene in the war in Donbas .

[ 90 ] Dugin said: "The Russian Renaissance can only stop at Kyiv." [ 91 ] During the war in Donbas , Dugin was in regular contact with pro-Russian separatist insurgents.

[ 92 ] He described his position as "unconditionally pro- DPR and pro- LPR ".

[ 93 ] A Skype video call posted on YouTube showed Dugin providing instructions to separatists of South and Eastern Ukraine as well as advising Ekaterina Gubareva , whose husband Pavel Gubarev declared himself the Donetsk Region governor and after that was arrested by the Security Service of Ukraine .

[ 86 ] On 31 March 2014, Oleg Bahtiyarov, a member of the Eurasia Youth Union of Russia founded by Dugin, was arrested.

[ 86 ] He had trained a group of about 200 people to seize parliament and another government building, according to the Security Service of Ukraine .

[ 86 ] Dugin stated he was disappointed in President Putin, saying that Putin did not aid the pro-Russian insurgents in Ukraine after the Ukrainian Army 's early July 2014 offensive.

[ 92 ] In August 2014, Dugin called for an eradication of Ukrainian identity.

[ 94 ] Halya Coynash of the Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group said that the influence of Dugin's "Eurasian ideology" on events in eastern Ukraine and on Russia's invasion of the Crimea was beyond any doubt.

[ 95 ] According to Vincent Jauvert, Dugin's radical ideology became the basis for the internal and foreign policy of the Russian authorities.

[ 96 ] "So Dugin is worth listening to, in order to understand to which fate the Kremlin is leading its country and the whole of Europe." [ 96 ] Ukraine gave Dugin a five-year entry ban, starting in June 2006, [ 97 ] and Kyiv declared him a persona non grata in 2007.

[ 98 ] His Eurasian Youth Union was banned in Ukraine.

[ 97 ] In 2007, the Security Service of Ukraine identified persons of the Eurasian Youth Union who committed vandalism on Hoverla in 2007 : they climbed up the mountain of Hoverla , imitated sawing down the details of the construction in the form of the small coat of arms of Ukraine by tools brought with them and painted the emblem of the Eurasian Youth Union on the memorial symbol of the Constitution of Ukraine .

[ 97 ] He was deported back to Russia when he arrived at Simferopol International Airport in June 2007.

[ 99 ] Before war broke out between Russia and Georgia in 2008, Dugin visited South Ossetia and predicted: "Our troops will occupy the Georgian capital Tbilisi, the entire country, and perhaps even Ukraine and the Crimean Peninsula, which is historically part of Russia, anyway." [ 100 ] Afterwards he said Russia should "not stop at liberating South Ossetia but should move further," and "we have to do something similar in Ukraine." [ 101 ] In 2008, Dugin stated that Russia should repeat the Georgian scenario in Ukraine, namely attack it.

[ 102 ] In September 2008, after the Russian-Georgian war, he did not hide his anger towards Putin, who "dared not drop the other shoe" and "restore the Empire." [ 96 ] On 10 October 2014, Dugin said, "Only after restoring the Greater Russia that is the Eurasian Union , we can become a credible global player. Now these processes slowed down very much. The Ukrainian maidan was the response of the West to the advance of the Russian integration." [ 103 ] He described the Euromaidan as a coup d'état carried out by the United States: "America wishes to wage the war against Russia not by its own hands but by the hands of the Ukrainians. Promising to wink at up to 10 thousand victims among the peaceful population of Ukraine and actually demanding the victims, the United States led to this war. The United States carried out the coup d'état during the maidan for the purpose of this war. The United States raised neo-Nazis Russophobes to the power for the purpose of this war." [ 104 ] Dugin said Russia is the major driving force for the current events in Ukraine: "Russia insists on its sovereignty, its liberty, responds to challenges thrown down to it, for example, in Ukraine. Russia is attempting to integrate the post-Soviet space." [ 103 ] As Israeli political scientist Vyacheslav Likhachov states, "If one seriously takes the fact that such a person as Alexander Dugin is the ideologist of the imperial dash for the West, then one can establish that Russia is not going to stop as far as the Atlantic Ocean." [ 105 ] In the 2014 article by Dmitry Bykov "Why TV, Alexander Dugin and Galina Pyshnyak crucified a boy ", Channel One Russia 's use of the aired story by Dugin and Pyshnyak about the allegedly crucified boy as a pretext for escalating the conflict was compared to the case of Beilis .

[ 106 ] On 9 July 2014, Dugin on his Facebook account wrote a story that a 6-year-old child was allegedly nailed down to an advertisement board and shot to death before his father's eyes.

[ 107 ] On 16 July 2014, Novaya Gazeta provided a videotape of its correspondent Eugen Feldman walking along the main square in Sloviansk , asking local old women if they had heard of the murder of the child. They said such an event did not take place.

[ 107 ] The website Change.org hosted a petition of citizens who demanded "a comprehensive investigation with identification for all persons involved in the fabrication of the plot." [ 107 ] On 2 October 2014, Dugin described the situation in Donbas: "The humanitarian crisis has long since been raging on the territory of Novorossiya . Already up to a million, if not more, refugees are in the Russian Federation. A large part of the inhabitants of the DPR and the LPR simply moved abroad." [ 108 ] In the end of October 2014, Dugin advised the separatists to establish dictatorship in Novorossiya until they win in the confrontation.

[ 109 ] Influence on Putin Dugin's influence on the Russian government and on president Vladimir Putin is disputed.

[ 7 ] He has no official ties to the Kremlin, [ 15 ] but is often referred to in the media as "Putin's brain", [ 16 ] and as being responsible for shaping Russian foreign policy .

[ 90 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] Others contend that Dugin's influence is limited and has been greatly exaggerated, [ 19 ] [ 18 ] [ 17 ] on the basis that the correlations between his views and Russian foreign policy do not imply causation.

[ 20 ] In 2016, international relations professor Peter Rutland wrote a review of a book by Charles Clover, the Financial Times 's Moscow correspondent. Rutland wrote: "Clover makes it clear that Dugin does not have any sort of direct influence over Putin. Rather what is happening is that Dugin expressed, early on, the zeitgeist of post-Soviet Russia, identifying the forces of disorientation and ressentiment that fueled Putin's subsequent actions." [ 113 ] Mark Galeotti , writing in 2022 for The Spectator , argued that Western commentators tend to overstate the importance of Dugin in Russian politics, sometimes even describing him as a new Rasputin . He argued that Dugin's influence on the politics since 2016 was negligible, but that he tried to present himself as an influential person.

[ 114 ] In November 2022, the Latvia-based newspaper Meduza reported that, according to sources close to the Kremlin, Dugin's influence on Putin had grown after the killing of his daughter Daria Dugina . According to Meduza ' s interlocutors, the Western media had often exaggerated Dugin's political influence in the past, but after the murder of Dugina, Putin had allegedly started to take a serious interest in his ideas and to use one of his favourite terms (" Anglo-Saxon ") in a public speech.

[ 115 ] Dugin openly criticized Putin for failing to defend "Russian cities" such as Kherson , which was liberated from Russian control on 11 November 2022.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Relationships with radical groups in other countries Dugin made contact with the French far-right thinker Alain de Benoist in 1990.

[ 118 ] [ 27 ] Around the same time he also met the Belgian Jean-François Thiriart and Yves Lacoste .

[ 119 ] In 1992 he invited some of the European far-right figures he had met into Russia.

[ 120 ] He also brought members of Jobbik and Golden Dawn to Russia to strengthen their ties to the country.

[ 66 ] According to the book War for Eternity by Benjamin R. Teitelbaum , Dugin met Steve Bannon in Rome in 2018 to discuss Heidegger, Traditionalist esotericism, and a series of geopolitical matters which Bannon disagreed with him, wherein Bannon pressed him to abandon his support for China, Turkey, and Iran.

[ 121 ] Dugin also developed links with far-right and far-left political parties in the European Union, including Syriza in Greece, Ataka in Bulgaria, the Freedom Party of Austria , and Front National in France, to influence EU policy on Ukraine and Russia.

[ 94 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Dugin is also closely aligned with Israeli journalist Avigdor Eskin , who previously served on the board of Dugin's Eurasia Party.

[ 125 ] Fifth column The typical rhetoric about the fifth column as foreign agents is used by Dugin for political accusations in many publications. In his 2014 interview published by Vzglyad and Komsomolskaya Pravda , he says, "A huge struggle is being conducted. And, of course, Europe has its own fifth column, its own Bolotnaya Square -minded people. And if we have them sitting idly and doing nasty things on TV Rain , Europe is indeed dominated and ruled by the fifth column in full swing. This is the same American riffraff." [ 126 ] [ 127 ] He sees the United States standing behind all the scenes, including the Russian fifth column. According to his statement, "The danger of our fifth column is not that they are strong, they are absolutely paltry, but that they are hired by the greatest 'godfather' of the modern world—by the United States. That is why they are effective, they work, they are listened to, they get away with anything because they have the world power standing behind them." [ 126 ] [ 127 ] He sees the US embassy as the center for funding and guiding the fifth column and asserts, "We know that the fifth column receives money and instructions from the American embassy." [ 108 ] According to Dugin, the fifth column promoted the breakup of the Soviet Union as a land continental construction, seized power under Boris Yeltsin , and headed Russia as the ruling politico-economic and cultural elite until the 2000s. The fifth column is the regime of liberal reformers of the 1990s and includes former Russian oligarchs like Vladimir Gusinsky and Boris Berezovsky , former government officials like Mikhail Kasyanov , Boris Nemtsov , and Vladimir Ryzhkov , artistic, cultural, and media workers, [ 128 ] the Echo of Moscow , the Russian State University for the Humanities , the highest ranks of the National Research University Higher School of Economics , a significant part of teachers of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations , and a minority part of teachers of the Moscow State University .

[ 129 ] Dugin proposes to deprive the fifth column of Russian citizenship and deport the group from Russia: "I believe it is necessary to deport the fifth column and deprive them of their citizenship." [ 130 ] However, in 2007, Dugin argued, "There are no longer opponents of Putin's policy, and if there are, they are mentally ill and should be sent to prophylactic health examination." [ 131 ] [ 132 ] In 2014, Dugin in an interview to Der Spiegel confirmed that he considers the opponents of Putin to be mentally ill.

[ 40 ] In one of his publications, Dugin introduced the term the sixth column and defined it as "the fifth column which just pretends to be something different", [ 128 ] those who are in favor of Putin, but demand that he stand for liberal values (as opposed to the liberal fifth column, which is specifically against Putin). During the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine , Dugin said that all the Russian sixth column stood up staunchly for Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov .

[ 91 ] As he asserts, "We need to struggle against the fifth and sixth columns." [ 103 ] Russian-American artist Mihail Chemiakin says Dugin is inventing "the sixth column". "Soon, probably, there would already be the seventh one as well. 'The fifth column' is understandable. That is we, intelligentsia, lousy, dirty, who read Camus . And 'the sixth column', in his opinion, is more dangerous, because that is the personal entourage of Vladimir Putin. But he is naïve and understands nothing. And as for Dugin, he can tell him who to shoot to death and who to imprison. Maybe Kudrin , and maybe Medvedev ..." [ 133 ] According to Dugin, the whole Internet should be banned: "I think that Internet as such, as a phenomenon is worth prohibiting because it gives nobody anything good." [ 134 ] In June 2012, Dugin said in a lecture that chemistry and physics are demonic sciences, and that all Orthodox Russians need to unite around the president of Russia in the last battle between good and evil, following the example of Iran and North Korea.

[ 135 ] He added: "If we want to liberate ourselves from the West, it is needed to liberate ourselves from textbooks on physics and chemistry." [ 135 ] In June 2014, Dugin characterized his position on the Russo-Ukrainian war as "firm opposition to the Junta and Ukrainian Nazism that are annihilating peaceful civilians" as well as rejection of liberalism and US hegemony.

[ 93 ] Loss of departmental headship In 2008 Dugin established a Center for Conservative Studies at the Moscow State University . The Center focused on counter-Enlightenment and conservative ideas of authors such as Guénon , Evola , Schmitt and Heidegger , and on their application to Russian politics.

[ 27 ] In 2014 Dugin lost that academic position due to the controversy following an interview where he commented on the death of 42 anti-Maidan activists in Odesa saying "But what we see on May 2nd is beyond any limits. Kill them, kill them, kill them. There should not be any more conversations. As a professor, I consider it so". Media outlets interpreted this as a call to kill Ukrainians.

[ 92 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] A petition entitled "We demand the dismissal of MSU Faculty of Sociology Professor A. G. Dugin!" was signed by over 10,000 people and sent to the MSU rector Viktor Sadovnichiy .

[ 138 ] [ 136 ] Dugin claimed to have been fired from this post. The university claimed the offer of the position of the department head resulted from a technical error and was therefore cancelled, and that he would remain a professor and deputy department head under contract until September 2014.

[ 92 ] Dugin wrote the statement of resignation from the faculty staff to be reappointed to the Moscow State University staff due to the offered position of department head, but since the appointment was cancelled he was no longer a staff member of the faculty nor a staff member of the Moscow State University (the two staff memberships are formally different at the MSU).

[ 12 ] Chief editorship of Tsargrad TV Dugin was named chief editor of Tsargrad TV by businessman Konstantin Malofeev soon after the TV station's founding in 2015.

[ 139 ] Personal life Dugin's first wife was Evgenia Debryanskaya , a Russian activist. They have a son, Artur Dugin, whom they named in honor of Arthur Rimbaud .

[ 79 ] Dugin had a daughter, Darya Dugina , with his second wife, philosopher Natalya Melentyeva.

[ 140 ] On 20 August 2022, Darya Dugina was killed in a car bombing when the car she was driving exploded near Bolshiye Vyazemy , a suburb of Moscow.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] It is unclear whether she was targeted deliberately, or whether her father, who had been expected to travel with her, but switched to another car at the last minute, was the intended target.

[ 142 ] Sanctions On 11 March 2015, the United States Department of the Treasury added Dugin to its list of Russian citizens who are sanctioned as a result of their involvement in the Russo-Ukrainian war; his Eurasian Youth Union was targeted too.

[ 143 ] In June 2015, Canada added Dugin to its list of sanctioned individuals .

[ 144 ] On 3 March 2022, the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned the outlet Geopolitika [ ru ] due to its alleged control by Dugin. Additionally, the United States Department of the Treasury sanctioned Dugin's daughter Darya on the basis of her work as chief editor of the website United World International (UWI). According to the United States Department of the Treasury, UWI was developed as part of Project Lakhta , owned by Yevgeny Prigozhin , who is held responsible for part of the Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] In January 2023, both Japan and Ukraine imposed sanctions on Dugin for promoting Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Bibliography Several of Dugin's books have been published by the publishing house Arktos , an English-language publisher for traditionalist and alt-right books, which also published works by other fascists and neo-Nazis.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] The Trump Revolution , Arktos (2025) Talking to the Wolf: The Alexander Dugin Interviews , Arktos (2023) Templars of the Proletariat , Arktos (2023) The Great Awakening vs the Great Reset , Arktos (2021) Political Platonism , Arktos (2019) Ethnos and Society , Arktos (2018) Konflikte der Zukunft – Die Rückkehr der Geopolitik , Bonus (2015) Noomahia: voiny uma. Tri Logosa: Apollon, Dionis, Kibela , Akademicheskii proekt (2014) Yetnosociologiya , Akademicheskii proekt (2014) Ethnosociology , Arktos (2019) Martin Hajdegger: filosofija drugogo Nachala , Akademicheskii proekt (2013) Martin Heidegger: The Philosophy of Another Beginning , Washington Summit (2014) V poiskah tiomnogo Logosa , Akademicheskii proekt (2013) Geopolitika Rossii , Gaudeamus (2012) Last War of the World-Island: The Geopolitics of Contemporary Russia , Arktos (2015) Putin protiv Putina , Yauza (2012) Putin vs Putin , Arktos (2014) The United States and the New World Order (debate with Olavo de Carvalho ), VIDE Editorial (2012) Chetvertaya Politicheskaya Teoriya , Amfora (2009) The Fourth Political Theory , Arktos (2012) Die Vierte Politische Theorie , Arktos (2013) The Rise of the Fourth Political Theory , Arktos (2017) Evrazijskaja missija , Eurasia (2005) Eurasian Mission: An Introduction to Neo-Eurasianism , Arktos (2014) Pop-kultura i znaki vremeni , Amphora (2005) Filosofiya voiny , Yauza (2004) Absoliutnaia rodina , Arktogeia-tsentr (1999) Tampliery proletariata: natsional-bol'shevizm i initsiatsiia , Arktogeia (1997) Osnovy geopolitiki: geopoliticheskoe budushchee Rossii , Arktogeia (1997) (The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia) Metafizika blagoi vesti: Pravoslavnyi ezoterizm , Arktogeia (1996) Misterii Evrazii , Arktogeia (1996) Konservativnaia revoliutsiia , Arktogeia (1994) Konspirologiya (1993) Filmography Dugin (2023) The Wolf in the Moonlight (2020) Dugin's House (2020) Chaos Theory (2019) Paradogma (2018) See also All-Russian nation Anti-globalization movement Eurasianism Igor Panarin Intermediate Region Pan-Slavism Rashism Russian irredentism Russian world Russophilia Slavophilia Statism List of Russian philosophers Notes ^ Also spelled Alexander .

^ Sources: Lewis, Lall, Alexandra, Marie (4 July 2023).

"From decolonisation to authoritarianism: the co-option of the decolonial agenda in higher education by right-wing nationalist elites in Russia and India" .

Higher Education .

87 (5): 1471– 1488.

doi : 10.1007/s10734-023-01074-0 .

S2CID 259600071 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Zizek, Slavoj (25 August 2022).

"Degeneracy, Depravity, and the New Right" .

The Daily Star . Archived from the original on 20 March 2023.

Lall, Marie (2022).

"The effects of the Ukraine conflict on South Asia – uncovering the clashing world views of populist autocracies vs. (neo)liberal democracies" .

Suntory . Archived from the original on 31 March 2023.

References Citations ^ Борис Исаев (2005).

Геополитика: Учебное пособие (in Russian). Издательский дом "Питер". p. 329.

ISBN 978-5469006510 .

^ Lukic, Rénéo; Brint, Michael, eds. (2001).

Culture, politics, and nationalism in the age of globalization . Ashgate. p. 103.

ISBN 9780754614364 . Retrieved 12 October 2015 .

Dugin defines 'thalassocracy' as 'power exercised thanks to the sea,' opposed to 'tellurocracy' or 'power exercised thanks to the land' ... The 'thalassocracy' here is the United States and its allies; the 'tellurocracy' is Eurasia.

^ Burton, Tara Isabella (12 May 2022).

"The far-right mystical writer who helped shape Putin's view of Russia – Alexander Dugin sees the Ukraine war as part of a wider, spiritual battle between traditional order and progressive chaos" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

^ Osipovich, Alexander.

"Meet the Russian Dubbed 'Putin's Brain' Who Is Courting Trump Supporters" .

WSJ . Retrieved 7 June 2025 .

^ a b Tolstoy, Andrey; McCaffray, Edmund (2015). "MIND GAMES: Alexander Dugin and Russia's War of Ideas".

World Affairs .

177 (6): 25– 30.

ISSN 0043-8200 .

^ "Russia: National Bolsheviks, The Party Of 'Direct Action' " .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 29 April 2005.

^ a b c d "Alexander Dugin: who is Putin ally and apparent car bombing target?" .

The Guardian . 21 August 2022.

^ Shekhovtsov, Anton (2018).

Russia and the Western Far Right: Tango Noir , Abingdon, Routledge, p. 43.

^ Multiple sources: In a 1999 interview for the Polish magazine Fronda , Dugin explains: "In Russian Orthodox christianity a person is a part of the Church, part of the collective organism, just like a leg. So how can a person be responsible for himself? Can a leg be responsible for itself? Here is where the idea of state, total state originates from. Also because of this, Russians, since they are Orthodox, can be the true fascists, unlike artificial Italian fascists: of Gentile type or their Hegelians. The true Hegelianism is Ivan Peresvetov – the man who in 16th century invented the oprichnina for Ivan the Terrible . He was the true creator of Russian fascism. He created the idea that state is everything and an individual is nothing." "Czekam na Iwana Groźnego" [I'm waiting for Ivan the Terrible].

11/12 (in Polish). Fronda. 1999. p. 133 . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

Shekhovtsov, Anton (2008).

"The Palingenetic Thrust of Russian Neo-Eurasianism: Ideas of Rebirth in Aleksandr Dugin's Worldview" .

Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions .

9 (4): 491– 506.

doi : 10.1080/14690760802436142 .

S2CID 144301027 . Archived from the original on 18 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

Numerous studies reveal Dugin – with different degrees of academic cogency – as a champion of fascist and ultranationalist ideas, a geopolitician, an 'integral Traditionalist', or a specialist in the history of religions. . . . This paper is not aimed at offering an entirely new conception of Dugin and his political views, though it will, hopefully, contribute to a scholarly vision of this political figure as a carrying agent of fascist Weltanschauung.

Shekhovtsov, Anton (2009).

"Aleksandr Dugin's Neo-Eurasianism: The New Right à la Russe" .

Religion Compass: Political Religions .

3 (4): 697– 716.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2009.00158.x . Archived from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

Ingram, Alan (November 2001). "Alexander Dugin: geopolitics and neo-fascism in post-Soviet Russia".

Political Geography .

20 (8): 1029– 1051.

doi : 10.1016/S0962-6298(01)00043-9 .

"The Most Dangerous Philosopher in the World" .

Big Think . 18 December 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

Rascoe, Ayesha (27 March 2022).

"Russian intellectual Aleksandr Dugin is also commonly known as 'Putin's brain' " .

NPR News . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

Dugin is a good old-fashioned mystical fascist of the sort that kind of flourished after World War I, when many people in Europe felt lost, felt like the Old World had failed, and were searching around for explanations. And a certain set of them decided the problem was all of modern thinking, the idea of freedom, the idea of individual rights. And in Dugin's case, he felt that the Russian Orthodox Church was destined to rule as an empire over all of Europe and Asia. And eventually, in a big book in 1997, he laid out the road map for accomplishing that. He's continued to be intimately involved in the Russian military, Russian intelligence services and Putin's inner circle.

Dunlop, John B. (31 January 2004).

"Aleksandr Dugin's Foundations of Geopolitics" .

The Europe Center, Stanford University . Retrieved 13 May 2022 .

By summer 2001, Aleksandr Dugin, a neo-fascist ideologue, had managed to approach the center of power in Moscow, having formed close ties with elements in the presidential administration, the secret services, the Russian military, and the leadership of the state Duma.

Umland, Andreas (July 2010).

"Aleksandr Dugin's transformation from a lunatic fringe figure into a mainstream political publicist, 1980–1998: A case study in the rise of late and post-Soviet Russian fascism" .

Journal of Eurasian Studies . Disciplinary and Regional Trends in Russian and Eurasian Studies: Retrospective Glances and New Steps.

1 (2): 144– 152.

doi : 10.1016/j.euras.2010.04.008 .

S2CID 154863277 .

^ Dugin, Alexander (15 December 2014).

Eurasian Mission: An Introduction to Neo-Eurasianism . Arktos. p. 26.

ISBN 978-1-910524-24-4 .

^ Shaun Walker (23 March 2014).

"Ukraine and Crimea: what is Putin thinking?" .

The Guardian .

^ a b c Дугин хочет с помощью Путина прояснить свой статус в МГУ (in Russian).

BBC Russian Service . 30 June 2014.

^ Benjamin R. Teitelbaum (2020).

War for Eternity: The Return of Traditionalism and the Rise of the Populist Right . Allen Lane. pp.

155– 156.

^ "Учебно-научный центр "Высшая политическая школа имени Ивана Ильина" " [Educational and scientific center—Ivan Ilyin Higher School of Politics].

Russian State University for the Humanities .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ a b "Factbox: Alexander Dugin advocates a vast new Russian empire" .

Reuters . 21 August 2022.

^ a b Multiple sources: Barbashin, Anton; Thoburn, Hannah (31 March 2014).

"Putin's Brain: Alexander Dugin and the Philosophy Behind Putin's Invasion of Crimea" .

Foreign Affairs .

Rutland, Peter (December 2016).

"Geopolitics and the Roots of Putin's Foreign Policy" .

Russian History .

43 ( 3– 4): 425– 436.

doi : 10.1163/18763316-04304009 .

JSTOR 26549593 .

Dugin ... has attracted a great deal of publicity since the annexation of Crimea, with analysts even describing him as 'Putin's brain.' "Russian intellectual Aleksandr Dugin is also commonly known as 'Putin's brain' " .

NPR . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

Heintz, Jim (21 August 2022).

"Car blast kills daughter of Russian known as 'Putin's brain' " .

Associated Press .

"Who Is 'Putin's Brain' Whose Daughter Was Just Killed In A Car Bomb In Russia?" .

Outlook . 23 August 2022.

Rahman, Khalida (21 August 2022).

"Who is Alexander Dugin? 'Putin's Brain' in Distress After Daughter Killed" .

Newsweek .

^ a b "Russia Probes Car Bomb That Killed Daughter of Putin Ideologist" .

Bloomberg News . 21 August 2022.

^ a b "Putin under fire from the ultranationalists after Daria Dugina's assassination" .

Le Monde . 22 August 2022.

^ a b Laruelle, Marlène (2015).

Eurasianism and the European Far Right : Reshaping the Europe-Russia Relationship . Lanham. p. 59.

ISBN 9781498510691 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Barros, George (8 July 2019).

"The West Overestimates Aleksandr Dugin's Influence in Russia" .

Providence . Retrieved 20 August 2022 .

^ Barnes, Julian E.; Goldman, Adam; Entous, Adam; Schwirtz, Michael (5 October 2022).

"U.S. Believes Ukrainians Were Behind an Assassination in Russia" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ Lillis, Natasha Bertrand, Katie Bo (5 October 2022).

"US believes elements within Ukraine's government authorized assassination near Moscow, sources say | CNN Politics" .

CNN . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Russia blames Ukraine for murder of Putin ally's daughter" .

POLITICO . 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ Доктор Дугин (in Russian). Литературная Россия. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012 . Retrieved 18 March 2012 .

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press. pp.

234– 235.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Dugin, who left Alexander's mother when his son was three. While Dugin had very little contact with the man after that, it does appear that his father loomed large in his life. Dugin has been vague in various interviews about his father's profession. He told me and others that Geli was a general in military intelligence (the GRU). But when pressed, he admitted he didn't actually know for a fact what he did. 'At the end of his life he worked for the customs police, but where he worked before that – he did not tell me. That I do not really know.' Dugin's friends, however, are adamant that his father must have been someone of rank within the Soviet system. For starters, the family had the accoutrements of prestige – a nice dacha, relatives with nice dachas, and access to opportunities. According to Dugin's close friend and collaborator Gaidar Dzhemal, Geli Dugin had, on more than one occasion, intervened from a high-ranking position in the Soviet state to get his son out of trouble.

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Alexander, Geli was transferred to the customs service after his son's detention in 1983 by the KGB.

^ a b c d e Backman, Jussi (2020).

"A Russian Radical Conservative Challenge to the Liberal Global Order: Aleksandr Dugin" . In Lehti, Marko; Pennanen, Henna-Riikka; Jouhki, Jukka (eds.).

Contestations of Liberal Order . Cham: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

289– 314.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-22059-4_11 .

ISBN 978-3-030-22059-4 .

OCLC 1112419471 .

S2CID 202323563 .

^ a b Umland, Andreas (July 2010).

"Aleksandr Dugin's Transformation from a Lunatic Fringe Figure into a Mainstream Political Publicist, 1980–1998: A Case Study in the Rise of Late and Post-Soviet Russian Fascism" .

Journal of Eurasian Studies .

1 (2): 144– 152.

doi : 10.1016/j.euras.2010.04.008 .

ISSN 1879-3665 .

S2CID 154863277 .

^ Laruelle, Marlene (2015).

"The Iuzhinskii Circle: Far-Right Metaphysics in the Soviet Underground and Its Legacy Today" .

The Russian Review .

74 (4): 563– 580.

doi : 10.1111/russ.12048 .

^ Teitelbaum, Benjamin R. (21 April 2020).

War for Eternity: The Return of Traditionalism and the Rise of the Populist Right . Penguin Books Limited. p. 41.

ISBN 978-0-14-199204-4 .

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Dugin is very forthright about his early Nazi antics, which he says were more about his total rebellion against a stifling Soviet upbringing than any real sympathy for Hitler. Still, virtually everyone who remembers Dugin from his early years brings it up.

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

He adopted the nom de plume 'Hans Sievers', which added a hint of Teutonic severity to an already colourful and fairly camp militaristic–folklore style. The impression he created was, as his later collaborator Eduard Limonov described it, a 'picture of Oscar Wildean ambiguity'. Sievers was not just a stage name: it was a complete persona and alter ego. This was painstakingly composed of as many antisocial elements as its creator could find – a total and malevolent rebellion not just against the Soviet Union, but against convention and public taste as a whole: his namesake, Wolfram Sievers ^ "Hans Zivers - Кровавый Навет" .

zivers.lenin.ru . Retrieved 21 July 2025 .

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

In the evenings he read voraciously, learned to speak Italian, German, French and English, played the guitar and wrote songs.

^ Alexandr Dugin en Argentina: "Nada puede frenar la transición hacia el mundo multipolar" .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ a b Shenfield, Stephen D. (2001).

Russian Fascism: Traditions, Tendencies, Movements . M.E. Sharpe. p. 192.

ISBN 9780765611642 .

^ Teitelbaum, Benjamin R. (21 April 2020).

War for Eternity: The Return of Traditionalism and the Rise of the Populist Right . Penguin Books Limited. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-14-199204-4 .

^ a b Charles Clover (5 October 2011).

"Putin's grand vision and echoes of '1984' " .

Financial Times .

In Russian: Чарльз Кловер (6 October 2011).

Грандиозные планы Путина и отголоски "1984" (in Russian).

inoSMI .

^ a b Christian von Neef (14 July 2014).

"Jeder Westler ist ein Rassist" .

Der Spiegel (in German). No. 29.

In Russian: Кристиан Нееф (16 July 2014).

Дугин: На Западе все расисты (in Russian). InoSMI.

^ a b c John Dunlop (January 2004).

"Aleksandr Dugin's Foundations of Geopolitics" (PDF) .

Demokratizatsiya .

12 (1): 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2016.

'It is especially important,' Dugin adds, 'to introduce geopolitical disorder into internal American activity, encouraging all kinds of separatism and ethnic, social and racial conflicts, actively supporting all dissident movements—extremist, racist, and sectarian groups, thus destabilizing internal political processes in the U.S.' ^ "The Unlikely Origins of Russia's Manifest Destiny" .

Foreign Policy . 27 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

^ a b Dunlop, John B. (30 July 2004).

"Russia's New—and Frightening—"Ism" " .

Hoover Institution . Retrieved 12 October 2017 .

^ "The Unlikely Origins of Russia's Manifest Destiny" .

Foreign Policy . 27 July 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

^ a b Andreas Umland (15 April 2008).

"Will United Russia become a fascist party?" .

Hürriyet Daily News .

^ Allensworth, Wayne (1998).

The Russian Question: Nationalism, Modernization and Post-Communist Russia . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. p. 251.

^ "Последний фольксфюрер" .

Elementy (6). 2000. Archived from the original on 30 March 2018.

^ Иван Зуев (31 October 2012).

Александр Дугин: Уроки религии – это великая победа над русофобами (in Russian). Nakanune.ru.

^ Dugin, Aleksandr (28 September 2012).

Мы должны забрать у либералов как минимум половину медийного поля!

[We must take at least half of the media field from the liberals!] (in Russian). Nakanune.ru.

^ Laruelle 2019 , pp. 95–96.

^ a b " Ereticamente intervista Aleksandr Dugin, a cura di Eduardo Zarelli" [ Ereticamente interviews Aleksandr Dugin, edited by Eduardo Zarelli].

Ereticamente.net (in Italian). 31 March 2018 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "Did philosopher Alexander Dugin, aka "Putin's brain," shape the 2016 election?" . 5 May 2018.

^ "Elogio di Bernard-Henri Levy, il filosofo engagé dei nostri tempi oscuri" [Praise to Bernard-Henri Levy, the committed philosopher of our dark times].

Linkiesta (in Italian). 5 November 2019 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

A few weeks earlier, the confrontation with Aleksandr Dugin, Russian intellectual and theorist of the Euro-Asian empire.

... Sometimes he [Lévy] stands as a witness, sometimes he thinks as an activist. Sometimes, and in certain periods more and more, he stands as a bulwark. Against Zemmour and for the Kurds. Against Dugin and for democracy.

^ a b Shekhovtsov, Anton (2009).

"Aleksandr Dugin's Neo-Eurasianism: The New Right à la Russe" .

Religion Compass: Political Religions .

3 (4): 697– 716.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8171.2009.00158.x . Archived from the original on 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ a b Ingram, Alan (November 2001). "Alexander Dugin: geopolitics and neo-fascism in post-Soviet Russia".

Political Geography .

20 (8): 1029– 1051.

doi : 10.1016/S0962-6298(01)00043-9 .

^ Stephen Shenfield (2001).

Russian Fascism: Traditions, Tendencies, Movements .

M. E. Sharpe . p. 195.

^ Robert Horvath (21 August 2008).

"Beware the rise of Russia's new imperialism" .

The Age . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "Вопросы к интервью – В ГОСТЯХ:Александр Дугин" [Questions for the interview – GUEST: Alexander Dugin].

Echo of Moscow (in Russian). 8 August 2008 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ Shekhovtsov, Anton (2008).

"The Palingenetic Thrust of Russian Neo-Eurasianism: Ideas of Rebirth in Aleksandr Dugin's Worldview" .

Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions .

9 (4): 491– 506.

doi : 10.1080/14690760802436142 .

S2CID 144301027 . Archived from the original on 18 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ "Aleksander Dugin: Czekam na Iwana Groźnego" [Aleksander Dugin: I am waiting for Ivan the Terrible].

Fronda (in Polish). 23 February 2015. p. 133 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

In Russian Orthodox christianity a person is a part of the Church, part of the collective organism, just like a leg. So how can a person be responsible for himself? Can a leg be responsible for itself? Here is where the idea of state, total state originates from. Also because of this, Russians, since they are Orthodox, can be the true fascists, unlike artificial Italian fascists: of Gentile type or their Hegelians. The true Hegelianism is Ivan Peresvetov – the man who in 16th century invented the oprichnina for Ivan the Terrible . He was the true creator of Russian fascism. He created the idea that state is everything and an individual is nothing.

^ The Ordo Templi Orientis Phenomenon.

"Mega Therion and his books in the Russian tradition" .

Archived 24 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

Ordo Templi Orientis . Russia ^ Aleksandr G. Dugin, Hyperborean Theory: The Experience of Ariosophical Research ( Giperboreiskaia teoriia: Opit ariosofskogo issledovaniia ), Moscow 1993; Aleksandr G. Dugin, "Herman Wirth and the Sacred Proto-Language of Humanity: In Search of the Holy Grail of Meanings" (transl. Jafe Arnold), in: Dugin, Philosophy of Traditionalism ( Filosofiia Traditsionalizma ), Moscow 2002, p. 135–167; Aleksandr G. Dugin,  ' "Herman Wirth's Theory of Civilization" (transl. Jafe Arnold), in: Dugin, Noomakhia: Wars of the Mind , vol. 14: Geosophy – Horizons and Civilizations ( Noomakhia: voinii uma , vol. 14: Geosofiia: gorizonti i tsivilizatsii ), Moscow 2017, p. 153–157.

^ Jafe Arnold, Mysteries of Eurasia: The Esoteric Sources of Alexander Dugin and the Yuzhinsky Circle , Research Masters Thesis, Amsterdam 2019, p. 72–73. Cf. Marlene Laruelle, Russian Nationalism: Imaginaries, Doctrines, and Political Battlefields , Abington, Oxfordshire / New York 2019, p. 95–133 (A Textbook Case of Doctrinal Entrepreneurship: Aleksandr Dugin) (download here ). Ibidem, ' Alexander Dugin and Eurasianism ', in: Mark Sedgwick (ed.), Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to Liberal Democracy , Oxford 2019, p. 155–169, 157, 159. Jacob Christiansen Senholt, "Radical Politics and Political Esotericism: The Adaption of Esoteric Discourse within the Radical Right" , in: Egil Asprem, Kennet Granholm (red.), Contemporary Esotericism , Abbington, Oxfordshire / New York 2013, p. 244–264, 252–254. Jafe Arnold, "Alexander Dugin and Western Esotericism: The Challenge of the Language of Tradition" , in: Mondi: Movimenti Simbolici e Sociali dell'Uomo 2 (2019), p. 33–70.

^ Highly critical of Dugin's enthousiasm for Wirth: Leonid A. Mosionjnik, Technology of the Historical Myth ( Tekhnologiya istoricheskogo mifa ), Saint Petersburg 2012, p. 95–102 et passim ( here for download ).

^ Aleksandr G. Dugin, "Herman Wirth: In Search of the Holy Grail of Meanings" ( German Virt: v poiskakh Sviatogo Graalia smislov Archived 14 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine ) (1998), in: Ibidem, Philosophy of Traditionalism ( Filosofiia Traditsionalizma ), Moscow 2002, p. 135–167, 162. See also Dugin, ' Runology According to Herman Wirth ' (transl. Jafe Arnold), in: Absolute Homeland ( Absoliutnaia Rodina Archived 7 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine ), Moscow 1999, p. 489 (Ch. 9). Ibidem, ' Herman Wirth: Runes, Great Yule, and the Arctic Homeland ' (transl. Jafe Arnold), Foreword to the 2nd ed. of Hyperborean Theory : Signs of the Great Nord ( Znaki Velikogo Norda: Giperboreiskaia teoriia Archived 9 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine ), Moscow 2008, p. 3–20, 17.

^ a b Teitelbaum, Benjamin R. (21 April 2020).

War for Eternity: The Return of Traditionalism and the Rise of the Populist Right . Penguin Books Limited. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-14-199204-4 .

^ James D. Heiser (May 2014).

The American Empire Should Be Destroyed: Alexander Dugin and the Perils of Immanentized Eschatology . Repristination Press.

ISBN 978-1891469435 .

^ Megah Stack (4 September 2008).

"Russian nationalist advocates Eurasian alliance against the U.S." Los Angeles Times . California . Retrieved 26 August 2016 .

^ Radin, Andrew; Reach, Clint (2017).

"Russian Views of the International Order" .

rand.org . Retrieved 21 November 2017 .

^ Open Society Foundations.

"Eurasia Program" . Retrieved 21 November 2017 .

^ a b Gessen, Masha (2017).

The Future is History: How Totalitarianism Reclaimed Russia . Riverhead Books. pp.

388– 89.

^ a b Laruelle (2006) , p. 11.

^ Laruelle (2006) , pp. 11–14.

^ Marat Shterin (2016). " Attraktivität und Dilemma: Neue religiöse Bewegungen in Russland ".

RGOW , 2. Institut G2W – Ökumenisches Forum für Glauben, Religion und Gesellschaft in Ost und West. p. 9.

^ Laruelle (2006) , p. 15.

^ Aleksandr Dugin.

The Fourth Political Theory . Arktos, 2012. p. 210.

^ Huang, Yuxiang (May 2022).

"杜金從仇中到親中的轉變" [Durgin's transformation from China-hating to China-friendly].

Yazhou Zhoukan (in Traditional Chinese) . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Ip, Cyril (29 August 2022).

"How 'Putin's Rasputin' Alexander Dugin changed his mind about China" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 27 June 2023 .

^ a b "The Bizarre Russian Prophet Rumored to Have Putin's Ear" .

The Bulwark . 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2022 .

^ Lee, p. 314 ^ "Нацбол.ру – Нацбол должен знать – Декларация о создании НБП" . 21 September 2008. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008 . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ Lee, p. 320 ^ Lee, p. 321 ^ "ВОС" .

w-o-s.ru . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ Yasmann, Victor (29 April 2005).

"Russia: National Bolsheviks, The Party Of 'Direct Action' " .

Radio Free Europe Radio Liberty . Retrieved 15 November 2018 .

For this mobilization, the NBP used a bizarre mixture of totalitarian and fascist symbols, geopolitical dogma, leftist ideas, and national-patriotic demagoguery.

^ a b c d Shynkarenko, Oleg (4 February 2014).

"Alexander Dugin: The Crazy Ideologue of the New Russian Empire" .

The Daily Beast .

In Russian: Арсентий Тропаревский.

Дугин: Сумасшедший гений новой Российской империи .

The Internet Times (in Russian).

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Sazhneva, Ekaterina (30 March 2022).

"Александр Дугин: "солнечный" Путин победил "лунного" " .

Moskovskij Komsomolets . Archived from the original on 31 March 2022.

^ Кто похвалит его лучше всех [Who will praise him better than the rest].

Kommersant (in Russian). 2007 . Retrieved 24 March 2016 .

(Click the "Results" ("Результаты") button at the bottom of the page) ^ Donald N. Jensen (1 October 2014).

"Are the Kremlin Hardliners Winning?" . Institute of Modern Russia.

^ a b c Newman, Dina (10 July 2014).

"Russian nationalist thinker Dugin sees war with Ukraine" .

BBC News . London . Retrieved 22 March 2022 .

A prominent Russian ultra-nationalist philosopher has told BBC News that war between Russia and Ukraine 'is inevitable' and has called on President Vladimir Putin to intervene militarily in eastern Ukraine 'to save Russia's moral authority'.

In Russian: Дина Ньюман (10 July 2014).

Кто придумал аннексировать украинский Крым?

.

BBC Ukrainian (in Russian).

^ a b Александр Дугин (21 May 2014).

За Ахметова грудью встала российская шестая колонна (in Russian). Nakanune.ru.

^ a b c d Ben Hoyle (3 July 2014).

"Putin accused of betraying and abandoning Ukraine separatists" .

The Australian .

"Rebel leaders in Ukraine feel 'abandoned' by Putin" .

The Australian . 4 July 2014.

Paul Sonne (4 July 2014).

"Russian Nationalists Feel Let Down by Kremlin" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ a b "Russia This Week: Dugin Dismissed from Moscow State University? (23–29 June)" .

interpretermag.com . 27 June 2014 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ a b Jones, Sam; Hope, Kerin; Weaver, Courtney (28 January 2015).

"Alarm bells ring over Syriza's Russian links" .

Financial Times .

^ Halya Coynash (2 July 2014).

"Intrigue over 'dismissal' of Putin's ideologue, Alexander Dugin" .

Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group . Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ a b c Vincent Jauvert (3 May 2014).

"Le Raspoutine de Poutine" .

Le Nouvel Observateur (in French).

In Russian: Венсан Жовер (12 May 2014).

Дугин — путинский Распутин (in Russian).

inoSMI .

^ a b c Служба безопасности Украины установила лиц, которые надругались над государственной символикой Украины на горе Говерла [The Security Service of Ukraine identified persons who outraged Ukraine's state symbols on the mountain of Hoverla].

Високий Вал: Чернігівська загальнополітична газета (in Russian). 20 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ Marlène Laruelle (3 September 2008).

"Neo-Eurasianist Alexander Dugin on the Russia–Georgia conflict" . Central Asia-Caucasus Institute Analyst.

^ Andreas Umland (14 June 2007).

"Vitrenko's flirtation with Russian "Neo-Eurasianism" " .

Kyiv Post (op-ed). Kyiv, UA.

^ "Road to War in Georgia: The Chronicle of a Caucasian Tragedy" .

Der Spiegel . 25 August 2008.

^ Alexander Dugin (8 August 2008).

"Interview" (in Russian).

Echo of Moscow .

^ Ірина Біла (10 September 2008).

Можливість застосування Ющенком силового сценарію; махінації навколо землі. (Огляд преси) .

Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian).

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

^ a b c Татьяна Медведева (10–16 October 2014).

Александр Дугин: "Нужно бороться с "шестой колонной" .

Газета "Культура" (in Russian).

^ Руслан Горевой (30 July 2014).

На пороге войны .

Газета "Версия" (in Russian). No. 24.

^ Юрій Савицький (22 September 2014).

Путін є найбільшим радикалом Росії – ізраїльський експерт .

Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian).

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

^ Дмитрий Быков (15 July 2014).

Зачем ТВ, Александр Дугин и Галина Пышняк распяли мальчика (in Russian). Sobesednik.ru.

^ a b c Мария Епифанова (16 July 2014).

И это — не предел?

.

Novaya Gazeta (in Russian). No. 77.

^ a b Александр Дугин (2 October 2014).

Против Путина готовится заговор, мы наблюдаем либеральный ответ Русской весне (in Russian). Nakanune.ru.

^ Новости "Новороссии": для достижения победы Дугин рекомендует террористам диктатуру (in Russian). Joinfo.ua. 29 October 2014.

^ "To Understand Putin, You First Need to Get Inside Aleksandr Dugin's Head" .

Haaretz . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

^ Burbank, Jane (22 March 2022).

"The Grand Theory Driving Putin to War" .

The New York Times . New York City . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

After unsuccessful interventions in post-Soviet party politics, Mr. Dugin focused on developing his influence where it counted – with the military and policymakers ... In Mr. Dugin's adjustment of Eurasianism to present conditions, Russia had a new opponent – no longer just Europe, but the whole of the 'Atlantic' world led by the United States. And his Eurasianism was not anti-imperial but the opposite: Russia had always been an empire, Russian people were 'imperial people', and after the crippling 1990s sellout to the 'eternal enemy', Russia could revive in the next phase of global combat and become a 'world empire'.

^ "What we know about the father of Darya Dugina, who was killed in a suspected car bombing in Russia" .

ABC News . 22 August 2022.

^ Rutland, Peter (2016).

"Geopolitics and the Roots of Putin's Foreign Policy" .

Russian History .

43 ( 3– 4): 425– 436.

doi : 10.1163/18763316-04304009 .

ISSN 0094-288X .

JSTOR 26549593 .

^ Galeotti, Mark (21 August 2022).

"What the Dugin assassination tells us about Russia" .

The Spectator .

^ "Александра Дугина много раз называли "мозгом" Кремля. Как утверждают источники "Медузы", его влияние на Путина действительно выросло — но произошло это после убийства его дочери Дарьи Дугиной" [Alexander Dugin has been called the "brain" of the Kremlin many times. According to Meduza ' s sources, his influence on Putin did grow, but this happened after the murder of his daughter Daria Dugina].

Meduza (in Russian). 3 November 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ "Russia's retreat from Kherson divides Putin's allies" .

The Hill . 13 November 2022.

^ " 'Putin's brain' quotes chilling story about king being killed in threat at Russian despot after Kherson surrender" .

LBC . 12 November 2022.

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Before being introduced to Alexander Dugin in June 1990, the French writer Alain de Benoist had never really gone out of his way to meet Russians, and they had never really gone out of their way to meet him.

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Another radical Dugin courted was Jean-François Thiriart, an eccentric Belgian optician, who was a proponent of National Bolshevism and a European empire stretching from Vladivostok to Dublin ... Dugin also met Yves Lacoste, publisher of Hérodote, a journal devoted to geopolitics, who appears to have been an adviser to various French political figures.

^ Clover, Charles (26 April 2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

Dugin travelled extensively in Europe. He spoke at a colloquium organized by de Benoist, and appeared on Spanish TV and at various conferences. In 1992 he would ultimately invite his new cohort of European far-rightists to Moscow, where they met some of Dugin's new patrons, who – they were surprised to realize – included quite a few military men.

^ Teitelbaum, Benjamin R. (21 April 2020).

War for Eternity: The Return of Traditionalism and the Rise of the Populist Right . Penguin Books Limited. pp.

1– 2, 161.

ISBN 978-0-14-199204-4 .

^ Coalson, Robert (28 January 2015).

"New Greek Government Has Deep, Long-Standing Ties With Russian 'Fascist' Dugin" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

^ Shekhovtsov, Anton (28 January 2015).

"Aleksandr Dugin and Greece's SYRIZA Connection" .

The Interpreter Magazine .

^ Mehmet Ulusoy: "Rusya, Dugin ve‚ Türkiye'nin Avrasyacılık stratejisi" Aydınlık 5. Dezember 2004, S. 10–16 ^ Clover, Charles (2016).

Black Wind, White Snow . Yale University Press. p. 240.

^ a b Петр Акопов (20 February 2014).

Это великая война континентов .

Vzglyad (in Russian).

^ a b Политолог, философ Александр Дугин: Это великая война континентов .

Komsomolskaya Pravda (in Russian). 20 February 2014.

^ a b Александр Дугин (29 April 2014).

Шестая колонна .

Vzglyad (in Russian).

^ Александр Дугин (24 March 2014), Пятая колонна и либеральная идеология: аномалия вседозволенности [ The fifth column and liberal ideology: an anomaly of permissiveness ] (in Russian), Eurasiainform.md, archived from the original on 29 July 2014 , retrieved 4 October 2014 ^ Елена Янкелевич (18 August 2014).

Андрей Макаревич: "пятая колонна" или жертва травли?

(in Russian). Riafan.ru. Archived from the original on 1 October 2021 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ Максим Соколов (5 October 2007).

Путин абсолютен [Putin is absolute].

Izvestia (in Russian).

^ Григорий Пасько (2007).

Шизофрения, или Будьте здоровы!

[Schizophrenia, or To your health!].

Index on Censorship (in Russian) (27). Archived from the original on 13 February 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ Виктор Резунков (20 October 2014).

Попахивает фашизмом .

Радио Свобода (in Russian).

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

^ God is against Internet (Dugin's speech in Russian) on YouTube ^ a b Владислав Гольянов (13 June 2012).

Владимир Путин как спаситель от "сатанинского" Запада (in Russian). Baltinfo.ru.

^ a b Fitzpatrick, Catherine A (27 June 2014).

"Russia This Week: Dugin Dismissed from Moscow State University? (23–29 June). Entry at 2002GMT" .

The Interpreter . Retrieved 12 January 2015 .

^ "В России собирают подписи за увольнение профессора МГУ, призвавшего убивать украинцев" .

Ukrainian Independent Information Agency . 15 July 2014.

^ "Требуем увольнения профессора факультета социологии МГУ А. Г. Дугина!" [We demand the dismissal of Professor of the Faculty of Sociology of Moscow State University A. G. Dugin!].

Change.org . 2014.

^ Shymko, Lesia (5 September 2019).

"The weaponization of religion: How the Kremlin is using Christian fundamentalism to advance Moscow's agenda" . The Day (Kyiv).

^ Knott, Paul (21 September 2018).

"Meet the most dangerous man in the world" .

The New European . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Daughter of Russian philosopher Alexander Dugin killed in car explosion" . Anadolu Agency . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ a b Sands, Leo (21 August 2022).

"Darya Dugina: Daughter of Putin ally killed in Moscow bomb" . BBC . Retrieved 21 August 2022 .

^ "U.S. Department of the Treasury Ukraine-related Designations" . treasury.gov. 11 March 2015.

^ "Expanded Sanctions List" . pm.gc.ca. 29 June 2015. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015.

^ "Treasury Sanctions Russians Bankrolling Putin and Russia-Backed Influence Actors" .

U.S. Department of the Treasury . Retrieved 10 April 2022 .

^ Office of Foreign Assets Control . "Notice of OFAC Sanctions Actions" published 10 March 2022. 87 FR 13793 ^ "ウクライナ情勢に関する外国為替及び外国貿易法に基づく措置について" (PDF) .

Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (in Japanese) . Retrieved 7 February 2023 .

^ "Ukraine Latest: Russian Cease-Fire Moves Into Second Day" .

Bloomberg.com . 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 7 February 2023 .

^ Teitelbaum, Benjamin R. (2 January 2017).

Lions of the north : sounds of the new Nordic radical nationalism . New York, NY. p. 51.

ISBN 9780190212599 .

OCLC 953576248 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Heidi Beirich (21 November 2014).

"White Identity Worldwide" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

^ Schaeffer, Carol (28 May 2017).

"How Hungary Became a Haven for the Alt-Right" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

Works cited Clover, Charles (2016).

Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-22394-1 .

OCLC 944961411 .

Laruelle, Marlene (2006).

"Aleksandr Dugin: A Russian Version of the European Radical Right?" .

Occasional Paper #254 . Kennan Institute, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.

——— (July 2015).

Eurasianism and the European Far Right: Reshaping the Europe-Russia Relationship . Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-1-4985-1069-1 .

OCLC 1105524560 .

——— (2019). "A textbook case of doctrinal entrepreneurship: Aleksandr Dugin".

Russian Nationalism. Imaginaries, Doctrines, and Political Battlefields . London and New York: Routledge . pp.

95– 133.

ISBN 978-1-138-38652-5 .

OCLC 1042352311 .

Malić, Branko (7 May 2017).

"The Invisible Empire: Introduction to Alexander Dugin's "Foundations of Geopolitics", pt. 1" .

Kali Tribune .

——— (9 May 2015).

"Against The Gnostics: Anti-Traditional and Anti-Christian Core of Alexander Dugin's 4th Political Theory" .

Kali Tribune .

——— (23 January 2015).

"Idiot's Guide to Chaos: Some Passages from Dugin's "4th PT" Left Untranslated Into English" .

Kali Tribune .

Marinescu, Mihai (31 January 2017).

"A Serpent Oil Salesman: Alexander Dugin from Eastern Orthodox Perspective" .

Kali Tribune .

Millerman, Michael (18 September 2020).

Beginning with Heidegger: Strauss, Rorty, Derrida, Dugin and the Philosophical Constitution of the Political . London: Arktos Media Limited.

ISBN 9781912975792 .

OCLC 1198715113 .

Umland, Andreas. " Post-Soviet "Uncivil Society" and the Rise of Aleksandr Dugin: A Case Study of the Extraparliamentary Radical Right in Contemporary Russia ". PhD in Politics, University of Cambridge, 2007.

R. Teitelbaum, Benjamin (21 April 2020).

War for Eternity Inside Bannon's Far-Right Circle of Global Power Brokers . Dey Street Books.

ISBN 9780062978479 .

OCLC 1152156905 .

External links Aleksandr Dugin at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata The Fourth Political Theory Movement Eurasia Archived 23 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine PaideumaTV Geopolitika.ru Works at Eurasianist Archive Liverant, Yigal (Winter 2009), "The Prophet of the New Russian Empire" , Azure , archived from the original on 2 February 2020 Will the Russian bear roar again?

Archived 15 August 2022 at the Wayback Machine Russia's rise in conservative family values , Alexander Dugin featured prominently at 12:30.

v t e Russian far-right politics General topics Far-right politics in Russia Russian nationalism Russian imperialism Neo-Nazism in Russia National Bolshevism Ruscism Putinism Political parties Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Organizations Russian Imperial Movement Rusich Group Union of Orthodox Banner-Bearers Union of the Russian People Historical organizations Fascist Union of Youth Pamyat Russian National Unity Russian Fascist Organization Russian Fascist Party Russian Women's Fascist Movement Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Union of Fascist Little Ones People Severin Dobrovolsky Aleksandr Dugin Ivan Ilyin Eduard Limonov Lev Okhotin Vladimir Putin Konstantin Rodzaevsky Anastasy Vonsyatsky Vladimir Zhirinovsky Emigrant newspapers and magazines Nash Put' Fashist Works The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Russian Fascism: Traditions, Tendencies, Movements Related topics Russia under Vladimir Putin Eurasianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e War in Donbas (2014–2022) Part of the Russo-Ukrainian War Followed by the Russian invasion of Ukraine General topics Aircraft losses Humanitarian situation International reactions Sanctions Sanctioned people OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine Civil volunteer movement Little green men Joint Forces Operation Civil–military administrations Timeline 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Battles Donetsk Artemivsk Sloviansk Kramatorsk 1st Mariupol Sievierodonetsk Karlivka 1st Donetsk Airport Luhansk border base Krasnyi Lyman Shakhtarsk Raion 95th Brigade raid Horlivka Yasynuvata Ilovaisk Novoazovsk 2nd Mariupol 2nd Donetsk Airport Debaltseve Shyrokyne Marinka Svitlodarsk Avdiivka Airstrikes Military Ukrainian Air Force Il-76 shootdown 2014 Russian cross-border shelling of Ukraine Zelenopillia strike Civilian Shelling of Donetsk, Rostov Oblast MH17 shoot-down reactions Novosvitlivka convoy strike Volnovakha bus attack Mariupol rocket attack Kramatorsk rocket attack Kharkiv bombing Stanytsia Luhanska kindergarten bombing Reactions Ukrainian No to capitulation!

(Pro-) Russian Pro-Russian unrest Donbas referendums 2014 Donbas elections 2018 Donbas elections International UNSC Resolution 2166 NATO summit in Wales Minsk Protocol 2014 G20 Brisbane summit Minsk II agreement Self-proclaimed states Donetsk People's Republic (April 2014 – September 2022) Luhansk People's Republic (April 2014 – September 2022) Novorossiya (May 2014 – May 2015) International recognition of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic (Pro-) Russian Organizations Russian Armed Forces Wagner Group Separatist forces List of equipment Army of the South-East DPR Republican Guard Russian Orthodox Army Vostok Battalion Kalmius Brigade Odessa Brigade Sparta Battalion Somalia Battalion Prizrak Brigade Pyatnashka Brigade Tsar's Wolves Interbrigades Rusich Group Redut Union of Donbass Volunteers Political parties and movements Donetsk Republic New Russia Party Communist Party of DPR Peace to Luhanshchina Borotba Antifascist Committee of Ukraine Ukrainian Choice The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Eurasian Youth Union Night Wolves Don Cossacks Internet Research Agency Russian Imperial Movement Lead figures Russian Vladimir Putin Dmitry Medvedev Vladislav Surkov Sergei Shoigu Crimean Sergey Aksyonov Vladimir Konstantinov Natalia Poklonskaya Donetsk Vladimir Antyufeyev Eduard Basurin Fyodor Berezin Igor Bezler Alexander Borodai Mikhail Chumachenko Igor Girkin Pavel Gubarev Ekaterina Gubareva Igor Khakimzyanov Alexander Khodakovsky Vladimir Kononov Arsen Pavlov † Vyacheslav Ponomarev Andrei Purgin Denis Pushilin Mikhail Tolstykh † Alexander Zakharchenko † Sergei Zhurikov Luhansk Alexander Bednov † Valery Bolotov † Aleksey Karyakin Aleksandr Kharitonov Arsen Klinchaev Sergey Kozlov Aleksey Mozgovoy † Leonid Pasechnik Igor Plotnitsky Gennadiy Tsypkalov † Kharkiv Yevhen Zhylin † Others Aleksandr Dugin Nelya Shtepa Oleg Tsaryov Ukrainian Organizations Government of Ukraine 1st Yatsenyuk 2nd Yatsenyuk Groysman Ministry of Internal Affairs National Guard Azov Donbas Patrol Police Dnipro-1 Armed Forces of Ukraine Ukrainian Ground Forces Territorial defense battalions Aidar Dnipro-2 Kryvbas Rukh Oporu Ukrainian Air Force Ukrainian Air Assault Forces Security Service of Ukraine Alpha Group Euromaidan Press State Border Guard Service of Ukraine Volunteer battalions Right Sector Lead figures Petro Poroshenko Oleksandr Turchynov Arseniy Yatsenyuk Volodymyr Groysman Andriy Parubiy Arsen Avakov Vitali Klitschko Oleh Tyahnybok Yuriy Lutsenko Valentyn Nalyvaichenko Valeriy Heletey Stepan Poltorak Mykhailo Koval Mykhailo Kutsyn Oleh Makhnitskyi Viktor Muzhenko Vitaly Yarema Oleh Liashko Dmytro Yarosh Rinat Akhmetov Ihor Kolomoyskyi Serhiy Taruta Ihor Baluta Semen Semenchenko Hennadiy Moskal Nadiya Savchenko George Tuka Pavlo Zhebrivskyi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Google Scholar People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dmjjp
Cached time: 20250817044216
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.071 seconds
Real time usage: 2.357 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14670/1000000
Revision size: 116889/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 554683/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 27393/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 704411/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.331/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22552705/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1986.025      1 -total
 46.71%  927.640      2 Template:Reflist
 15.40%  305.947     68 Template:Cite_web
 12.82%  254.559      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.40%  226.457     47 Template:Cite_news
  8.48%  168.369     31 Template:Cite_book
  8.05%  159.826     17 Template:Cite_journal
  7.36%  146.103      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.31%  105.431      1 Template:Conservatism_in_Russia
  4.52%   89.683      1 Template:Nobold Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:929468:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044216 and revision id 1305946537. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aleksandr_Dugin&oldid=1305946537 " Categories : 1962 births 20th-century Russian journalists 20th-century Russian male writers 20th-century Russian philosophers 20th-century Russian politicians 21st-century Russian journalists 21st-century Russian male writers 21st-century Russian non-fiction writers 21st-century Russian philosophers 21st-century Russian politicians Anti-American sentiment in Russia Anti-Ukrainian sentiment in Russia Anti-Western sentiment Conservatism in Russia Defenders of the White House (1993) Eurasia Party politicians Eurasianists Geopoliticians Journalists from Moscow Living people National Bolshevik Party politicians National Bolsheviks Neo-Sovietism Neo-Stalinists Old Believers People deported from Ukraine People of the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation Politicians from Moscow Pro-Russian people of the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine Pro-Russian people of the war in Donbas Russian conspiracy theorists Russian far-right politicians Russian individuals subject to European Union sanctions Russian individuals subject to U.S. Department of the Treasury sanctions Russian magazine founders Russian male journalists Russian nationalists Russian activists Russian political party founders Russian political philosophers Russian political scientists Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons List Writers from Moscow Russian fascists Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Traditional Chinese-language sources (zh-hant) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with hCards Interlanguage link template existing link All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2023 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aleksandr Dugin 56 languages Add topic

