Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Categories and tactics Toggle Categories and tactics subsection 2.1 Discussing specific aspects of climate change science 2.1.1 Playing up the potential non-human causes 2.1.2 Playing up flawed studies 2.1.3 Disputing IPCC reports and processes 2.1.4 Creating doubts about scientific publishing processes 2.2 Being "lukewarm" or "skeptical" 2.3 Pushing for adaptation only 2.4 Delaying climate change mitigation measures 2.5 Promoting conspiracy theories 3 Psychology 4 Connections to other debates Toggle Connections to other debates subsection 4.1 Links with other environmental issues 4.2 Links with nationalism and right-wing groups 4.3 Conservative views 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 Similarities with tobacco industry tactics 5.2 Republican Party in the United States 6 Denial networks Toggle Denial networks subsection 6.1 Conservative and libertarian think tanks 6.2 Publishers, websites and networks 6.2.1 Publications for school children 7 Notable people who deny climate change Toggle Notable people who deny climate change subsection 7.1 Politicians 7.2 Scientists 8 Lobbying and related activities Toggle Lobbying and related activities subsection 8.1 Fossil fuel companies and other private sector actors 8.1.1 ExxonMobil 8.2 Attacks and threats towards scientists 8.3 Funding for deniers 9 Effects on public opinion Toggle Effects on public opinion subsection 9.1 United States 9.2 Europe 10 Responses to denialism Toggle Responses to denialism subsection 10.1 The role of emotions and persuasive argument 10.2 Following people who have changed their position 10.3 Effective approaches to dialogue 10.4 Approaches with farmers 10.5 Statements of well known people calling for climate action 10.6 Legal response 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Climate change denial 36 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Denial of the scientific consensus on climate change On the floor of the U.S. Senate , Republican Senator Jim Inhofe displayed a snowball—on 26 February 2015, in winter—as evidence the globe was not warming, [ 1 ] in a year that was found to be Earth's warmest on record at the time.

[ 2 ] The director of NASA 's Goddard Institute for Space Studies distinguished local weather in a single location in a single week from global climate change.

[ 3 ] Climate change denial (also global warming denial ) is a form of science denial characterized by rejecting, refusing to acknowledge, disputing, or fighting the scientific consensus on climate change which exists due to extensive and diverse empirical evidence. Those promoting denial commonly use rhetorical tactics to give the appearance of a scientific controversy where there is none.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Climate change denial includes unreasonable doubts about the extent to which climate change is caused by humans , its effects on nature and human society , and the potential of adaptation to global warming by human actions.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] : 170–173 To a lesser extent, climate change denial can also be implicit when people accept the science but fail to reconcile it with their belief or action .

[ 7 ] Several studies have analyzed these positions as forms of denialism , [ 9 ] : 691–698 pseudoscience , [ 10 ] or propaganda .

[ 11 ] : 351 Many issues that are settled in the scientific community, such as human responsibility for climate change, remain the subject of politically or economically motivated attempts to downplay, dismiss or deny them—an ideological phenomenon academics and scientists call climate change denial . Climate scientists, especially in the United States, have reported government and oil-industry pressure to censor or suppress their work and hide scientific data, with directives not to discuss the subject publicly. The fossil fuels lobby has been identified as overtly or covertly supporting efforts to undermine or discredit the scientific consensus on climate change.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Industrial, political and ideological interests organize activity to undermine public trust in climate science.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 9 ] : 691–698 Climate change denial has been associated with the fossil fuels lobby, the Koch brothers , industry advocates, ultraconservative think tanks , and ultraconservative alternative media , often in the U.S.

[ 11 ] : 351 [ 17 ] [ 9 ] More than 90% of papers that are skeptical of climate change originate from right-wing think tanks.

[ 18 ] Climate change denial is undermining efforts to act on or adapt to climate change , and exerts a powerful influence on the politics of climate change .

[ 16 ] [ 9 ] : 691–698 In the 1970s, oil companies published research that broadly concurred with the scientific community's view on climate change. Since then, for several decades, oil companies have been organizing a widespread and systematic climate change denial campaign to seed public disinformation, a strategy that has been compared to the tobacco industry 's organized denial of the hazards of tobacco smoking . Some of the campaigns are carried out by the same people who previously spread the tobacco industry's denialist propaganda.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Terminology Climate change denial refers to denial, dismissal, or doubt of the scientific consensus on the rate and extent of climate change , its significance, or its connection to human behavior, in whole or in part.

[ 16 ] [ 7 ] Climate denial is a form of science denial . It can also take pseudoscientific forms.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The terms climate skeptics or contrarians are nowadays used with the same meaning as climate change deniers even though deniers usually prefer not to, in order to sow confusion as to their intentions.

[ 24 ] The terminology is debated: most of those actively rejecting the scientific consensus use the terms skeptic and climate change skepticism , and only a few have expressed preference for being described as deniers.

[ 7 ] [ 25 ] : 2 But the word "skepticism" is incorrectly used, as scientific skepticism is an intrinsic part of scientific methodology.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In fact, all scientists adhere to scientific skepticism as part of the scientific process that demands continuing questioning. Both options are problematic, but climate change denial has become more widely used than skepticism .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 7 ] The term contrarian is more specific but less frequently used. In academic literature and journalism, the terms climate change denial and climate change deniers have well-established usage as descriptive terms without any pejorative connotation.

[ 7 ] The terminology evolved and emerged in the 1990s. By 1995 the word "skeptic" was being used specifically for the minority who publicized views contrary to the scientific consensus . This small group of scientists presented their views in public statements and the media rather than to the scientific community.

[ 30 ] : 9, 11 [ 31 ] : 69–70, 246 Journalist Ross Gelbspan said in 1995 that industry had engaged "a small band of skeptics" to confuse public opinion in a "persistent and well-funded campaign of denial".

[ 32 ] His 1997 book The Heat is On may have been the first to concentrate specifically on the topic.

[ 16 ] In it, Gelbspan discusses a "pervasive denial of global warming" in a "persistent campaign of denial and suppression" involving "undisclosed funding of these 'greenhouse skeptics'" with "the climate skeptics" confusing the public and influencing decision makers.

[ 31 ] : 3, 33–35, 173 In December 2014, an open letter from the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry called on the media to stop using the term skepticism when referring to climate change denial. It contrasted scientific skepticism—which is "foundational to the scientific method"—with denial—"the a priori rejection of ideas without objective consideration"—and the behavior of those involved in political attempts to undermine climate science. It said: "Not all individuals who call themselves climate change skeptics are deniers. But virtually all deniers have falsely branded themselves as skeptics. By perpetrating this misnomer, journalists have granted undeserved credibility to those who reject science and scientific inquiry." [ 33 ] [ 34 ] In 2015, The New York Times 's public editor said that the Times was increasingly using denier when "someone is challenging established science", but assessing this on an individual basis with no fixed policy, and would not use the term when someone was "kind of wishy-washy on the subject or in the middle". The executive director of the Society of Environmental Journalists said that while there was reasonable skepticism about specific issues, she felt that "denier" was "the most accurate term when someone claims there is no such thing as global warming, or agrees that it exists but denies that it has any cause we could understand or any impact that could be measured".

[ 35 ] A petition by climatetruth.org [ 36 ] asked signers to "Tell the Associated Press: Establish a rule in the AP Stylebook ruling out the use of 'skeptic' to describe those who deny scientific facts". In September 2015, the Associated Press announced "an addition to AP Stylebook entry on global warming" that advised "to describe those who don't accept climate science or dispute the world is warming from human-made forces, use 'climate change doubters' or 'those who reject mainstream climate science'. Avoid use of 'skeptics' or 'deniers'".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In May 2019, The Guardian also rejected use of the term "climate skeptic" in favor of "climate science denier".

[ 39 ] In addition to explicit denial , people have also shown implicit denial by accepting the scientific consensus but failing to "translate their acceptance into action".

[ 7 ] This type of denial is also called soft climate change denial .

[ 40 ] Categories and tactics Characteristics of science denial (including climate science denial) Climate misinformation falls within categories such as ● Global warming isn't happening. ● Humans aren't causing global warming. ● Climate impacts aren't bad. ● Climate solutions won't work. ● Climate science is unreliable.

[ 41 ] In 2004, German climate scientist Stefan Rahmstorf described how the media give the misleading impression that climate change is still disputed within the scientific community, attributing this impression to climate change skeptics' PR efforts. He identified different positions that climate skeptics argue, which he used as a taxonomy of climate change skepticism .

[ 42 ] Later the model was also applied to denial: [ 43 ] [ 16 ] [ 42 ] Trend skeptics or deniers (who claim that no significant warming is taking place) : " Given that the warming is now evident even to laypeople, the trend skeptics are a gradually vanishing breed. They [...] claim that the warming trend measured by weather stations is an artefact due to urbanisation around those stations ( urban heat island effect)." [ 42 ] Attribution skeptics or deniers (who accept the climate change trends but claim there are natural causes for this, not human-made ones): "A few of them even deny that the rise in the atmospheric carbon dioxide content is anthropogenic; they claim that the atmospheric carbon dioxide is released from the ocean by natural processes." [ 42 ] Impact skeptics or deniers (who think climate change is harmless or even beneficial, for example the "potential extension of agriculture into higher latitudes" [ 42 ] ).

Sometimes consensus denial is added, for people who question the existence of the scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change.

[ 43 ] The National Center for Science Education describes climate change denial as disputing differing points in the scientific consensus, a sequential range of arguments from denying the occurrence of climate change, accepting that but denying any significant human contribution, accepting these but denying scientific findings on how this would affect nature and human society, to accepting all these but denying that humans can mitigate or reduce the problems.

[ 6 ] James L. Powell provides a more extended list, [ 8 ] : 170–173 as does climatologist Michael E. Mann in "six stages of denial", a ladder model whereby deniers have over time conceded acceptance of points, while retreating to a position that still rejects the mainstream consensus: [ 44 ] CO 2 is not actually increasing.

Even if it is, the increase has no impact on the climate since there is no convincing evidence of warming.

Even if there is warming, it is due to natural causes.

Even if the warming cannot be explained by natural causes, the human impact is small, and the impact of continued greenhouse gas emissions will be minor.

Even if the current and future projected human effects on Earth's climate are not negligible, the changes are generally going to be good for us.

Whether or not the changes are going to be good for us, humans are very adept at adapting to changes; besides, it's too late to do anything about it, and/or a technological fix is bound to come along when we really need it.

[ 44 ] One deceptive approach is cherry picking data from short time periods to assert that global average temperatures are not rising.

Blue trendlines show short-term countertrends that mask longer-term warming trends that are shown by red trendlines .

[ 45 ] Such representations have been applied to the so-called global warming hiatus (blue rectangle with blue dots , upper right).

[ 46 ] Climate change denial is a form of denialism .

Chris and Mark Hoofnagle have defined denialism in this context as the use of rhetorical devices "to give the appearance of legitimate debate where there is none, an approach that has the ultimate goal of rejecting a proposition on which a scientific consensus exists." This process characteristically uses one or more of the following tactics: [ 4 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Allegations that scientific consensus involves conspiring to fake data or suppress the truth: a climate change conspiracy theory.

Fake experts, or individuals with views at odds with established knowledge, at the same time marginalizing or denigrating published topic experts. Like the manufactured doubt over smoking and health , a few contrarian scientists oppose the climate consensus, some of them the same people .

Selectivity, such as cherry-picking atypical or even obsolete papers, in the same way that the MMR vaccine controversy was based on one paper: examples include discredited ideas of the medieval warm period .

[ 48 ] Unworkable demands of research, claiming that any uncertainty invalidates the field or exaggerating uncertainty while rejecting probabilities and mathematical models.

Logical fallacies .

Discussing specific aspects of climate change science Further information: History of climate change science § Discredited theories and reconciled apparent discrepancies The Fourth National Climate Assessment ("NCA4", U.S., 2017) includes charts [ 49 ] illustrating how human factors—not various natural factors that have been investigated—are the predominant cause of observed global warming.

Campaigns by climate change deniers portray scientists as disagreeing about global warming, [ 50 ] but datasets from various scientific organizations show 1880– pairwise correlations of the four longer-term datasets are at least 99.29% .

Climate change denial opposes the results of academic studies of scientific agreement on human-caused climate change. The level of scientific consensus positively correlates with expertise in climate science.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Some politicians [ 55 ] and climate change denial groups say that because CO 2 is only a trace gas in the atmosphere (0.04%), it cannot cause climate change.

[ 56 ] But scientists have known for over a century that even this small proportion has a significant warming effect, and doubling the proportion leads to a large temperature increase.

[ 24 ] Some groups allege that water vapor is a more significant greenhouse gas, and is left out of many climate models.

[ 24 ] But while water vapor is a greenhouse gas, its very short atmospheric lifetime (about 10 days) compared to that of CO 2 (hundreds of years) means that CO 2 is the primary driver of increasing temperatures; water vapor acts as a feedback, not a forcing , mechanism.

[ 57 ] Climate denial groups may also argue that global warming has stopped, that a global warming hiatus is in effect, or that global temperatures are actually decreasing, leading to global cooling . These arguments are based on short-term fluctuations and ignore the long-term pattern.

[ 24 ] Some groups and prominent deniers such as William Happer argue that there is a greenhouse gas saturation effect that significantly decreases the warming potential of further gases released into the atmosphere. Such an effect does exist in some form, as Happer's research demonstrates, [ 58 ] but is likely negligible with respect to net global warming.

[ 59 ] Climate change denial literature often features the suggestion that we should wait for better technologies before addressing climate change, when they will be more affordable and effective.

[ 24 ] The belief that technological innovation rather than widespread social change will offer solutions is sometime called techno-optimism .

[ 60 ] Playing up the potential non-human causes Further information: History of climate change science § Solar variation Climate denial groups often point to natural variability, such as sunspots and cosmic rays, to explain the warming trend.

[ 24 ] According to these groups, there is natural variability that will abate over time, and human influence has little to do with it. But climate models already take these factors into account. The scientific consensus is that they cannot explain the observed warming trend.

[ 24 ] Playing up flawed studies In 2007, the Heartland Institute published an article titled "500 Scientists Whose Research Contradicts Man-Made Global Warming Scares" by Dennis T. Avery , a food policy analyst at the Hudson Institute .

[ 61 ] Avery's list was immediately called into question for misunderstanding and distorting the conclusions of many of the named studies and citing outdated, flawed studies that had long been abandoned. Many of the scientists on the list demanded their names be removed.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] At least 45 of them had no idea they were included as "co-authors" and disagreed with the article's conclusions.

[ 64 ] The Heartland Institute refused these requests, saying that the scientists "have no right—legally or ethically—to demand that their names be removed from a bibliography composed by researchers with whom they disagree".

[ 64 ] Disputing IPCC reports and processes Further information: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change § Challenges and controversies Deniers have generally attacked either the IPCC's processes, scientist or the synthesis and executive summaries; the full reports attract less attention.

In 1996, climate change denier Frederick Seitz criticized the 1995 IPCC Second Assessment Report , alleging corruption in the peer-review process. Scientists rejected his assertions; the presidents of the American Meteorological Society and University Corporation for Atmospheric Research described his claims as part of a "systematic effort by some individuals to undermine and discredit the scientific process".

[ 65 ] In 2005, the House of Lords Economics Committee wrote, "We have some concerns about the objectivity of the IPCC process, with some of its emissions scenarios and summary documentation apparently influenced by political considerations." It doubted the high emission scenarios and said that the IPCC had "played-down" what the committee called "some positive aspects of global warming".

[ 66 ] The main statements of the House of Lords Economics Committee were rejected in the response made by the United Kingdom government.

[ 67 ] On 10 December 2008, the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works minority members released a report under the leadership of the Senate's most vocal global warming denier, Jim Inhofe . It says it summarizes scientific dissent from the IPCC.

[ 68 ] Many of its statements about the numbers of people listed in the report, whether they are actually scientists, and whether they support the positions attributed to them, have been disputed.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Inhofe also said that "some parts of the IPCC process resembled a Soviet-style trial, in which the facts are predetermined, and ideological purity trumps technical and scientific rigor." [ 72 ] Creating doubts about scientific publishing processes For broader coverage of this topic, see Conflicts of interest in academic publishing .

Some climate change deniers promote conspiracy theories alleging that the scientific consensus is illusory, or that climatologists are acting out of their own financial interests by causing undue alarm about a changing climate.

[ 24 ] [ 73 ] Some climate change deniers claim that there is no scientific consensus on climate change, that any evidence for a scientific consensus is faked, [ 74 ] or that the peer-review process for climate science papers has become corrupted by scientists seeking to suppress dissent.

[ 74 ] No evidence of such conspiracies has been presented. In fact, much of the data used in climate science is publicly available, contradicting allegations that scientists are hiding data or stonewalling requests.

[ 24 ] Some climate change deniers assert that the scientific consensus on climate change is based on conspiracies to produce manipulated data or suppress dissent. It is one of a number of tactics used in climate change denial to attempt to manufacture political and public controversy disputing this consensus.

[ 4 ] These people typically allege that, through worldwide acts of professional and criminal misconduct, the science behind climate change has been invented or distorted for ideological or financial reasons.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] They promote harmful conspiracy theories alleging that scientists and institutions involved in global warming research are part of a global scientific conspiracy or engaged in a manipulative hoax.

[ 77 ] The Great Global Warming Swindle is a 2007 British polemical documentary film directed by Martin Durkin that denies the scientific consensus about the reality and causes of climate change, justifying this by suggesting that climatology is influenced by funding and political factors. The film strongly opposes the scientific consensus on climate change. It argues that the consensus on climate change is the product of "a multibillion-dollar worldwide industry: created by fanatically anti-industrial environmentalists; supported by scientists peddling scare stories to chase funding; and propped up by complicit politicians and the media".

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] The programme's publicity materials claim that man-made global warming is "a lie" and "the biggest scam of modern times." [ 79 ] The film received strong criticism from many scientists and others. Journalist George Monbiot called it "the same old conspiracy theory that we've been hearing from the denial industry for the past ten years".

[ 80 ] The climate deniers involved in the Climatic Research Unit email controversy ("Climategate") in 2009 claimed that researchers faked the data in their research publications and suppressed their critics in order to receive more funding (i.e. taxpayer money).

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Eight committees investigated these allegations and published reports, each finding no evidence of fraud or scientific misconduct.

[ 83 ] According to the Muir Russell report, the scientists' "rigor and honesty as scientists are not in doubt", the investigators "did not find any evidence of behavior that might undermine the conclusions of the IPCC assessments", but there had been "a consistent pattern of failing to display the proper degree of openness." [ 84 ] [ 85 ] The scientific consensus that climate change is occurring as a result of human activity remained unchanged at the end of the investigations.

[ 86 ] Being "lukewarm" or "skeptical" In 2012, Clive Hamilton published the essay "Climate change and the soothing message of luke-warmism".

[ 87 ] He defined luke-warmists as "those who appear to accept the body of climate science but interpret it in a way that is least threatening: emphasising uncertainties, playing down dangers, and advocating a slow and cautious response. They are politically conservative and anxious about the threat to the social structure posed by the implications of climate science. Their 'pragmatic' approach is therefore alluring to political leaders looking for a justification for policy minimalism." He cited Ted Nordhaus and Michael Shellenberger of the Breakthrough Institute , and also Roger A. Pielke Jr.

, Daniel Sarewitz , Steve Rayner , Mike Hulme and "the pre-eminent luke-warmist" Danish economist Bjørn Lomborg .

[ 87 ] Climate change skepticism, while in some cases professing to do research on climate change, has focused instead on influencing the opinion of the public, legislators and the media, in contrast to legitimate science.

[ 30 ] : 28 Pope Francis groups together four types of respondents rejecting climate change: those who "deny, conceal, gloss over or relativize the issue".

[ 88 ] Pushing for adaptation only For broader coverage of this topic, see Climate change adaptation .

The conservative National Center for Policy Analysis , whose "Environmental Task Force" contains a number of climate change deniers , including Sherwood Idso and S. Fred Singer, [ 89 ] has said, "The growing consensus on climate change policies is that adaptation will protect present and future generations from climate-sensitive risks far more than efforts to restrict CO 2 emissions." [ 90 ] The adaptation-only plan is also endorsed by oil companies like ExxonMobil. According to a Ceres report, "ExxonMobil's plan appears to be to stay the course and try to adjust when changes occur. The company's plan is one that involves adaptation, as opposed to leadership." [ 91 ] [ 92 ] The George W. Bush administration also voiced support for an adaptation-only policy in 2002. "In a stark shift for the Bush administration, the United States has sent a climate report [ U.S. Climate Action Report 2002 ] to the United Nations detailing specific and far-reaching effects it says global warming will inflict on the American environment. In the report, the administration also for the first time places most of the blame for recent global warming on human actions—mainly the burning of fossil fuels that send heat-trapping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere." The report "does not propose any major shift in the administration's policy on greenhouse gases. Instead it recommends adapting to inevitable changes instead of making rapid and drastic reductions in greenhouse gases to limit warming." [ 93 ] This position apparently precipitated a similar shift in emphasis at the COP 8 climate talks in New Delhi several months later; [ 94 ] "The shift satisfies the Bush administration, which has fought to avoid mandatory cuts in emissions for fear it would harm the economy. 'We're welcoming a focus on more of a balance on adaptation versus mitigation', said a senior American negotiator in New Delhi. 'You don't have enough money to do everything.

' " [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Some find this shift and attitude disingenuous and indicative of a bias against prevention (i.e. reducing emissions/consumption) and toward prolonging the oil industry's profits at the environment's expense. In an article addressing the supposed economic hazards of addressing climate change, writer and environmental activist George Monbiot wrote: "Now that the dismissal of climate change is no longer fashionable, the professional deniers are trying another means of stopping us from taking action. It would be cheaper, they say, to wait for the impacts of climate change and then adapt to them".

[ 97 ] Delaying climate change mitigation measures Further information: Economics of climate change mitigation and Economic analysis of climate change A 2022 study found that the public in many countries substantially underestimates the degree of scientific consensus that humans are causing climate change.

[ 98 ] Studies from 2019–2021 [ 99 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] found scientific consensus to range from 98.7–100%.

Research found that 80–90% of Americans underestimate the prevalence of support for major climate change mitigation policies and climate concern. While 66–80% Americans support these policies, Americans estimate the prevalence to be 37–43%. Researchers have called this misperception a false social reality, a form of pluralistic ignorance .

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Climate change deniers often debate whether action (such as the restrictions on the use of fossil fuels to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions) should be taken now or in the near future. They fear the economic ramifications of such restrictions. For example, in a 1998 speech, a staff member of the Cato Institute , a libertarian think tank , argued that emission controls' negative economic effects outweighed their environmental benefits.

[ 102 ] Climate change deniers tend to argue that even if global warming is caused solely by the burning of fossil fuels, restricting their use would damage the world economy more than the increases in global temperature.

[ 103 ] Conversely, the general consensus is that early action to reduce emissions would help avoid much greater economic costs later, and reduce the risk of catastrophic, irreversible change.

[ 104 ] Earlier, climate change deniers' online YouTube content focused on denying global warming, or saying such warming is not caused by humans burning fossil fuel.

[ 105 ] As such denials became untenable, content shifted to asserting that climate solutions are unworkable, that global warming is harmless or even beneficial, and that the environmental movement is unreliable.

[ 105 ] A 2016 article in Science made the case that opposition to climate policy was beginning to take a "rhetorical shift away from outright skepticism" and called this neoskepticism . Rather than denying the existence of global warming, neoskeptics instead "question the magnitude of the risks and assert that reducing them has more costs than benefits." According to the authors, the emergence of neoskepticism "heightens the need for science to inform decision making under uncertainty and to improve communication and education." [ 106 ] There is a range of possible mitigation policies. Disagreement over the sufficiency, viability, or desirability of a given policy is not necessarily neoskepticism. But neoskepticism is marked by failure to appreciate the increased risks associated with delayed action.

[ 107 ] Gavin Schmidt has called neoskepticism a form of confirmation bias and the tendency to always take "as gospel the lowest estimate of a plausible range".

[ 108 ] Neoskeptics err on the side of the least disruptive projections and least active policies and, as such, neglect or misapprehend the full spectrum of risks associated with global warming.

[ 108 ] In political terms, soft climate denial can stem from concerns about the economics and economic impacts of climate change , particularly the concern that strong measures to combat global warming or mitigate its impacts will seriously inhibit economic growth .

[ 109 ] : 10 Promoting conspiracy theories Further information: Psychology of climate change denial § Conspiratorial beliefs Climate change denial sign in Sudbury, Canada (2016) Climate change denial is commonly rooted in a phenomenon known as conspiracy theory , in which people misattribute events to a powerful group's secret plot or plan.

[ 110 ] People with certain cognitive tendencies are also more drawn than others to conspiracy theories about climate change. Conspiratorial beliefs are more predominantly found in narcissistic people and those who consistently look for meanings or patterns in their world, including believers in paranormal activity.

[ 111 ] Climate change conspiracy disbelief is also linked to lower levels of education and analytic thinking.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Scientists are investigating which factors associated with conspiracy belief can be influenced and changed. They have identified "uncertainty, feelings of powerlessness, political cynicism, magical thinking, and errors in logical and probabilistic reasoning".

[ 114 ] In 2012, researchers found that belief in other conspiracy theories was associated with being more likely to endorse climate change denial.

[ 115 ] Examples of science-related conspiracy theories that some people believe include that aliens exist, childhood vaccines are linked to autism , Bigfoot is real, the government "adds fluoride to drinking water for 'sinister' purposes ", and the moon landing was faked .

[ 116 ] Examples of alleged climate change conspiracies include: Aiming at New World Order : Senator James Inhofe , a Republican from Oklahoma , suggested in 2006 that supporters of the Kyoto Protocol such as Jacques Chirac are aiming at global governance.

[ 117 ] In his speech, Inhofe said: "So, I wonder: are the French going to be dictating U.S. policy?" [ 118 ] William M. Gray also claimed in 2006 that scientists support the scientific consensus on climate change because they were promoted by government leaders and environmentalists seeking world government .

[ 119 ] He added that its purpose was to exercise political influence, to try to introduce world government, and to control people.

[ 119 ] [ 114 ] To promote other types of energy sources: Some have claimed that the "threat of global warming is an attempt to promote nuclear power ".

[ 114 ] Another claim is that "because many people have invested in renewable energy companies, they stand to lose a lot of money if global warming is shown to be a myth. According to this theory, environmental groups therefore bribe climate scientists to doctor their data so that they are able to secure their financial investment in green energy." [ 114 ] Psychology See also: Effects of climate change on mental health and Climate psychology This section is an excerpt from Psychology of climate change denial .

[ edit ] The psychology of climate change denial is the study of why people deny climate change, despite the scientific consensus on climate change . A study assessed public perception and action on climate change on grounds of belief systems, and identified seven psychological barriers affecting behavior that otherwise would facilitate mitigation , adaptation , and environmental stewardship : cognition, ideological worldviews, comparisons to key people, costs and momentum, disbelief in experts and authorities, perceived risks of change, and inadequate behavioral changes.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Other factors include distance in time, space, and influence.

Reactions to climate change may include anxiety, depression, despair, dissonance, uncertainty, insecurity, and distress, with one psychologist suggesting that "despair about our changing climate may get in the way of fixing it." [ 122 ] The American Psychological Association has urged psychologists and other social scientists to work on psychological barriers to taking action on climate change.

[ 123 ] The immediacy of a growing number of extreme weather events are thought to motivate people to deal with climate change.

[ 124 ] A study published in PLOS One in 2024 found that even a single repetition of a claim was sufficient to increase the perceived truth of both climate science-aligned claims and climate change skeptic/denial claims—"highlighting the insidious effect of repetition".

[ 125 ] This effect was found even among climate science endorsers.

[ 125 ] Connections to other debates Links with other environmental issues Many of the climate change deniers have disagreed, in whole or part, with the scientific consensus regarding other issues, particularly those relating to environmental risks, such as ozone depletion , DDT , and passive smoking .

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] In the 1990s, the Marshall Institute began campaigning against increased regulations on environmental issues such as acid rain , ozone depletion , second-hand smoke, and the dangers of DDT .

[ 28 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] : 170 In each case their argument was that the science was too uncertain to justify any government intervention, a strategy it borrowed from earlier efforts to downplay the health effects of tobacco in the 1980s.

[ 15 ] [ 129 ] : 170 This campaign would continue for the next two decades.

[ 129 ] : 105 Links with nationalism and right-wing groups See also: Eco-fascism , Eco-nationalism § Ethnic Eco-nationalism vs. Civic Eco-nationalism , and Right-wing antiscience In 2023, an increase in climate change denial was noted, particularly among supporters of the far right .

[ 130 ] It has been suggested that climate change can conflict with a nationalistic view because it is "unsolvable" at the national level and requires collective action between nations or between local communities, and that therefore populist nationalism tends to reject the science of climate change.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] The UK Independence Party 's policy on climate change has been influenced by climate change denier Christopher Monckton and by its energy spokesman Roger Helmer , who has said, "It is not clear that the rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide is anthropogenic." [ 133 ] Jerry Taylor of the Niskanen Center posits that climate change denial is an important component of Trumpian historical consciousness, and "plays a significant role in the architecture of Trumpism as a developing philosophical system".

[ 134 ] Though climate change denial was apparently waning circa 2021, some right-wing nationalist organizations have adopted a theory of "environmental populism" advocating that natural resources be preserved for a nation's existing residents, to the exclusion of immigrants.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Other such right-wing organizations have contrived new "green wings" that falsely assert that refugees from poor nations cause environmental pollution and climate change and should therefore be excluded.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] A study published in PLOS Climate studied two forms of national identity —defensive or "national narcissism" and "secure national identification"—for their correlation to support for policies to mitigate climate change and transition to renewable energy .

[ 138 ] The authors defined national narcissism as "a belief that one's national group is exceptional and deserves external recognition underlain by unsatisfied psychological needs". They defined secure national identification as "reflect[ing] feelings of strong bonds and solidarity with one's ingroup members, and sense of satisfaction in group membership". The researchers concluded that secure national identification tends to support policies promoting renewable energy, while national narcissism is inversely correlated with support for such policies—except to the extent that such policies, as well as greenwashing , enhance the national image.

[ 138 ] Right-wing political orientation, which may indicate susceptibility to climate conspiracy beliefs, was also found to be negatively correlated with support for genuine climate mitigation policies.

[ 138 ] Conservative views Degrees of concern about the effects of climate change can vary with political affiliation. This is very evident in the US, were voters of the Democratic Party worry much more about climate change than voters of the Republican Party .

[ 139 ] The gap has been widening since the late 2010s [ 140 ] One worldview that often leads to climate change denial is belief in free enterprise capitalism .

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] The "freedom of the commons" ( tragedy of the commons ), or the freedom to use natural resources as a public good as it is practiced in free enterprise capitalism, destroys important ecosystems and their functions, and so having a stake in this worldview does not correlate with climate change mitigation behavior.

[ 141 ] [ 143 ] Political worldview plays an important role in environmental policy and action. Liberals tend to focus on environmental risks, while conservatives focus on the benefits of economic development.

[ 144 ] Because of this difference, conflicting opinions on the acceptance of climate change arise.

[ 144 ] A study of climate change denial indicators in public opinion data from ten Gallup surveys from 2001 to 2010 shows that conservative white men in the U.S. are significantly more likely to deny climate change than other Americans.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Conservative white men who report understanding climate change very well are even more likely to deny climate change.

[ 145 ] Another reason for the discrepancy in climate change denial between liberals and conservatives is that "contemporary environmental discourse is based largely on moral concerns related to harm and care, which are more deeply held by liberals than by conservatives"; if the discourse is instead framed using moral concerns related to purity that are more deeply held by conservatives, the discrepancy is resolved.

[ 147 ] In the U.S., climate change denial largely correlates with political affiliation .

[ 148 ] This is partially because Democrats focus more on tighter government regulations and taxation, which are the basis for most environmental policy.

[ 149 ] Political affiliation also affects how different people interpret the same facts.

[ 149 ] More highly educated people are less likely to rely on their own interpretation and political ideology rather than on scientists' opinions.

[ 149 ] Therefore, political worldviews override expert opinion on the interpretation of climate facts and evidence of anthropogenic climate change.

[ 149 ] [ 146 ] Affiliation with a political group, especially in the U.S., is an important personal and social identity for many.

[ 150 ] Because of this, many people hold the popular values of their political affiliation, regardless of their personal beliefs, so as not to be ostracized by the group.

[ 150 ] [ 146 ] History The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: History of climate change science and History of climate change policy and politics Typical storyline of deniers Since the late 1980s, this well-coordinated, well-funded campaign by contrarian scientists, free-market think tanks and industry has created a paralyzing fog of doubt around climate change. Through advertisements, op-eds, lobbying and media attention, greenhouse doubters (they hate being called deniers) argued first that the world is not warming; measurements indicating otherwise are flawed, they said. Then they claimed that any warming is natural, not caused by human activities. Now they contend that the looming warming will be minuscule and harmless.

— Sharon Begley , Newsweek , 2007 [ 151 ] U.S. fossil fuel companies have known about global warming since at least the 1960s.

[ 152 ] In 1966, a coal industry research organization, Bituminous Coal Research Inc., published its finding that if then prevailing trends of coal consumption continued, "the temperature of the earth's atmosphere will increase" and "vast changes in the climates of the earth will result. [...] Such changes in temperature will cause melting of the polar icecaps, which, in turn, would result in the inundation of many coastal cities, including New York and London." [ 153 ] In a discussion following this paper in the same publication, a combustion engineer for Peabody Coal, now Peabody Energy , the world's largest coal supplier, added that the coal industry was merely "buying time" before additional government air pollution regulations would be promulgated to clean the air. Nevertheless, the coal industry publicly advocated for decades thereafter the position that increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is beneficial for the planet.

[ 153 ] In response to increasing public awareness of the greenhouse effect in the 1970s, conservative reaction built up, denying environmental concerns that could lead to government regulation. In 1977, the first Secretary of Energy, James Schlesinger , suggested President Jimmy Carter take no action regarding a climate change memo, citing uncertainty.

[ 154 ] During the presidency of Ronald Reagan , global warming became a political issue, with immediate plans to cut spending on environmental research, particularly climate-related, and stop funding for CO 2 monitoring. Congressman Al Gore was aware of the developing science: he joined others in arranging congressional hearings from 1981 onward, with testimony from scientists including Revelle, Stephen Schneider , and Wallace Smith Broecker .

[ 155 ] An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) report in 1983 said global warming was "not a theoretical problem but a threat whose effects will be felt within a few years", with potentially "catastrophic" consequences.

[ 156 ] The Reagan administration called the report "alarmist" and the dispute was widely covered. Public attention turned to other issues, then the 1985 finding of a polar ozone hole brought a swift international response. To the public, this was related to climate change and the possibility of effective action, but news interest faded.

[ 157 ] Public attention was renewed amid summer droughts and heat waves when James Hansen testified to a Congressional hearing on 23 June 1988, [ 158 ] [ 159 ] saying with high confidence that long-term warming was underway with severe warming likely within the next 50 years, and warning of likely storms and floods. There was increasing media attention: the scientific community had reached a broad consensus that the climate was warming, human activity was very likely the primary cause, and there would be significant consequences if the trend was not curbed.

[ 160 ] These facts encouraged discussion about new environmental regulations, which the fossil fuel industry opposed.

[ 156 ] From 1989 onward, industry-funded organizations, including the Global Climate Coalition and the George C. Marshall Institute , sought to spread doubt, in a strategy already developed by the tobacco industry.

[ 15 ] [ 156 ] [ 129 ] A small group of scientists opposed to the consensus on global warming became politically involved, and with support from conservative political interests, began publishing in books and the press rather than in scientific journals.

[ 156 ] Historian Spencer Weart identifies this period as the point where skepticism about basic aspects of climate science was no longer justified, and those spreading mistrust about these issues became deniers.

[ 161 ] : 46 As the scientific community and new data increasingly refuted their arguments, deniers turned to political arguments, making personal attacks on scientists' reputations, and promoting ideas of global warming conspiracies .

[ 161 ] : 47 With the 1989 fall of communism , the attention of U.S. conservative think tanks , which had been organized in the 1970s as an intellectual counter-movement to socialism, turned from the "red scare" to the "green scare" tactic, which they saw as a threat to their aims of private property, free trade market economies, and global capitalism. They used environmental skepticism to promote denial of environmental problems such as loss of biodiversity and climate change.

[ 11 ] The campaign to spread doubt continued into the 1990s, including an advertising campaign funded by coal industry advocates intended to "reposition global warming as theory rather than fact".

[ 162 ] [ 15 ] There was also a 1998 proposal by the American Petroleum Institute to recruit scientists to convince politicians, the media, and the public that climate science was too uncertain to warrant environmental regulation.

[ 163 ] In 1998, journalists Ross Gelbspan noted that his fellow journalists accepted that global warming was occurring, but were in "'stage-two' denial of the climate crisis ", unable to accept the feasibility of solutions to the problem.

[ 31 ] : 3, 35, 46, 197 His book, Boiling Point , published in 2004, detailed the fossil-fuel industry's campaign to deny climate change and undermine public confidence in climate science.

[ 164 ] In Newsweek 's August 2007 cover story "The Truth About Denial", Sharon Begley reported that "the denial machine is running at full throttle", and that this "well-coordinated, well-funded campaign" by contrarian scientists, free-market think tanks, and industry had "created a paralyzing fog of doubt around climate change." [ 15 ] Similarities with tobacco industry tactics See also: Tobacco industry playbook In 2006, George Monbiot published an article about similarities between the methods of groups funded by Exxon and those of the tobacco giant Philip Morris , including direct attacks on peer-reviewed science and attempts to create public controversy and doubt.

[ 165 ] The approach to downplay climate change's significance was copied from tobacco lobbyists , who attempted to prevent or delay the introduction of regulation in the face of scientific evidence linking tobacco to lung cancer . They attempted to discredit the research by creating doubt, manipulating debate, discrediting the scientists involved, disputing their findings, and creating and maintaining an apparent controversy by promoting claims that contradicted scientific research. Doubt shielded the tobacco industry from litigation and regulation for decades.

[ 166 ] For example, in 1992 an EPA report linked secondhand smoke with lung cancer. In response, the tobacco industry engaged the APCO Worldwide public relations company, which set out a strategy of astroturfing campaigns to cast doubt on the science by linking smoking anxieties with other issues, including global warming, in order to turn public opinion against calls for government intervention. The campaign depicted public concerns as "unfounded fears" supposedly based only on "junk science" in contrast to their "sound science", and operated through front groups , primarily the Advancement of Sound Science Center (TASSC) and its Junk Science website, run by Steven Milloy . A tobacco company memo read, "Doubt is our product since it is the best means of competing with the 'body of fact' that exists in the mind of the general public. It is also the means of establishing a controversy." During the 1990s, the tobacco campaign died away, and TASSC began taking funding from oil companies, including Exxon. Its website became central in distributing "almost every kind of climate-change denial that has found its way into the popular press." [ 128 ] : 104–106 Monbiot wrote that TASSC "has done more damage to the campaign to halt [climate change] than any other body" by trying to manufacture the appearance of a grassroots movement against "unfounded fear" and "over-regulation".

[ 165 ] Republican Party in the United States Voters of the Democratic Party in the U.S. are more likely to (correctly) agree that global warming is due to human activity than voters of the Republican Party . This gap widened in the late 2010s.

[ 140 ] During the 2020 California wildfires It'll start getting cooler, you just watch. [...] I don't think science knows, actually.

— Then U.S. President Donald Trump, September 13, 2020.

[ 167 ] The Republican Party in the United States is unique in denying anthropogenic climate change among conservative political parties in the Western world.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] In 1994, according to a leaked memo, the Republican strategist Frank Luntz advised members of the Republican Party, with regard to climate change, that "you need to continue to make the lack of scientific certainty a primary issue" and "challenge the science" by "recruiting experts who are sympathetic to your view".

[ 15 ] (In 2006, Luntz said he still believes "back [in] '97, '98, the science was uncertain", but now agreed with the scientific consensus.) [ 170 ] From 2008 to 2017, the Republican Party went from "debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist".

[ 171 ] In 2011, "more than half of the Republicans in the House and three-quarters of Republican senators" said "that the threat of global warming, as a human-made and highly threatening phenomenon, is at best an exaggeration and at worst an utter 'hoax ' ".

[ 172 ] In 2014, more than 55% of congressional Republicans were reported to be climate change deniers.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] According to PolitiFact in May 2014, Jerry Brown 's statement that "virtually no Republican" in Washington accepts climate change science was "mostly true"; PolitiFact counted "eight out of 278, or about 3 percent" of Republican members of Congress who "accept the prevailing scientific conclusion that global warming is both real and man-made." [ 175 ] [ 176 ] In 2005, The New York Times reported that Philip Cooney , a former fossil fuel lobbyist and "climate team leader" at the American Petroleum Institute and President George W. Bush's chief of staff of the Council on Environmental Quality , had "repeatedly edited government climate reports in ways that play down links between such emissions and global warming, according to internal documents".

[ 177 ] Sharon Begley reported in Newsweek that Cooney "edited a 2002 report on climate science by sprinkling it with phrases such as 'lack of understanding' and 'considerable uncertainty'." Cooney reportedly removed an entire section on climate in one report, whereupon another lobbyist sent him a fax saying "You are doing a great job." [ 15 ] The sharp divide over the existence of and responsibility for global warming and climate change falls largely along party lines in the US ( Democrats and Republicans ).

[ 178 ] Overall, 60% of Americans surveyed in 2021 said oil and gas companies were "completely or mostly responsible" for climate change.

[ 178 ] In the 2016 U.S. election cycle, every Republican presidential candidate, and the Republican leader in the U.S. Senate , questioned or denied climate change, and opposed U.S. government steps to address it.

[ 179 ] In 2016, Aaron McCright argued that anti-environmentalism —and climate change denial specifically—had expanded in the U.S. to become "a central tenet of the current conservative and Republican identity".

[ 180 ] In a 2017 interview, United States Secretary of Energy Rick Perry acknowledged the existence of climate change and impact from humans, but said that he did not agree that carbon dioxide was its primary driver, pointing instead to "the ocean waters and this environment that we live in".

[ 181 ] The American Meteorological Society responded in a letter to Perry that it is "critically important that you understand that emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are the primary cause", pointing to conclusions of scientists worldwide.

[ 182 ] Climate denial has started to decrease among the Republican Party leadership toward acknowledgment that "the climate is changing"; a 2019 study by several major think tanks called the climate right "fragmented and underfunded".

[ 183 ] Florida Republican Tom Lee described people's emotional impact and reactions to climate change, saying: "I mean, you have to be the Grim Reaper of reality in a world that isn't real fond of the Grim Reaper. That's why I use the term 'emotionally shut down', because I think I think you lose people at hello a lot times in the Republican conversation over this." [ 184 ] When a moderator at the August 23, 2023, Republican presidential debate asked the candidates to raise their hands if they believed human behavior is causing climate change, none did.

[ 185 ] Entrepreneur Vivek Ramaswamy said, "the climate change agenda is a hoax" and that "more people are dying of climate change policies than they actually are of climate change"; none of his competitors challenged him directly on climate.

[ 185 ] After investigating Ramaswamy's latter claim, fact-checking websites found no supporting evidence.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Denial networks The archetypes of climate change deniers The Paid Lobbyist (the coal industry , among others, is fighting emission reductions), the Don Quixote (emotionally committed laypeople, frequently pensioners, but also including a few journalists – many of them literally fighting windmills), and the Eccentric Scientist (they are few and far between). All three groups act like lobbyists: from a thousand research results, they cherry-pick and present the three that happen to support their own position – albeit only with a liberal interpretation." — Stefan Rahmstorf , 2004 [ 42 ] Conservative and libertarian think tanks A 2000 article explored the connection between conservative think tanks and climate change denial.

[ 16 ] Research found that specific groups were marshaling skepticism against climate change; a 2008 University of Central Florida study found that 92% of "environmentally skeptical" literature published in the U.S. was partly or wholly affiliated with self-proclaimed conservative think tanks.

[ 11 ] In 2013, the Center for Media and Democracy reported that the State Policy Network (SPN), an umbrella group of 64 U.S. think tanks, had been lobbying on behalf of major corporations and conservative donors to oppose climate change regulation.

[ 188 ] Conservative and libertarian think tanks in the U.S., such as The Heritage Foundation , Marshall Institute, Cato Institute , and the American Enterprise Institute , were significant participants in lobbying attempts seeking to halt or eliminate environmental regulations.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Between 2002 and 2010, the combined annual income of 91 climate change counter-movement organizations—think tanks, advocacy groups and industry associations—was roughly $900 million.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] During the same period, billionaires secretively donated nearly $120 million (£77 million) via the Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund to more than 100 organizations seeking to undermine the public perception of the science on climate change.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Publishers, websites and networks In November 2021, a study by the Center for Countering Digital Hate identified "ten fringe publishers" that together were responsible for nearly 70 percent of Facebook user interactions with content that denied climate change. Facebook said the percentage was overstated and called the study misleading.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] The "toxic ten" publishers: Breitbart News , The Western Journal , Newsmax , Townhall , Media Research Center , The Washington Times , The Federalist , The Daily Wire , RT (TV network) , and The Patriot Post .

The Rebel Media and its director, Ezra Levant , have promoted climate change denial and oil sands extraction in Alberta .

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] Willard Anthony Watts is an American blogger who runs Watts Up With That?

, a climate change denial blog.

[ 201 ] A piece of research from 2015 identified 4,556 people with overlapping network ties to 164 organizations that were responsible for most efforts to downplay the threat of climate change in the U.S.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] Publications for school children According to documents leaked in February 2012, The Heartland Institute is developing a curriculum for use in schools that frames climate change as a scientific controversy.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ 206 ] In 2017, deputy director of the National Center for Science Education (NCSE) Glenn Branch wrote, "the Heartland Institute is continuing to inflict its climate change denial literature on science teachers across the country".

[ 207 ] Each significant claim was rated for accuracy by scientists who were experts on that topic. It was found that "the 'Key Findings' section are incorrect, misleading, based on flawed logic, or simply factually inaccurate".

[ 208 ] The NCSE has prepared Classroom Resources in response to Heartland and other anti-science threats.

[ 209 ] In 2023, Republican politician and Baptist minister Mike Huckabee published Kids Guide to the Truth About Climate Change , which acknowledges global warming but minimizes the influence of human emissions .

[ 210 ] Marketed as an alternative to mainstream education, the publication does not attribute authorship or cite scientific credentials.

[ 210 ] The NCSE's deputy director called the publication "propaganda" and "very unreliable as a guide to climate change for kids", saying it represented "present-day" atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide as 280 parts per million (ppm), which was true in 391 BC but short of 2023's actual concentration of 420 ppm.

[ 211 ] In 2023, the state of Florida approved a public school curriculum including videos produced by conservative advocacy group PragerU that liken climate change skeptics to those who fought Communism and Nazism, imply renewable energy harms the environment, and say current global warming occurs naturally.

[ 212 ] Texas, which has a large influence on school textbooks published nationwide, proposed textbooks in 2023 that included more information about the climate crisis than editions a decade earlier.

[ 213 ] But some books clouded the human causes of climate change and downplayed the role of fossil fuels, with Texas U.S. Representative August Pfluger emphasizing the importance of "secure, reliable energy" (oil and natural gas) produced in the Permian Basin .

[ 213 ] In September 2023, Pfluger's Congressional website said, "we cannot allow the radical climate lobby to infiltrate Texas middle schools and brainwash our children", claiming that liquefied natural gas is "not only...good for our economy, but it's good for the environment".

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] Notable people who deny climate change Politicians Donald Trump on sea level rise When they say that the seas will rise over the next 400 years — one-eighth of an inch, you know. Which means, basically you have a little more beachfront property, OK.

— Donald Trump, 2 June 2024 [ 215 ] (NOAA expected sea levels along U.S. coastlines to rise an average of 10 to 12 inches within three decades.

[ 215 ] ) Acknowledgment of climate change by politicians, while expressing uncertainty as to how much of it is due to human activity, has been described as a new form of climate denial, and "a reliable tool to manipulate public perception of climate change and stall political action".

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] In 2010, Donald Trump said, "With the coldest winter ever recorded, with snow setting record levels up and down the coast, the Nobel committee should take the Nobel Prize back from Al Gore ....Gore wants us to clean up our factories and plants in order to protect us from global warming, when China and other countries couldn't care less. It would make us totally noncompetitive in the manufacturing world, and China, Japan and India are laughing at America's stupidity." In 2012, Trump tweeted, "The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive." [ 218 ] [ 219 ] By the early 2020s, Trump's administration generally changed the framing of the issue from denial to dismissal : diminishing, ridiculing or rejecting the idea that climate change should be mitigated or even studied.

[ 220 ] On January 21, 2015, Jim Inhofe returned to chairing the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works as part of a new Republican majority in the Senate. In response to NOAA and NASA reports that 2014 had been the warmest year globally in the temperature record , he said, "we had the coldest in the western hemisphere in the same time frame", and attributed changes to a 30-year cycle, not human activity.

[ 221 ] In a debate the same day about a bill for the Keystone XL pipeline , Inhofe endorsed an amendment proposed by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse , "Climate change is real and not a hoax", which passed 98–1. Inhofe clarified his view, saying, "Climate is changing and climate has always changed and always will. There is archaeological evidence of that, there is biblical evidence of that, there is historical evidence of that", but added, "there are some people who are so arrogant to think they are so powerful they can change climate." [ 222 ] On February 26, 2015, Inhofe brought a snowball to the Senate floor and tossed it before delivering remarks in which he said that environmentalists keep talking about global warming even though it keeps getting cold.

[ 223 ] Tom Coburn on the 2015 Paris Agreement (a global effort to reduce carbon emissions), claiming it was 'poorly negotiated', in an interview with TheStreet .

In 2017, former U.S. Senator Tom Coburn discussed the Paris Agreement and denied the scientific consensus on human-caused global warming. He claimed that sea level rise had been no more than 5 mm in 25 years, and asserted there was now global cooling . In 2013, he said, "I am a global warming denier. I don't deny that." [ 224 ] Republican Jim Bridenstine , the first elected politician to serve as NASA administrator , had previously said that global temperatures were not rising. But a month after the Senate confirmed his NASA position in April 2018, he acknowledged that human emissions of greenhouse gases are raising global temperatures.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] During a May 2018 meeting of the United States House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology , Representative Mo Brooks claimed that sea level rise is caused not by melting glaciers but rather by coastal erosion and silt that flows from rivers into the ocean.

[ 227 ] In 2019, Ernesto Araújo , the minister of foreign affairs appointed by Brazil 's newly elected president Jair Bolsonaro , called global warming a plot by " cultural Marxists " [ 228 ] and eliminated the ministry's climate change division.

[ 229 ] Avatar of Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene @RepMTG We live on a spinning planet that rotates around a much bigger sun along with other planets and heavenly bodies rotating around the sun that all create gravitational pull on one another while our galaxy rotates and travels through the universe. Considering all of that, yes our climate will change, and it's totally normal! ... Don't fall for the scam, fossil fuels are natural and amazing.

Apr 15, 2023 [ 230 ] An April 15, 2023, tweet by Republican U.S. Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene said climate change was a "scam", that "fossil fuels are natural and amazing", and that "there are some very powerful people that are getting rich beyond their wildest dreams convincing many that carbon is the enemy".

[ 231 ] Her tweet included a chart that omitted carbon dioxide and methane [ 231 ] —the two most dominant greenhouse gas emissions.

[ 232 ] A 2024 analysis found 100 U.S. representatives and 23 U.S. senators—23% of the 535 members of Congress—to be climate change deniers, all the deniers being Republicans.

[ 233 ] Scientists American and New Zealand climate scientist Kevin Trenberth has published widely on climate change science and fought back against climate change misinformation for decades.

[ 234 ] He describes in his memoirs his "close encounters with deniers and skeptics"—with fellow meteorologists or climate change scientists. These included Richard Lindzen ("he is quite beguiling but is criticized as "intellectually dishonest" by his peers"; Lindzen was a professor of meteorology at MIT and has been called a contrarian in relation to climate change and other issues.

[ 235 ] ), Roy Spencer (who has "repeatedly made errors that always resulted in lower temperature trends than were really present"), John Christy ("his decisions on climate work and statements appear to be heavily colored by his religion"), Roger Pielke Jr , Christopher Landsea , Pat Michaels ("long associated with the Cato Institute , he changed his bombastic tune gradually over time as climate change became more evident").

[ 234 ] : 95 Sherwood B. Idso is a natural scientist and is the president of the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change , which rejects the scientific consensus on climate change. In 1982 he published his book Carbon Dioxide: Friend or Foe?

, which said increases in CO 2 would not warm the planet, but would fertilize crops and were "something to be encouraged and not suppressed".

William M. Gray was a climate scientist ( emeritus professor of atmospheric science at Colorado State University ) who supported climate change denial: he agreed that global warming was taking place, but argued that humans were responsible for only a tiny portion of it and it was largely part of the Earth's natural cycle.

[ 236 ] [ 119 ] [ 237 ] In 1998, Frederick Seitz , an American physicist and former National Academy of Sciences president, wrote the Oregon Petition , a controversial document in opposition to the Kyoto Protocol. The petition and accompanying "Research Review of Global Warming Evidence" claimed that "We are living in an increasingly lush environment of plants and animals as a result of the carbon dioxide increase. [...] This is a wonderful and unexpected gift from the Industrial Revolution".

[ 165 ] In their book Merchants of Doubt , the authors write that Seitz and a group of other scientists fought the scientific evidence and spread confusion on many of the most important issues of our time, like the harmfulness of tobacco smoke , acid rains , CFCs , pesticides , and global warming .

[ 129 ] : 25–29 Lobbying and related activities The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Percentage of documents taking each overall position on climate change as real and human-caused, 1977–2014.

[ 238 ] Blue= acknowledge ; blue with lines= acknowledge including reasonable doubt ; black= acknowledge and doubt ; gray= reasonable doubt ; red= doubt .

Efforts to lobby against environmental regulation have included campaigns to manufacture doubt about the science behind climate change and to obscure the scientific consensus and data.

[ 11 ] : 352 These have undermined public confidence in climate science.

[ 11 ] : 351 [ 9 ] As of 2015, the climate change denial industry is most powerful in the U.S.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] Efforts by climate change denial groups played a significant role in the United States' rejection of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997.

[ 16 ] Fossil fuel companies and other private sector actors The fossil fuel industry has been waging a decades-long, multi-billion-dollar disinformation campaign denying climate change and spreading doubt on climate science, aimed at blocking climate action and phasing out fossil fuels .

[ 241 ] Research conducted at an Exxon archival collection at the University of Texas and interviews with former Exxon employees indicate that the company's scientific opinion and its public posture toward climate change were contradictory.

[ 242 ] A systematic review of Exxon's climate modeling projections concluded that in private and academic circles since the late 1970s and early 1980s, ExxonMobil predicted global warming correctly and skillfully, correctly dismissed the possibility of a coming ice age in favor of a "carbon dioxide induced super-interglacial", and reasonably estimated how much CO 2 would lead to dangerous warming.

[ 243 ] Between 1989 and 2002, the Global Climate Coalition , a group of mainly U.S. businesses, used aggressive lobbying and public relations tactics to oppose action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and fight the Kyoto Protocol . Large corporations and trade groups from the oil, coal and auto industries financed the coalition.

The New York Times reported, "even as the coalition worked to sway opinion [toward skepticism], its own scientific and technical experts were advising that the science backing the role of greenhouse gases in global warming could not be refuted".

[ 244 ] In 2000, the Ford Motor Company was the first company to leave the coalition as a result of pressure from environmentalists.

[ 245 ] Daimler-Chrysler, Texaco, the Southern Company and General Motors subsequently left the GCC.

[ 246 ] It closed in 2002.

From January 2009 through June 2010, the oil, coal and utility industries spent $500 million in lobby expenditures in opposition to legislation to address climate change.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] A study in 2022 traced the history of an influential group of economic consultants hired by the petroleum industry from the 1990s to the 2010s to estimate the costs of various proposed climate policies. The economists used models that inflated predicted costs while ignoring policy benefits, and their results were often portrayed to the public as independent rather than industry-sponsored. Their work played a key role in undermining numerous major climate policy initiatives in the US over a span of decades. This study illustrates how the fossil fuel industry has funded biased economic analyses to oppose climate policy.

[ 249 ] ExxonMobil This section is an excerpt from ExxonMobil climate change denial .

[ edit ] A protestor demonstrating as part of the "Exxon knew" movement in Washington, DC in 2015 From the 1980s to mid 2000s, ExxonMobil was a leader in climate change denial, opposing regulations to curtail global warming. For example, ExxonMobil was a significant influence in preventing ratification of the Kyoto Protocol by the United States.

[ 250 ] ExxonMobil funded organizations critical of the Kyoto Protocol and seeking to undermine public opinion about the scientific consensus that global warming is caused by the burning of fossil fuels . Of the major oil corporations , ExxonMobil has been the most active in the debate surrounding climate change.

[ 250 ] According to a 2007 analysis by the Union of Concerned Scientists , the company used many of the same strategies , tactics, organizations, and personnel the tobacco industry used in its denials of the link between lung cancer and smoking .

[ 251 ] ExxonMobil has funded, among other groups, the Competitive Enterprise Institute , George C. Marshall Institute , Heartland Institute , the American Legislative Exchange Council and the International Policy Network .

[ 252 ] : 67 [ 253 ] [ 254 ] Between 1998 and 2004, ExxonMobil granted $16 million to advocacy organizations which disputed the impact of global warming.

[ 255 ] From 1989 until April 2010, ExxonMobil and its predecessor Mobil purchased regular Thursday advertorials in The New York Times , The Washington Post , and The Wall Street Journal claiming that the science of climate change was unsettled.

[ 256 ] An analysis conducted by The Carbon Brief in 2011 found that 9 out of 10 of the most prolific authors who cast doubt on climate change or speak against it had ties to ExxonMobil . Greenpeace have said that Koch industries invested more than US$50 million in the past 50 years on spreading doubts about climate change.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] [ 259 ] Attacks and threats towards scientists Climate change deniers attacked the work of climate scientist Michael E. Mann for years. On 8 February 2024, Mann won a $1 million judgment for punitive damages in a defamation lawsuit filed in 2012 against bloggers who attacked his hockey stick graph of the Northern Hemisphere temperature rise. One of the bloggers had called Mann's work "fraudulent", contrary to numerous investigations that had already cleared Mann of any misconduct and supported the validity of his research.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] After Elon Musk 's 2022 takeover of Twitter (now X), key figures at the company who ensured trusted content was prioritized were removed, and climate scientists received a large increase in hostile, threatening, harassing, and personally abusive tweets from deniers.

[ 262 ] In 2023, increases in climate change denial were reported, particularly on the far right .

[ 130 ] Climate change deniers threatened meteorologists , accusing them of causing a drought, falsifying thermometer readings, and cherry-picking warmer weather stations to misrepresent global warming.

[ 130 ] Also in 2023, CNN reported that meteorologists and climate communicators worldwide were receiving increased harassment and false accusations that they were lying about or controlling the weather, inflating temperature records to make climate change seem worse, and changing color palettes of weather maps to make them look more dramatic.

[ 263 ] The German television news service Tagesschau called this a global phenomenon.

[ 264 ] Funding for deniers Journalists reported in 2015 that oil companies had known since the 1970s that burning oil and gas could cause climate change but nonetheless funded deniers for years.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Several large fossil fuel corporations provide significant funding for attempts to mislead the public about climate science's trustworthiness.

[ 265 ] ExxonMobil and the Koch family foundations have been identified as especially influential funders of climate change contrarianism.

[ 266 ] The bankruptcy of the coal company Cloud Peak Energy revealed it funded the Institute for Energy Research , a climate denial think tank, as well as several other policy influencers.

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] After the IPCC released its Fourth Assessment Report in 2007, the American Enterprise Institute (AEI) offered British, American, and other scientists $10,000 plus travel expenses to publish articles critical of the assessment. The institute had received more than $1.6 million from Exxon, and its vice-chairman of trustees was former Exxon head Lee Raymond . Raymond sent letters that alleged the IPCC report was not "supported by the analytical work". More than 20 AEI employees worked as consultants to the George W. Bush administration .

[ 269 ] The authors of the 2010 book Merchants of Doubt provide documentation for the assertion that professional deniers have tried to sow seeds of doubt in public opinion in order to halt any meaningful social or political action to reduce the impact of human carbon emissions. That only half of the American population believes global warming is caused by human activity could be seen as a victory for these deniers.

[ 129 ] One of the authors' main arguments is that most prominent scientists who have opposed the near-universal consensus are funded by industries, such as automotive and oil, that stand to lose money by government actions to regulate greenhouse gases.

[ 129 ] The Global Climate Coalition was an industry coalition that funded several scientists who expressed skepticism about global warming. In 2000, several members left the coalition when they became the target of a national divestiture campaign run by John Passacantando and Phil Radford at Ozone Action. When Ford Motor Company left the coalition, it was regarded as "the latest sign of divisions within heavy industry over how to respond to global warming".

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] After that, between December 1999 and early March 2000, the GCC was deserted by Daimler-Chrysler , Texaco , energy firm the Southern Company and General Motors.

[ 272 ] The Global Climate Coalition closed in 2002.

[ 273 ] In early 2015, several media reports emerged saying that Willie Soon , a popular scientist among climate change deniers, had failed to disclose conflicts of interest in at least 11 scientific papers published since 2008.

[ 274 ] They reported that he received a total of $1.25 million from ExxonMobil, Southern Company, the American Petroleum Institute, and a foundation run by the Koch brothers.

[ 275 ] Documents obtained by Greenpeace under the Freedom of Information Act show that the Charles G. Koch Foundation gave Soon two grants totaling $175,000 in 2005/6 and again in 2010. Grants to Soon between 2001 and 2007 from the American Petroleum Institute totaled $274,000, and between 2005 and 2010 from ExxonMobil totaled $335,000. The Mobil Foundation, the Texaco Foundation, and the Electric Power Research Institute also funded Soon. Acknowledging that he received this money, Soon said that he had "never been motivated by financial reward in any of my scientific research".

[ 13 ] In 2015, Greenpeace disclosed papers documenting that Soon failed to disclose to academic journals funding including more than $1.2 million from fossil fuel industry-related interests, including ExxonMobil, the American Petroleum Institute, the Charles G. Koch Charitable Foundation , and the Southern Company.

[ 276 ] [ 277 ] [ 278 ] Science editor-in-chief Donald Kennedy has said that deniers such as Michaels are lobbyists more than researchers, and "I don't think it's unethical any more than most lobbying is unethical". He said donations to deniers amount to "trying to get a political message across".

[ 279 ] Robert Brulle analyzed the funding of 91 organizations opposed to restrictions on carbon emissions, which he called the "climate change counter-movement". Between 2003 and 2013, the donor-advised funds Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund , combined, were the largest funders, accounting for about a quarter of the funds, and the American Enterprise Institute was the largest recipient, with 16% of the total funds. The study also found that the amount of money donated to these organizations by means of foundations whose funding sources cannot be traced had risen.

[ 280 ] [ 281 ] [ 282 ] Effects on public opinion See also: Public opinion on climate change and Media coverage of climate change False balance in climate science: Representation of climate change skeptics among climate scientists (97% believing climate change to be real, 3% denying), and American Fox News channel guests (31% real, 69% denying). Based on IPCC report coverage between August 1, 2013, and October 1, 2013.

[ 283 ] Public opinion on climate change is significantly affected by media coverage of climate change and the effects of climate change denial campaigns. Campaigns to undermine public confidence in climate science have decreased public belief in climate change, which in turn has affected legislative efforts to curb CO 2 emissions.

[ 9 ] Climate change conspiracy theories and denial have resulted in poor action or no action at all to effectively mitigate the damage done by global warming . 40% of Americans believed ( ca.

2017) that climate change is a hoax [ 284 ] even though 100% of climate scientists (as of 2019) believe it is real.

[ 52 ] A study in 2015 stated: "Exposure to conspiracy theories reduced people's intentions to reduce their carbon footprint, relative to people who were given refuting information." [ 114 ] Manufactured uncertainty over climate change, the fundamental strategy of climate change denial, has been very effective, particularly in the U.S. It has contributed to low levels of public concern and to government inaction worldwide.

[ 16 ] [ 285 ] : 255 A 2010 Angus Reid poll found that global warming skepticism in the U.S., Canada, and the United Kingdom has been rising.

[ 286 ] [ 287 ] There may be multiple causes of this trend, including a focus on economic rather than environmental issues, and a negative perception of the United Nations and its role in discussing climate change.

[ 288 ] According to Tim Wirth , "They patterned what they did after the tobacco industry. ... Both figured, sow enough doubt, call the science uncertain and in dispute. That's had a huge impact on both the public and Congress." [ 15 ] American media has propagated this approach, presenting a false balance between climate science and climate skeptics.

[ 265 ] In 2006 Newsweek reported that most Europeans and Japanese accepted the consensus on scientific climate change, but only one third of Americans thought human activity plays a major role in climate change; 64% believed that scientists disagreed about it "a lot".

[ 15 ] Deliberate attempts by the Western Fuels Association "to confuse the public" have succeeded. This has been "exacerbated by media treatment of the climate issue". According to a 2012 Pew poll, 57% of Americans are unaware of, or outright reject, the scientific consensus on climate change.

[ 50 ] Some organizations promoting climate change denial have asserted that scientists are increasingly rejecting climate change, but this is contradicted by research showing that 97% of published papers endorse the scientific consensus, and that percentage is increasing with time.

[ 50 ] On the other hand, global oil companies have begun to acknowledge the existence of climate change and its risks.

[ 289 ] Still, top oil firms are spending millions lobbying to delay, weaken, or block policies to tackle climate change.

[ 290 ] Manufactured climate change denial is also influencing how scientific knowledge is communicated to the public. According to climate scientist Michael E. Mann , "universities and scientific societies and organizations, publishers, etc.—are too often risk averse when it comes to defending and communicating science that is perceived as threatening by powerful interests".

[ 291 ] [ 292 ] United States Further information: Climate change policy of the United States Results of a survey in 31 countries of public opinion, specifically among Facebook users, on the causes of climate change [ 293 ] Results of a survey overseen by the United Nations Development Programme on belief in whether climate change presents a climate emergency [ 294 ] Opinion about human causation of climate change increased substantially with education among voters of the Democratic Party in the U.S., but not among voters of the Republican Party.

[ 295 ] Conversely, opinions favoring becoming carbon neutral declined substantially with age among Republicans, but not among Democrats.

[ 295 ] National political divides on the seriousness of climate change consistently correlate with political ideology, with right-wing opinion being more negative (survey of 19 countries).

[ 296 ] A study found that public climate change policy support and behavior are significantly influenced by public beliefs, attitudes and risk perceptions.

[ 297 ] As of March 2018 the rate of acceptance among U.S. TV forecasters that the climate is changing has increased to 95 percent. The number of local TV stories about global warming has also increased, by a factor of 15.

Climate Central has received some credit for this, because it provides classes for meteorologists and graphics for TV stations.

[ 298 ] Popular media in the U.S. gives greater attention [ needs update ] to climate change skeptics than the scientific community as a whole, and the level of agreement within the scientific community has not been accurately communicated.

[ 299 ] [ 265 ] [ 16 ] In some cases, news outlets have let climate change skeptics instead of experts in climatology explain the science of climate change.

[ 265 ] US and UK media coverage differ from that in other countries, where reporting is more consistent with the scientific literature.

[ 300 ] [ 16 ] Some journalists attribute the difference to climate change denial being propagated, mainly in the U.S., by business-centered organizations employing tactics worked out previously by the U.S. tobacco lobby.

[ 15 ] [ 301 ] [ 302 ] Denial of climate change is most prevalent among white, politically conservative men in the U.S.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] In France , the U.S., and the U.K., climate change skeptics' opinions appear much more frequently in conservative news outlets than others, and in many cases those opinions are left uncontested.

[ 16 ] In 2018, the National Science Teachers Association urged teachers to "emphasize to students that no scientific controversy exists regarding the basic facts of climate change".

[ 305 ] Europe At least 72% of Chinese, American and European respondents to a 2020−2021 European Investment Bank climate survey stated that climate change had an impact on everyday life.

Climate change denial has been promoted by several far-right European parties, including Spain's Vox , Finland's far-right Finns Party , Austria's far-right Freedom Party , and Germany's anti-immigration Alternative for Deutschland (AfD).

[ 306 ] Russia also spreads climate disinformation with the aim of blaming the Western Bloc .

[ 307 ] [ 308 ] In April 2023, French political scientist Jean-Yves Dormagen said that the modest and conservative classes were the most skeptical about climate change.

[ 309 ] In a study by the Jean-Jaurès Foundation published the same month, climate skepticism was compared to a new populism whose representative and spokesman is Steven E. Koonin .

[ 310 ] [ 311 ] Responses to denialism This article contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( November 2024 ) The role of emotions and persuasive argument Temperature data: Global average temperature datasets from various scientific organizations show substantial agreement concerning the progress and extent of global warming: pairwise correlations of 1850+/1880+ datasets exceed 99.1% .

Causation: The Fourth National Climate Assessment ("NCA4", USGCRP, 2017) includes charts [ 312 ] illustrating how human factors, especially accumulation in the atmosphere of greenhouse gases, are the predominant cause of observed global warming.

Presenting data and other facts is less effective in motivating people to act to mitigate climate change, than financial incentives and social pressure involved in showing people climate-related actions of other people.

[ 313 ] The strongest factors in self-reported changes in opinion about global warming in the United States were Republican party identification, seeing others experience impacts of global warming, and learning more about global warming.

[ 314 ] Climate denial "is not simply overcome by reasoned argument", because it is not a rational response. Attempting to overcome denial using techniques of persuasive argument, such as supplying a missing piece of information, or providing general scientific education may be ineffective. A person who is in denial about climate is most likely taking a position based on their feelings, especially their feelings about things they fear.

[ 315 ] Academics have stated that "It is pretty clear that fear of the solutions drives much opposition to the science." [ 316 ] It can be useful to respond to emotions, including with the statement "It can be painful to realise that our own lifestyles are responsible", in order to help move "from denial to acceptance to constructive action." [ 315 ] [ 317 ] [ 318 ] Following people who have changed their position Some climate change skeptics have changed their positions regarding global warming.

Ronald Bailey , author of Global Warming and Other Eco-Myths (published in 2002), stated in 2005, "Anyone still holding onto the idea that there is no global warming ought to hang it up." [ 319 ] By 2007, he wrote "Details like sea level rise will continue to be debated by researchers, but if the debate over whether or not humanity is contributing to global warming wasn't over before, it is now.... as the new IPCC Summary makes clear, climate change Pollyannaism is no longer looking very tenable." [ 320 ] Jerry Taylor promoted climate denialism for 20 years as former staff director for the energy and environment task force at the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) and former vice president of the Cato Institute . Taylor began to change his mind after climate scientist James Hansen challenged him to reread some Senate testimony. He became President of the Niskanen Center in 2014, where he is involved in turning climate skeptics into climate activists, and making the business case for climate action.

[ 321 ] [ 322 ] [ 323 ] Michael Shermer , the publisher of Skeptic magazine, reached a tipping point in 2006 as a result of his increasing familiarity with scientific evidence, and decided there was "overwhelming evidence for anthropogenic global warming". Journalist Gregg Easterbrook , an early skeptic of climate change who authored the influential book A Moment on the Earth , also changed his mind in 2006, and wrote an essay titled "Case Closed: The Debate About Global Warming is Over".

[ 324 ] In 2006, he stated, "based on the data I'm now switching sides regarding global warming, from skeptic to convert." [ 325 ] In 2009, Russian president Dmitri Medvedev expressed his opinion that climate change was "some kind of tricky campaign made up by some commercial structures to promote their business projects". After the devastating 2010 Russian wildfires damaged agriculture and left Moscow choking in smoke, Medvedev commented, "Unfortunately, what is happening now in our central regions is evidence of this global climate change." [ 324 ] Bob Inglis , a former US representative for South Carolina, changed his mind in around 2010 after appeals from his son on his environmental positions, and after spending time with climate scientist Scott Heron studying coral bleaching in the Great Barrier Reef .

[ 326 ] Richard A. Muller , professor of physics at the University of California, Berkeley , and the co-founder of the Berkeley Earth Surface Temperature project, funded by Charles Koch Charitable Foundation , had been a prominent critic of prevailing climate science. In 2011, he stated that "following an intensive research effort involving a dozen scientists, I concluded that global warming was real and that the prior estimates of the rate of warming were correct. I'm now going a step further: Humans are almost entirely the cause." [ 327 ] "I used to be a climate-change skeptic", conservative columnist Max Boot admitted in 2018, one who believed that "the science was inconclusive" and that worry was "overblown". Now, he says, referencing the Fourth National Climate Assessment , "the scientific consensus is so clear and convincing." [ 328 ] Effective approaches to dialogue Explaining the techniques of science denial and misinformation, by presenting "examples of people using cherrypicking or fake experts or false balance to mislead the public", has been shown to inoculate people somewhat against misinformation.

[ 329 ] [ 330 ] [ 331 ] Dialogue focused on the question of how belief differs from scientific theory may provide useful insights into how the scientific method works, and how beliefs may have strong or minimal supporting evidence.

[ 332 ] [ 333 ] Wong-Parodi's survey of the literature shows four effective approaches to dialogue, including "[encouraging] people to openly share their values and stance on climate change before introducing actual scientific climate information into the discussion." [ 334 ] Approaches with farmers One study of climate change denial among farmers in Australia found that farmers were less likely to take a position of climate denial if they had experienced improved production from climate-friendly practices, or identified a younger person as a successor for their farm.

[ 335 ] Therefore, seeing positive economic results from efforts at climate-friendly agricultural practices, or becoming involved in intergenerational stewardship of a farm may play a role in turning farmers away from denial.

In the United States, rural climate dialogues sponsored by the Sierra Club have helped neighbors overcome their fears of political polarization and exclusion, and come together to address shared concerns about climate impacts in their communities. Some participants who start out with attitudes of anthropogenic climate change denial have shifted to identifying concerns which they would like to see addressed by local officials.

[ 336 ] Statements of well known people calling for climate action Further information: List of statements by major scientific organizations about climate change In May 2013 Charles, Prince of Wales took a strong stance criticising both climate change deniers and corporate lobbyists by likening the Earth to a dying patient. "A scientific hypothesis is tested to absolute destruction, but medicine can't wait. If a doctor sees a child with a fever, he can't wait for [endless] tests. He has to act on what is there." [ 337 ] Legal response Further information: Climate change litigation As of February 2024, there are at least 32 ongoing lawsuits in the United States seeking damages against the fossil fuel industry on the grounds that it spread climate change denialism despite knowing the risks.

[ 338 ] [ 339 ] [ 340 ] In June 2025, UN Special Rapporteur Elisa Morgera released a report that cites climate disinformation as a major obstacle to action and, among other actions, calls for criminalization of climate disinformation and a ban on fossil-fuel lobbying and advertising.

[ 341 ] See also Climate change portal Agnotology – Study of culturally induced ignorance or doubt Anti-environmentalism – Opposition to environmentalism Climate movement CO2 Coalition – Nonprofit conservative think tank and climate denial organization Environmental skepticism – Skepticism of environmentalism Individual action on climate change – What everyone can do to limit climate change Motivated reasoning – Processing personal/social information Right-wing antiscience – Attitudes that reject science and the scientific method Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Semmelweis reflex – Cognitive bias Skeptical Science – Climate science blog to counter arguments by climate change deniers Films: Climate Change Denial Disorder , satirical parody film about a fictional disease Before the Flood , documenting climate change denial and lobbying processes References ^ Barrett, Ted (27 February 2015).

"Inhofe brings snowball on Senate floor as evidence globe is not warming" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2023.

^ "NASA, NOAA Analyses Reveal Record-Shattering Global Warm Temperatures in 2015" . NASA. 20 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2023.

^ Woolf, Nicky (26 February 2015).

"Republican Senate environment chief uses snowball as prop in climate rant" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2023.

^ a b c Diethelm, P.; McKee, M. (2008).

"Denialism: what is it and how should scientists respond?" .

The European Journal of Public Health .

19 (1): 2– 4.

doi : 10.1093/eurpub/ckn139 .

ISSN 1101-1262 .

PMID 19158101 .

^ Hartley, Sophie (17 February 2025).

"Tactics Used by Fossil Fuel Companies to Suppress Critique and Obstruct Climate Action" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ a b National Center for Science Education (4 June 2010).

"Climate change is good science" . National Center for Science Education.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2016 . Retrieved 21 June 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g National Center for Science Education (15 January 2016).

"Why Is It Called Denial?" .

National Center for Science Education .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2023 .

^ a b Powell, James Lawrence (2011).

The inquisition of climate science . New York: Columbia university press.

ISBN 978-0-231-15718-6 .

^ a b c d e f Dunlap, Riley E. (2013).

"Climate Change Skepticism and Denial: An Introduction" .

American Behavioral Scientist .

57 (6): 691– 698.

doi : 10.1177/0002764213477097 .

ISSN 0002-7642 .

S2CID 147126996 .

^ Ove Hansson, Sven (2017). "Science denial as a form of pseudoscience".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science .

63 : 39– 47.

Bibcode : 2017SHPSA..63...39H .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsa.2017.05.002 .

PMID 28629651 .

^ a b c d e f Jacques, Peter J.; Dunlap, Riley E.; Freeman, Mark (2008).

"The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism" .

Environmental Politics .

17 (3): 349– 385.

Bibcode : 2008EnvPo..17..349J .

doi : 10.1080/09644010802055576 .

ISSN 0964-4016 .

S2CID 144975102 .

^ Stoddard, Isak; Anderson, Kevin; Capstick, Stuart; Carton, Wim; Depledge, Joanna; Facer, Keri; Gough, Clair; Hache, Frederic; Hoolohan, Claire; Hultman, Martin; Hällström, Niclas; Kartha, Sivan; Klinsky, Sonja; Kuchler, Magdalena; Lövbrand, Eva; Nasiritousi, Naghmeh; Newell, Peter; Peters, Glen P.; Sokona, Youba; Stirling, Andy; Stilwell, Matthew; Spash, Clive L.; Williams, Mariama; et al. (18 October 2021).

"Three Decades of Climate Mitigation: Why Haven't We Bent the Global Emissions Curve?" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

46 (1): 653– 689.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-012220-011104 .

hdl : 1983/93c742bc-4895-42ac-be81-535f36c5039d .

ISSN 1543-5938 .

S2CID 233815004 . Retrieved 31 August 2022 .

^ a b Vidal, John (27 June 2011).

"Climate sceptic Willie Soon received $1m from oil companies, papers show" .

The Guardian . London.

^ ClimateWire, Gayathri Vaidyanathan.

"What Have Climate Scientists Learned from 20-Year Fight with Deniers?" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 5 February 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Begley, Sharon (13 August 2007).

"The Truth About Denial" .

Newsweek . Archived from the original on 21 October 2007.

( MSNBC single page version, archived 20 August 2007 ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Painter, James; Ashe, Teresa (2012).

"Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the print media in six countries, 2007–10" .

Environmental Research Letters .

7 (4): 044005.

Bibcode : 2012ERL.....7d4005P .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/7/4/044005 .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

^ Hoggan, James; Littlemore, Richard (2009).

Climate Cover-Up: The Crusade to Deny Global Warming . Vancouver: Greystone Books.

ISBN 978-1-55365-485-8 .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

See, e.g., pp. 31 ff , describing industry-based advocacy strategies in the context of climate change denial, and p73 ff , describing involvement of free-market think tanks in climate-change denial.

^ Xifra, Jordi (2016). "Climate Change Deniers and Advocacy: A Situational Theory of Publics Approach".

American Behavioral Scientist .

60 (3): 276– 287.

doi : 10.1177/0002764215613403 .

hdl : 10230/32970 .

S2CID 58914584 .

^ a b Egan, Timothy (5 November 2015).

"Exxon Mobil and the G.O.P.: Fossil Fools" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ a b Goldenberg, Suzanne (8 July 2015).

"Exxon knew of climate change in 1981, email says – but it funded deniers for 27 more years" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2015 . Retrieved 9 November 2015 .

^ 'Shell knew': oil giant's 1991 film warned of climate change danger Archived 24 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian ^ "NCSE Tackles Climate Change Denial" .

National Center for Science Education . 13 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 July 2015 .

^ Brown, Michael.

Adversaries, zombies and NIPCC climate pseudoscience Archived 2 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Phys.org , 26 September 2013 ^ a b c d e f g h i Rennie, John (2009).

"7 Answers to Climate Contrarian Nonsense" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ Washington, Haydn (2013).

Climate Change Denial: Heads in the Sand . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-53004-3 .

^ O'Neill, Saffron J.; Boykoff, Max (28 September 2010).

"Climate denier, skeptic, or contrarian?" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

107 (39): E151.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..107E.151O .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1010507107 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 2947866 .

PMID 20807754 .

^ Mann, Michael E. (2013).

The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-52638-8 .

^ a b Weart, Spencer R. (June 2015).

"Government: The View from Washington, DC" .

The Discovery of Global Warming . American Institute of Physics.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

^ Weart, S. (2015) "The Public and Climate, cont. footnote 136a" .

aip.org . Archived from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2022 .

in: The Discovery of Global Warming ^ a b Brown, R. G. E. Jr. (23 October 1996).

"Environmental science under siege: Fringe science and the 104th Congress, U. S. House of Representatives" (PDF) .

Report, Democratic Caucus of the Committee on Science . Washington, D.C.: U. S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007.

^ a b c Gelbspan, Ross (1998).

The heat is on : the climate crisis, the cover-up, the prescription . Reading, MA: Perseus Books.

ISBN 978-0-7382-0025-5 .

^ Gelbspan, Ross (December 1995).

"The heat is on: The warming of the world's climate sparks a blaze of denial" .

Harper's Magazine . Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 June 2015 .

^ Gillis, Justin (12 February 2015).

"Verbal Warming: Labels in the Climate Debate" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ Boslough, Mark (5 December 2014).

"Deniers are not Skeptics" .

Committee for Skeptical Inquiry .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2019 . Retrieved 7 July 2015 .

^ Seifter, Andrew; Strupp, Joe (22 June 2015).

"NY Times Public Editor: We're 'Moving In A Good Direction' On Properly Describing Climate Deniers" .

Media Matters for America .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2019 . Retrieved 2 July 2015 .

^ "AP: Deniers Are Not Skeptics!" .

Oil Change U.S .

Washington, D.C.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ Colford, Paul (22 September 2015).

"An addition to AP Stylebook entry on global warming" .

Associated Press . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ Schlanger, Zoë (24 September 2015).

"The real skeptics behind the AP decision to put an end to the term 'climate skeptics' " .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ Carrington, Damian (17 May 2019).

"Why The Guardian is changing the language it uses about the environment" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2019 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ Smith, Devin (2016).

"Living in the Web of Soft Climate Denial" .

New Economic Perspectives . Retrieved 2 February 2024 .

^ Colarossi, Jessica; Ricciardi, Jackie (23 May 2023).

"Tweets, Ads, and Lies: Researchers Are Fighting against Climate Misinformation" . Boston University.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2024.

^ a b c d e f Rahmstorf, S., 2004, The climate sceptics: Weather Catastrophes and Climate Change—Is There Still Hope For Us?

Archived 10 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine (Munich: PG Verlag) pp. 76–83 [note: numbering not shown in original] ^ a b Björnberg, Karin Edvardsson; et al. (2017).

"Climate and environmental science denial: A review of the scientific literature published in 1990–2015" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

167 : 229– 241.

Bibcode : 2017JCPro.167..229B .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.066 .

^ a b Michael E. Mann (2013).

The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines . Columbia University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-231-52638-8 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 July 2015 .

^ Zimmerman, Jess (7 November 2011).

"Handy image shows how climate deniers manipulate data" .

Grist .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2019.

^ Stover, Dawn (23 September 2014).

"The global warming 'hiatus' " .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2020.

^ Liu, D. W. C. (2012).

"Science Denial and the Science Classroom" .

CBE: Life Sciences Education .

11 (2): 129– 134.

doi : 10.1187/cbe.12-03-0029 .

PMC 3366896 .

PMID 22665586 .

^ a b Hoofnagle, Mark (11 March 2009).

"Climate change deniers: failsafe tips on how to spot them" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2015 .

^ "Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I – Chapter 3: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change" .

science2017.globalchange.gov . U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP): 1– 470. 2017. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019.

Adapted directly from Fig. 3.3.

^ a b c Cook, John; et al. (15 May 2013).

"Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in the scientific literature" .

Environmental Research Letters .

8 (2): 024024.

Bibcode : 2013ERL.....8b4024C .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024 .

^ Cook, John; Oreskes, Naomi; Doran, Peter T.; Anderegg, William R. L.; et al. (2016).

"Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming" .

Environmental Research Letters .

11 (4): 048002.

Bibcode : 2016ERL....11d8002C .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002 .

hdl : 1983/34949783-dac1-4ce7-ad95-5dc0798930a6 .

^ a b Powell, James Lawrence (20 November 2019).

"Scientists Reach 100% Consensus on Anthropogenic Global Warming" .

Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society .

37 (4): 183– 184.

doi : 10.1177/0270467619886266 .

S2CID 213454806 . Retrieved 15 November 2020 .

^ a b Lynas, Mark; Houlton, Benjamin Z.; Perry, Simon (19 October 2021).

"Greater than 99% consensus on human caused climate change in the peer-reviewed scientific literature" .

Environmental Research Letters .

16 (11): 114005.

Bibcode : 2021ERL....16k4005L .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ac2966 .

S2CID 239032360 .

^ a b Myers, Krista F.; Doran, Peter T.; Cook, John; Kotcher, John E.; Myers, Teresa A. (20 October 2021).

"Consensus revisited: quantifying scientific agreement on climate change and climate expertise among Earth scientists 10 years later" .

Environmental Research Letters .

16 (10): 104030.

Bibcode : 2021ERL....16j4030M .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ac2774 .

S2CID 239047650 .

^ Byik, Andre (21 February 2024).

"The claim: Climate change is a 'hoax' because CO2 is only 0.04% of the atmosphere" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2024.

Using example of Republican U.S. Representative Doug LaMalfa .

^ "Fact Check: Share of CO2 in the atmosphere not a reflection of its climate impact" .

Reuters . 4 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 22 February 2024.

^ Archer, David (6 April 2005).

"Water vapour: feedback or forcing?" .

RealClimate .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2020 . Retrieved 5 September 2018 .

^ van Wijngaarden, W A; Happer, W (4 June 2020). "Dependence of Earth's Thermal Radiation on Five Most Abundant Greenhouse Gases".

arXiv : 2006.03098 [ physics.ao-ph ].

^ Zhong, W; Haigh, J D (27 March 2013).

"The greenhouse effect and carbon dioxide" .

Weather .

68 (4): 100– 105.

Bibcode : 2013Wthr...68..100Z .

doi : 10.1002/wea.2072 .

S2CID 121741093 – via Wiley.

^ Hartley, Sophie (17 February 2025).

"Tactics Used by Fossil Fuel Companies to Suppress Critique and Obstruct Climate Action" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 12 April 2025 .

^ "500 Scientists Whose Research Contradicts Man-Made Global Warming Scares" . The Heartland Institute. 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ Monbiot, George (8 December 2009).

"The Real Climate Scandal" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 12 December 2009.

^ Monbiot, George (9 December 2009).

"The climate denial industry seeks to dupe the public. It's working" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 3 September 2010 .

^ a b Haldar, Ishita. (2011).

Global warming : the causes and consequences . New Delhi: Mind Melodies. p. 137.

ISBN 978-93-80302-81-2 .

OCLC 695282079 .

^ Rasmussen, C., ed. (25 July 1996).

"Special insert—An open letter to Ben Santer" . UCAR Quarterly. Archived from the original on 26 June 2006 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

^ "Final Climate Change Report" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008 . Retrieved 29 December 2008 .

^ The Committee Office, House of Lords (28 November 2005).

"House of Lords – Economic Affairs – Third Report" . Publications.parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 15 October 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "UN Blowback: More Than 650 International Scientists Dissent Over Man-Made Global Warming Claims" .

www.epw.senate.gov . Archived from the original on 11 December 2008 . Retrieved 11 December 2008 .

^ "How many on Inhofe's list are IPCC authors?" . Archived from the original on 27 January 2012.

^ "More on Inhofe's alleged list of 650 scientists" . Archived from the original on 22 January 2012.

^ "Inhofe's 650 "dissenters" (make That 649... 648...)" .

The New Republic . 15 December 2008.

^ Senator James Inhofe, Chairman of Committee on Environment and Public Works, U.S. Senate.

The Facts and Science of Climate Change ^ Uscinski, Joseph E.; Douglas, Karen; Lewandowsky, Stephan (September 2017). "Climate Change Conspiracy Theories".

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science .

1 .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.328 .

ISBN 978-0-19-022862-0 .

^ a b Uscinski, Joseph E.; Douglas, Karen; Lewandowsky, Stephan (27 September 2017).

"Climate Change Conspiracy Theories" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.328 .

ISBN 9780190228620 . Retrieved 18 January 2021 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (1 March 2010).

"US Senate's top climate sceptic accused of waging 'McCarthyite witch-hunt' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 July 2015 .

^ Achenbach, Joel.

"The Tempest" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 31 March 2010 .

^ Goertzel, Ted (June 2010).

"Conspiracy theories in science" .

EMBO Reports .

11 (7): 493– 99.

doi : 10.1038/embor.2010.84 .

PMC 2897118 .

PMID 20539311 .

^ "The Great Global Warming Swindle from Channel4.com" . Channel 4.com. Archived from the original on 10 March 2007 . Retrieved 12 March 2007 .

^ a b Al Webb (6 March 2007).

"Global warming labeled a 'scam' " .

The Washington Times . Archived from the original on 8 March 2007.

^ "Another Species of Denial" . 30 January 2007 . Retrieved 2 January 2014 .

^ Greene, R.; Robison-Greene, R. (2020).

Conspiracy Theories: Philosophers Connect the Dots . Open Court.

^ McKie, Robin (9 November 2019).

"Climategate 10 years on: what lessons have we learned?" . Retrieved 18 January 2021 .

^ Six of the major investigations covered by secondary sources include: 1233/uk-climategate-inquiry-largely-clears.html House of Commons Science and Technology Committee (UK); Independent Climate Change Review (UK); International Science Assessment Panel Archived May 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine (UK); Pennsylvania State University (US); United States Environmental Protection Agency (US); Department of Commerce (US).

^ Jonsson, Patrik (7 July 2010).

"Climate scientists exonerated in 'climategate' but public trust damaged" . Christian Science Monitor. p. 2 . Retrieved 17 August 2011 .

^ Russell, Sir Muir (July 2010).

"The Independent Climate Change E-mails Review" (PDF) . p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2011 .

^ Biello, David (Feb., 2010). " Negating 'Climategate' ".

Scientific American .

(302) :2. 16.

ISSN 0036-8733 .

^ a b Clive Hamilton (25 July 2012).

"Climate change and the soothing message of luke-warmism" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 11 July 2020 .

^ Pope Francis, Laudate Deum , paragraph 5, published 4 October 2023, accessed 2 June 2024 ^ "Environmental Task Force" .

National Center for Policy Analysis . Archived from the original on 6 February 2007 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Burnett, H. Sterling (19 September 2005).

"Climate Change: Consensus Forming around Adaptation" .

National Center for Policy Analysis . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Logan, Andrew; Grossman, David (May 2006).

"ExxonMobil's Corporate Governance on Climate Change" (PDF) .

Ceres & Investor Network on Climate Risk . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ "Letter to Michael J. Boskin, Secretary Exxon Mobil Corporation" (PDF) .

Investor Network on Climate Risk . 15 May 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Revkin, Andrew C.

(3 June 2002).

"Bush climate plan says adapt to inevitable Cutting gas emissions not recommended" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ "Climate Compendium: International Negotiations: Vulnerability & Adaptation" . Climate Change Knowledge Network & International Institute for Sustainable Development . 2007. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Revkin, Andrew C. (23 October 2002).

"US Pullout Forces Kyoto Talks To Focus on Adaptation – Climate Talks Will Shift Focus From Emissions" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Eilperin, Juliet (7 April 2007).

"U.S., China Got Climate Warnings Toned Down" .

The Washington Post . pp. A05 . Retrieved 30 December 2008 .

^ Monbiot, George (December 2006).

"Costing Climate Change" .

New Internationalist . Archived from the original on 8 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ "Public perceptions on climate change" (PDF) .

PERITIA Trust EU – The Policy Institute of King's College London . June 2022. p. 4.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 July 2022.

^ Powell, James (20 November 2019).

"Scientists Reach 100% Consensus on Anthropogenic Global Warming" .

Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society .

37 (4): 183– 184.

doi : 10.1177/0270467619886266 .

S2CID 213454806 .

^ Sparkman, Gregg; Geiger, Nathan; Weber, Elke U. (23 August 2022).

"Americans experience a false social reality by underestimating popular climate policy support by nearly half" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 4779 (fig. 3).

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.4779S .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-32412-y .

PMC 9399177 .

PMID 35999211 .

^ Yoder, Kate (29 August 2022).

"Americans are convinced climate action is unpopular. They're very, very wrong. / Support for climate policies is double what most people think, a new study found" .

Grist .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2022.

^ "Global Warming, the Anatomy of a Debate: A speech by Jerry Taylor of the Cato Institute" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2012.

^ "What's up with the weather: the debate: Fred Palmer" .

Nova and Frontline .

PBS . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ Nicholas Stern (2006).

"7. Projecting the Growth of Greenhouse-Gas Emissions" . In Stern, Nicolas (ed.).

Stern Review: The Economics of Climate Change .

HM Treasury , Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-70080-1 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2007 . Retrieved 19 February 2014 .

^ a b "YouTube making money off new breed of climate denial, monitoring group says" .

Reuters . 16 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2024.

^ Stern, Paul C.; Perkins, John H.; Sparks, Richard E.; Knox, Robert A. (2016).

"The challenge of climate-change neoskepticism" .

Science .

353 (6300): 653– 654.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...353..653S .

doi : 10.1126/science.aaf6675 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 27516588 .

S2CID 19503400 .

^ Yirka, Bob; Phys.org.

"Panel offers advice on how to combat climate-change "neoskepticism" " .

phys.org . Retrieved 7 February 2024 .

^ a b Wendel, JoAnna (2016).

"Climate Scientists' New Hurdle: Overcoming Climate Change Apathy" .

Eos .

97 .

doi : 10.1029/2016EO057547 .

ISSN 2324-9250 .

^ Heatley, Brian; Read, Rupert; Foster, John (2019).

"Introduction: Looking for Hope between Disaster and Catastrophe" . In Foster, John (ed.).

Facing Up to Climate Reality: Honesty, Disaster and Hope . Green House Publishing in association with London Publishing Partnership. pp.

1– 12.

ISBN 978-1-907994-93-7 – via Google Books .

^ McCauley, Clark; Jacques, Susan (May 1979). "The popularity of conspiracy theories of presidential assassination: A Bayesian analysis".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

37 (5): 637– 644.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.37.5.637 .

^ Bruder, Martin; Haffke, Peter; Neave, Nick; Nouripanah, Nina; Imhoff, Roland (2013).

"Measuring Individual Differences in Generic Beliefs in Conspiracy Theories Across Cultures: Conspiracy Mentality Questionnaire" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

4 : 225.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00225 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 3639408 .

PMID 23641227 .

^ Swami, Viren; Voracek, Martin; Stieger, Stefan; Tran, Ulrich S.; Furnham, Adrian (December 2014).

"Analytic thinking reduces belief in conspiracy theories" .

Cognition .

133 (3): 572– 585.

doi : 10.1016/j.cognition.2014.08.006 .

ISSN 0010-0277 .

PMID 25217762 .

S2CID 15915194 .

^ Douglas, Karen M.; Sutton, Robbie M.; Callan, Mitchell J.; Dawtry, Rael J.; Harvey, Annelie J. (18 August 2015).

"Someone is pulling the strings: hypersensitive agency detection and belief in conspiracy theories" .

Thinking & Reasoning .

22 (1): 57– 77.

doi : 10.1080/13546783.2015.1051586 .

ISSN 1354-6783 .

S2CID 146892686 .

^ a b c d e Douglas, Karen M.; Sutton, Robbie M. (2015).

"Climate change: Why the conspiracy theories are dangerous" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

71 (2): 98– 106.

Bibcode : 2015BuAtS..71b..98D .

doi : 10.1177/0096340215571908 .

S2CID 144008955 . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ Lewandowsky, Stephan; Oberauer, Klaus (2013). "NASA Faked the Moon Landing—Therefore, (Climate) Science Is a Hoax".

Psychological Science .

24 (5): 622– 633.

doi : 10.1177/0956797612457686 .

PMID 23531484 .

S2CID 23921773 .

^ Than, Ker (4 April 2013).

"Fact Checking 6 Persistent Science Conspiracy Theories" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ "Senate Environment And Public Works Committee" . Archived from the original on 28 March 2007 . Retrieved 25 March 2007 .

^ "James M. Inhofe – U.S. Senator (OK)" . Archived from the original on 28 March 2007 . Retrieved 23 March 2007 .

^ a b c Achenbach, Joel (28 May 2006).

"The Tempest" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 23 April 2007 .

^ Lejano, Raul P. (16 September 2019).

"Ideology and the Narrative of Climate Skepticism" .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

100 (12): ES415 – ES421 .

Bibcode : 2019BAMS..100S.415L .

doi : 10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0327.1 .

ISSN 0003-0007 .

^ Gifford, Robert (2011). "The dragons of inaction: Psychological barriers that limit climate change mitigation and adaptation".

American Psychologist .

66 (4): 290– 302.

doi : 10.1037/a0023566 .

ISSN 1935-990X .

PMID 21553954 .

S2CID 8356816 .

^ Green, Emily (13 October 2017).

"The Existential Dread of Climate Change" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021.

^ Swim, Janet.

"Psychology and Global Climate Change: Addressing a Multi-faceted Phenomenon and Set of Challenges. A Report by the American Psychological Association's Task Force on the Interface Between Psychology and Global Climate Change" (PDF) .

American Psychological Association . p. 9.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Hersher, Rebecca (4 January 2023).

"How our perception of time shapes our approach to climate change" . NPR.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2023.

^ a b Jiang, Yangxueqing; Schwarz, Norbert; Reynolds, Katherine J.; Newman, Eryn J. (7 August 2024).

"Repetition increases belief in climate-skeptical claims, even for climate science endorsers" .

PLOS ONE .

19 (8): See esp. "Abstract" and "General discussion".

Bibcode : 2024PLoSO..1907294J .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0307294 .

PMC 11305575 .

PMID 39110668 .

^ Peter Jacques (2009).

Environmental skepticism: ecology, power and public life . Global environmental governance series. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7102-2 .

^ George E. Brown (March 1997). "Environmental Science Under Siege in the U.S. Congress".

Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development .

39 (2): 12– 31.

Bibcode : 1997ESPSD..39b..12B .

doi : 10.1080/00139159709604359 .

^ a b Hamilton, Clive (2011).

Requiem for a Species: Why We Resist the Truth about Climate Change . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-84977-498-7 .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g Conway, Erik; Oreskes, Naomi (2010).

Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming . US: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-59691-610-4 .

^ a b c Parry, Roland Lloyd; Rey, Benedicte; Laborda, Adria; Tan, Kate (13 May 2023).

"Meteorologists targeted in climate misinfo surge" . Phys.org.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2023.

^ "Climate denial and the populist right" .

International Institute for Environment and Development . 15 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 March 2017 .

^ Harari, Yuval Noah (20 February 2017).

"Transcript of "Nationalism vs. globalism: the new political divide" " .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2021 . Retrieved 4 March 2017 .

^ Helmer, Roger (14 October 2015).

"Plenary Speech Climate Change October 14th 2015" . Archived from the original on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ "Climate Change Denial as the Historical Consciousness of Trumpism: Lessons from Carl Schmitt" .

Niskanen Center . 10 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ a b Milman, Oliver (21 November 2021).

"Climate denial is waning on the right. What's replacing it might be just as scary" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 21 November 2021.

^ a b Claudia Wallner (11 May 2022).

"Recording: The Rise of the Far-Right: From Climate Denial to Eco-Fascism" .

RUSI .

^ a b Adryan Corcione (30 April 2020).

"Eco-fascism: What It Is, Why It's Wrong, and How to Fight It" . Teen Vogue.

^ a b c Cislak, Aleksandra; Wójcik, Adrian D.; Borkowska, Julia; Milfont, Taciano (8 June 2023).

"Secure and defensive forms of national identity and public support for climate policies" .

PLOS Climate .

2 (6): e0000146.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pclm.0000146 .

hdl : 10289/16820 .

^ Saad, Lydia (20 April 2023).

"A Steady Six in 10 Say Global Warming's Effects Have Begun" . Gallup, Inc.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2023.

^ a b "As Economic Concerns Recede, Environmental Protection Rises on the Public's Policy Agenda / Partisan gap on dealing with climate change gets even wider" .

PewResearch.org . Pew Research Center. 13 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2021.

(Discontinuity resulted from survey changing in 2015 from reciting "global warming" to "climate change".) ^ a b Gifford, Robert (2011). "The dragons of inaction: Psychological barriers that limit climate change mitigation and adaptation".

American Psychologist .

66 (4): 290– 302.

doi : 10.1037/a0023566 .

ISSN 1935-990X .

PMID 21553954 .

S2CID 8356816 .

^ Jylhä, K. M.; Stanley, S. K.; Ojala, M.; Clarke, E. J. R (2023).

"Science Denial: A Narrative Review and Recommendations for Future Research and Practice" .

European Psychologist .

28 (3): 151– 161.

doi : 10.1027/1016-9040/a000487 .

S2CID 254665552 .

^ Hall, David (8 October 2019).

"Climate explained: why some people still think climate change isn't real" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .

^ a b Lewandowsky, Stephan; Oberauer, Klaus (August 2016).

"Motivated Rejection of Science" .

Current Directions in Psychological Science .

25 (4): 217– 222.

doi : 10.1177/0963721416654436 .

hdl : 1983/493a3119-4525-430a-abb5-b0521440fb39 .

ISSN 0963-7214 .

S2CID 53705050 .

^ a b McCright, Aaron M.; Dunlap, Riley E. (October 2011). "Cool dudes: The denial of climate change among conservative white males in the United States".

Global Environmental Change .

21 (4): 1163– 1172.

Bibcode : 2011GEC....21.1163M .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.06.003 .

^ a b c Weddig, Catherine (15 September 2022).

"Climate Change Denial & Skepticism: A Review of the Literature" .

Social Science Research Council – via MediaWell.

^ Feinberg, Matthew; Willer, Robb (January 2013). "The Moral Roots of Environmental Attitudes".

Psychological Science .

24 (1): 56– 62.

doi : 10.1177/0956797612449177 .

ISSN 0956-7976 .

PMID 23228937 .

S2CID 18348687 .

^ Unsworth, Kerrie L.; Fielding, Kelly S. (July 2014).

"It's political: How the salience of one's political identity changes climate change beliefs and policy support" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change .

27 : 131– 137.

Bibcode : 2014GEC....27..131U .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.002 .

^ a b c d Stoknes, Per Espen (1 March 2014). "Rethinking climate communications and the "psychological climate paradox" ".

Energy Research & Social Science .

1 : 161– 170.

Bibcode : 2014ERSS....1..161S .

doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2014.03.007 .

hdl : 11250/278817 .

ISSN 2214-6296 .

^ a b Greene, Steven (June 1999). "Understanding Party Identification: A Social Identity Approach".

Political Psychology .

20 (2): 393– 403.

doi : 10.1111/0162-895X.00150 .

ISSN 0162-895X .

^ Begley, Sharon; Eve Conant; Sam Stein; Eleanor Clift; Matthew Philips (13 August 2007).

"The Truth About Denial" (PDF) . Newsweek. p. 20 . Retrieved 3 September 2011 .

^ Hudson, March (2016).

"US firms knew about global warming in 1968 – what about Australia?" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2018 .

^ a b Young, Élan (22 November 2019).

"Coal Knew, Too, A Newly Unearthed Journal from 1966 Shows the Coal Industry, Like the Oil Industry, Was Long Aware of the Threat of Climate Change" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ Pattee, Emma (14 June 2022).

"The 1977 White House climate memo that should have changed the world" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

^ Weart, S. (2015) Global Warming Becomes a Political Issue (1980-1983) in: The Discovery of Global Warming ^ a b c d Weart, Spencer R. (2009).

The Discovery of Global Warming . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-04497-5 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ Weart, S. (2015) Breaking into Politics (1980-1988) , in The Discovery of Global Warming ^ Hansen, James (1988).

"Statement of Dr. James Hansen, director, NASA Goddard Institute for space studies" (PDF) .

Climate Change ProCon.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 August 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2015 .

^ Shabecoff, Philip (24 June 1988).

"Global Warming Has Begun, Expert Tells Senate" .

The New York Times .

^ Weart, S. (2015) The Summer of 1988 , in: The Discovery of Global Warming ^ a b Weart, Spencer (2011).

"Global warming: How skepticism became denial" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

67 (1): 41– 50.

Bibcode : 2011BuAtS..67a..41W .

doi : 10.1177/0096340210392966 .

S2CID 53607015 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2015.

^ Wald, Matthew L. (8 July 1991).

"Pro-Coal Ad Campaign Disputes Warming Idea" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2013 .

^ Cox, Robert (2009).

Environmental Communication and the Public Sphere . Sage. pp.

311– 312.

^ Gelbspan, Ross (22 July 2004).

"An excerpt from Boiling Point by Ross Gelbspan" .

Grist .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2015 .

^ a b c Monbiot, George (19 September 2006).

"The denial industry" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 24 March 2007 . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Manjit, Kumar (18 October 2010).

"Merchants of Doubt, By Naomi Oreskes & Erik M Conway" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2013 .

^ Colman, Zack; Guillén, Alex (17 September 2021).

"Trump's climate change rollbacks to drive up U.S. emissions" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021.

^ Båtstrand, Sondre (2015). "More than Markets: A Comparative Study of Nine Conservative Parties on Climate Change".

Politics and Policy .

43 (4): 538– 561.

doi : 10.1111/polp.12122 .

ISSN 1747-1346 .

S2CID 143331308 .

^ Chait, Jonathan (27 September 2015).

"Why Are Republicans the Only Climate-Science-Denying Party in the World?" .

New York .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ "Frontline: Hot Politics: Interviews: Frank Luntz" . PBS. 13 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 March 2010 .

^ Davenport, Coral; Lipton, Eric (3 June 2017).

"How G.O.P. Leaders Came to View Climate Change as Fake Science" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Warner, Judith (27 February 2011).

"Fact-Free Science" .

The New York Times Magazine . pp.

11– 12.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2021 . Retrieved 9 September 2017 .

^ Matthews, Chris (12 May 2014).

"Hardball With Chris Matthews for May 12, 2014" .

Hardball With Chris Matthews .

MSNBC .

NBC news – via ProQuest .

^ EarthTalk (22 December 2014).

"How Does Climate Denial Persist?" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2017 .

^ Kliegman, Julie (18 May 2014).

"Jerry Brown says 'virtually no Republican' in Washington accepts climate change science" .

Tampa Bay Times .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ McCarthy, Tom (17 November 2014).

"Meet the Republicans in Congress who don't believe climate change is real" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

^ Revkin, Andrew (8 June 2005).

"Bush Aide Edited Climate Reports" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2017 . Retrieved 3 August 2007 .

^ a b McGreal, Chris (26 October 2021).

"Revealed: 60% of Americans say oil firms are to blame for the climate crisis" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021.

Source: Guardian/Vice/CCN/YouGov poll. Note: ±4% margin of error.

^ "Nations Approve Landmark Climate Accord in Paris" Archived 5 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

The New York Times , 12 December 2015.

^ Graham Redfearn (7 January 2016).

"Era of climate science denial is not over, study finds" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2016 .

^ "Energy Secty Rick Perry: CO 2 is not the main driver of climate change" .

CNBC . 19 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2017 .

^ Seitter, Keith.

"AMS Letter to Perry" . American Meteorological Society.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 24 June 2017 .

^ Roberts, David (26 April 2019).

"Don't bother waiting for conservatives to come around on climate change" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ "Florida's GOP Has A Change Of Heart About Climate Change" .

Health News Florida, WUSF . 21 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2020 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ a b Peoples, Ssteve (24 August 2023).

"Presidential debate shows how GOP candidates are struggling to address concerns about climate change" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2023.

^ Kessler, Glenn (25 August 2023).

"Vivek Ramaswamy says 'hoax' agenda kills more people than climate change" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2023.

^ Cercone, Jeff; Sherman, Amy (24 August 2023).

"More deaths from climate policies than climate change? Scientists say Ramaswamy's claim is baseless" .

PolitiFact .

^ Pilkington, Ed (14 November 2013).

"Facebook and Microsoft help fund rightwing lobby network, report finds" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 November 2013 .

^ "The Climate Denial Machine: How the Fossil Fuel Industry Blocks Climate Action" .

The Climate Reality Project . 5 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ Borowy, Iris (2014).

Defining Sustainable Development for Our Common Future: A History of the World Commission on Environment and Development . Routledge. p. 44.

ISBN 978-1-135-96122-0 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (20 December 2013).

"Conservative groups spend up to $1bn a year to fight action on climate change" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ Brulle, Robert (2014). "Institutionalizing delay: foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change counter-movement organizations".

Climatic Change .

122 (4): 681– 694.

Bibcode : 2014ClCh..122..681B .

doi : 10.1007/s10584-013-1018-7 .

S2CID 27538787 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (14 February 2013).

"Secret funding helped build vast network of climate denial thinktanks" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ Schultz, Colin (23 December 2013).

"Meet the Money Behind The Climate Denial Movement" .

Smithsonian .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2021 . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ Porterfield, Carlie (2 November 2021).

"Breitbart Leads Climate Change Misinformation On Facebook, Study Says" .

Forbes . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ "The Toxic Ten: How ten fringe publishers fuel 69% of digital climate change denial" .

Center for Countering Digital Hate . 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ Graves, H.; Beard, D.E. (2019).

The Rhetoric of Oil in the Twenty-First Century: Government, Corporate, and Activist Discourses . Routledge Studies in Rhetoric and Communication. Taylor & Francis. p. 176.

ISBN 978-1-351-05212-2 . Retrieved 26 April 2022 .

^ Craig, Sean (31 October 2016).

"UN offers The Rebel press accreditation for climate conference after environment minister's intervention" .

Financial Post . Retrieved 13 November 2020 .

^ Rowell, Andy (24 June 2017).

"Rebel Media: From Promoting Tar Sands and Climate Denial to 'Bigoted Lunatics' " .

Oil Change International . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ Kay, Jonathan (1 May 2017).

"How Climate Change Denial Set the Stage for Fake News" .

The Walrus . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ Farmer, Thomas G.; Cook, John (2013).

Climate Change Science: A Modern Synthesis: Volume 1-The Physical Climate . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 9789400757578 .

^ Eric Roston (30 November 2015).

"Unearthing America's Deep Network of Climate Change Deniers" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ Farrell, Justin (2015). "Network structure and influence of the climate change counter-movement".

Nature Climate Change .

6 (4): 370– 374.

Bibcode : 2016NatCC...6..370F .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate2875 .

S2CID 18207833 .

^ Justin Gillis; Leslie Kaufman (15 February 2012).

"Leak Offers Glimpse of Campaign Against Climate Science" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2012 .

^ Stephanie Pappas; LiveScience (15 February 2012).

"Leaked: Conservative Group Plans Anti-Climate Education Program" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2012 . Retrieved 15 February 2012 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (15 February 2012).

"Heartland Institute claims fraud after leak of climate change documents" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 October 2014 .

^ Branch, Glenn (5 June 2017).

"The Heartbreak for Heartland Continues" .

NCSE .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2017 .

^ Vincent, Emmanuel (31 May 2017).

"Report Heartland Institute sent to influence US teachers on climate change earns an "F" from scientists" .

Science Feedback .

Climate Feedback .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2024 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ "Classroom Resources" .

NCSE .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2017 .

^ a b Gopal, Keerti (31 July 2023).

"Mike Huckabee's "Kids Guide to the Truth About Climate Change" Shows the Changing Landscape of Climate Denial" .

Inside Climate News .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2023.

^ "NCSE helps to expose climate change propaganda aimed at kids" . National Center for Science Education (NCSE). 3 August 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2023.

^ Milman, Oliver (10 August 2023).

"Videos denying climate science approved by Florida as state curriculum" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2023.

^ a b c Worth, Katie (13 October 2023).

"Climate Misinformation Persists in New Middle School Textbooks" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2023.

(subscription needed for original) ^ Pfluger, August (22 September 2023).

"Pfluger Fly-By Newsletter" .

pfluger.house.gov . United States House of Representatives.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2023.

^ a b Cama, Timothy (3 June 2024).

"Trump eyes cutting Interior, 'environment agencies' " . E & E News (by Politico).

Archived from the original on 5 June 2024.

^ Crist, Meehan (10 February 2017).

"How the New Climate Denial Is Like the Old Climate Denial" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ "Why News Outlets Only Sometimes Push Back Against Climate Denial" .

Media Matters for America . 16 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Schulman, Jeremy.

"Every Insane Thing Donald Trump Has Said About Global Warming" . Mother Jones . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ Wong, Edward (18 November 2016).

"Trump Has Called Climate Change a Chinese Hoax. Beijing Says It Is Anything But" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ Rosten, Eric; Kahn, Brian (17 June 2025).

"America's New Language of Climate Denial" . Bloomberg.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2025.

^ Cama, Timothy (21 January 2015).

"Sen. Inhofe takes charge of Environment Committee" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 22 January 2015 .

^ Cappiello, Dina (21 January 2015).

"Senate says climate change real, but doesn't agree on cause" .

Dayton Daily News . The Associated Press . Retrieved 26 January 2015 .

^ Casteel, Chris (26 February 2015).

"Sen. Inhofe throws snowball on U.S. Senate floor" .

Tulsa World .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ Brown, Alex (27 August 2013).

"Tom Coburn Labels Himself a "Global Warming Denier" " .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

citing /http://www.tulsaworld.com/blogs/post.aspx/Coburn_on_revising_the_Constitution_global_warming/30-21971 TulsaWorld [archived article] ^ Frej, Willa (18 May 2018).

"Trump's NASA Chief Has Apparently Changed His Tune On Climate Change" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2021 . Retrieved 18 May 2018 .

^ Koren, Marina (17 May 2018).

"Trump's NASA Chief: 'I Fully Believe and Know the Climate Is Changing' " .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2018 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Waldman, Scott (17 May 2018).

"Republican lawmaker: Rocks tumbling into ocean causing sea level rise" . Science.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2018 . Retrieved 17 May 2018 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (15 November 2018).

"Brazil's new foreign minister believes climate change is a Marxist plot" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2019 .

^ Escobar, Herton (22 January 2019).

"Brazil's new president has scientists worried. Here's why" .

Science | AAAS .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2019 .

^ Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene [@RepMTG] (15 April 2023).

"We live on a spinning planet that rotates around a much bigger sun along with other planets and heavenly bodies rotating around the sun that all create gravitational pull on one another while our galaxy rotates and travels through the universe. Considering all of that, yes our climate will change, and it's totally normal! ... Don't fall for the scam, fossil fuels are natural and amazing" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ a b Greene, Marjorie Taylor [@RepMTG] (15 April 2023).

"Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene🇺🇸" ( Tweet ). Hapeville, GA.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 – via Twitter .

described in Al-Arshani, Sarah (16 April 2023).

"Marjorie Taylor Greene says climate change is a 'scam' and that fossil fuels are 'amazing' " .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023.

^ "Overview of Greenhouse Gases" .

EPA.gov . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2016.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2023.

See pie chart for carbon dioxide and methane emissions totalling more than 90% of greenhouse gas emissions.

^ So, Kat (18 July 2024).

"Climate Deniers of the 118th Congress" . American Progress.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2024.

^ a b Trenberth, K. E. (2023).

A personal tale of the development of Climate Science. The life and times of Kevin Trenberth . Kevin E. Trenberth.

ISBN 978-0-473-68694-9 .

^ Achenbach, Joel (June 5, 2006).

"Global-warming skeptics continue to punch away" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on June 18, 2008 . Retrieved December 8, 2009 .

^ Harsanyi, David (5 June 2006).

"Chill out over global warming" .

The Denver Post . Retrieved 23 April 2007 .

^ Gray, William M. (16 November 2000).

"Viewpoint: Get off warming bandwagon" .

BBC News . Retrieved 10 November 2007 .

^ Supran, Geoffrey; Oreskes, Naomi (2017).

"Assessing ExxonMobil's climate change communications (1977–2014)" .

Environmental Research Letters .

12 (8): 084019.

Bibcode : 2017ERL....12h4019S .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/aa815f .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

^ Readfearn, Graham (5 March 2015).

"Doubt over climate science is a product with an industry behind it" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2019 . Retrieved 6 May 2017 .

^ Washington, Haydn; Cook, John (2011).

Climate Change Denial: Heads in the Sand . Earthscan. p. 108.

ISBN 978-1-84971-335-1 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2020 .

^ Shaye Wolf et al.: Scientists’ warning on fossil fuels , in: Oxford Open Climate Change , Volume 5, Issue 1, 2025, doi : 10.1093/oxfclm/kgaf011 ^ Jennings, Katie; Grandoni, Dino, & Rust, Susanne. (23 October 2015) "How Exxon went from leader to skeptic on climate change research" Archived 8 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 26 October 2015.

^ Supran, G.; Rahmstorf, S.; Oreskes, N. (13 January 2023).

"Assessing ExxonMobil's global warming projections" .

Science .

379 (6628): eabk0063.

Bibcode : 2023Sci...379.0063S .

doi : 10.1126/science.abk0063 .

PMID 36634176 .

S2CID 255749694 .

^ Revkin, Andrew C.

Industry Ignored Its Scientists on Climate Archived 9 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times . 23 April 2009.

^ Bradsher, Keith (7 December 1999).

"Ford Announces Its Withdrawal From Global Climate Coalition" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 October 2018 . Retrieved 21 July 2013 .

^ "GCC Suffers Technical Knockout, Industry defections decimate Global Climate Coalition" .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Broder, John M. (20 October 2010).

"Climate Change Doubt Is Tea Party Article of Faith" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2017 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ Weiss, Daniel J.; Lefton, Rebecca; Lyon, Susan (27 September 2010).

"Dirty Money, Oil Companies and Special Interests Spend Millions to Oppose Climate Legislation" . Center for American Progress Action Fund.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 September 2017 .

^ Franta, Benjamin (2022).

"Weaponizing economics: Big Oil, economic consultants, and climate policy delay" .

Environmental Politics .

31 (4): 555– 575.

Bibcode : 2022EnvPo..31..555F .

doi : 10.1080/09644016.2021.1947636 .

ISSN 0964-4016 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ a b van den Hove, Sybille; Le Menestrel, Marc; de Bettignies, Henri-Claude (2002).

"The oil industry and climate change: strategies and ethical dilemmas" .

Climate Policy .

2 (1): 3– 18.

Bibcode : 2002CliPo...2....3V .

doi : 10.3763/cpol.2002.0202 .

ISSN 1469-3062 .

^ "Smoke, Mirrors & Hot Air | Union of Concerned Scientists" .

www.ucsusa.org . Retrieved 6 February 2024 .

^ Mann, Michael E. (2014).

The hockey stick and the climate wars: dispatches from the front lines (Paperback ed.). New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-52638-8 .

^ Lee, Jennifer 8.

(28 May 2003).

"Exxon Backs Groups that Question Global Warming" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 October 2024 .

the company... has increased donations to... policy groups that, like Exxon itself, question the human role in global warming and argue that proposed government policies to limit carbon dioxide emissions associated with global warming are too heavy handed. Exxon now gives more than $1 million a year to such organizations, which include the Competitive Enterprise Institute, Frontiers of Freedom, the George C. Marshall Institute, the American Council for Capital Formation Center for Policy Research and the American Legislative Exchange Council... Exxon has become the single-largest corporate donor to some of the groups, accounting for more than 10 percent of their annual budgets. While a few of the groups say they also receive some money from other oil companies, it is only a small fraction of what they receive from ExxonMobil.

^ Barnett, Antony; Townsend, Mark (28 November 2004).

"Claims by think-tank outrage eco-groups" .

The Guardian . UK . Retrieved 16 January 2007 .

^ Weart, S. (2025) The public and climate change . In: The Discovery of Global Warming ^ "Exxon's Uncertainty Campaign in Black and White" .

InsideClimate News . 22 October 2016 . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

^ "9 out of 10 top climate change deniers linked with Exxon Mobil" . 10 May 2011.

^ "Analysing the '900 papers supporting climate scepticism': 9 out of top 10 authors linked to ExxonMobil" .

^ "Exposing the dirty money behind fake climate science" . Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 November 2023 .

^ Tollefson, Jeff (22 February 2024). "Climatologist Michael Mann wins defamation case: what it means for scientists".

Nature .

626 (8000): 698– 699.

Bibcode : 2024Natur.626..698T .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-024-00396-y .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 38337053 .

S2CID 267579204 .

^ Jury rules for climate scientist Michael Mann in long-running defamation case.

Science (Report). 8 February 2024.

doi : 10.1126/science.zuort15 .

^ Fazackerley, Anna (14 May 2023).

"Climate crisis deniers target scientists for vicious abuse on Musk's Twitter" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2023.

^ Paddison, Laura (27 May 2023).

" 'Murderers' and 'criminals': Meteorologists face unprecedented harassment from conspiracy theorists" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2023.

^ Schneider, Isabel (14 September 2023).

"Anfeindungen von Klimaleugnern: Wettermoderatoren als neue Zielscheibe" .

Tagesschau (in German) . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ a b c d Antilla, Liisa (2005).

"Climate of scepticism: US newspaper coverage of the science of climate change" .

Global Environmental Change .

15 (4): 338– 352.

Bibcode : 2005GEC....15..338A .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.08.003 .

^ Farrell, Justin (2015).

" Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate change . In" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

113 (1): 92– 97.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1509433112 .

PMC 4711825 .

PMID 26598653 .

^ "A Major Coal Company Went Bust. Its Bankruptcy Filing Shows That It Was Funding Climate Change Denialism" . 16 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "Cloud Peak Energy" .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ Sample, Ian (2 February 2007).

"Scientists offered cash to dispute climate study" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 16 August 2007 .

^ "Canvassing Works" .

Canvassing Works . Retrieved 19 July 2013 .

^ Bradsher, Keith (7 December 1999).

"Ford Announces Its Withdrawal From Global Climate Coalition" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 21 July 2013 .

^ "GCC Suffers Technical Knockout, Industry defections decimate Global Climate Coalition" . June 2022.

^ "globalclimate.org" . Global Climate. 19 April 2003. Archived from the original on 19 April 2003.

^ Gillis, Justin; Schartz, John (21 February 2015).

"Deeper Ties to Corporate Cash for Doubtful Climate Researcher" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 8 November 2021 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (21 February 2015).

"Work of prominent climate change denier was funded by energy industry" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2016 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 .

^ Brahic, Catherine (25 February 2015).

"Climate change sceptic's work called into question" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ McCoy, Terrence (23 February 2015).

"Things just got very hot for climate deniers' favorite scientist" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ Gillis, Justin; Schwartz, John (21 February 2015).

"Deeper Ties to Corporate Cash for Doubtful Climate Researcher" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2015 .

^ Borenstein, Seth (27 July 2006).

"Utilities Paying Global Warming Skeptic" .

CBS News from Associated Press . Archived from the original on 3 March 2007 . Retrieved 14 April 2007 .

^ Brulle, Robert J. (21 December 2013). "Institutionalizing delay: foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change counter-movement organizations".

Climatic Change .

122 (4): 681– 694.

Bibcode : 2014ClCh..122..681B .

doi : 10.1007/s10584-013-1018-7 .

S2CID 27538787 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (20 December 2013).

"Conservative groups spend up to $1bn a year to fight action on climate change" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 7 October 2019 .

^ "Robert Brulle: Inside the Climate Change "Countermovement" " .

Frontline .

PBS . 23 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2015 . Retrieved 21 February 2015 .

^ Nuccitelli, Dana (23 October 2013).

"Fox News defends global warming false balance by denying the 97% consensus" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 15 January 2024 .

^ Uscinski, Joseph E.; Olivella, Santiago (October 2017).

"The conditional effect of conspiracy thinking on attitudes toward climate change" .

Research & Politics .

4 (4): 205316801774310.

doi : 10.1177/2053168017743105 .

ISSN 2053-1680 .

^ Lever-Tracy, Constance, ed. (2010).

Routledge handbook of climate change and society . Routledge international handbooks (1. publ ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-87621-3 .

^ Corcoran, Terence (6 January 2010).

"The cool down in climate polls" .

Financial Post . Archived from the original on 1 January 2011 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ White, Rob (2012).

Climate Change from a Criminological Perspective . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4614-3640-9 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 July 2015 .

^ "Americans Skeptical of Science Behind Global Warming" . Rasmussen Reports. 3 December 2009.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2010 .

^ "Oil Company Positions on the Reality and Risk of Climate Change" .

Environmental Studies . University of Oshkosh—Wisconsin.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 March 2016 .

^ Laville, Sandra (22 March 2019).

"Top oil firms spending millions lobbying to block climate change policies, says report" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 25 October 2019 .

^ Boslough, Mark (20 October 2017).

"An Interview with CSICon Speaker Michael Mann" . Committee for Skeptical Inquiry.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 19 December 2017 .

^ Jamieson, Dale; Oppenheimer, Michael; Oreskes, Naomi (25 October 2019).

"The real reason scientists downplay the risks of climate change" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 25 October 2019 .

^ Leiserowitz, A.; Carman, J.; Buttermore, N.; Wang, X.; et al. (June 2021).

International Public Opinion on Climate Change (PDF) . New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate Change Communication and Facebook Data for Good. p. 7.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 June 2021.

^ ● Survey results from: "The Peoples' Climate Vote" .

UNDP.org . United Nations Development Programme. 26 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2021.

Fig. 3.

● Data re top emitters from: "Historical GHG Emissions / Global Historical Emissions" .

ClimateWatchData.org . Climate Watch. 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2021.

^ a b Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (1 March 2022).

"Americans Largely Favor U.S. Taking Steps To Become Carbon Neutral by 2050 / Appendix (Detailed charts and tables)" .

Pew Research .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2022.

^ Poushter, Jacob; Fagan, Moira; Gubbala, Sneha (31 August 2022).

"Climate Change Remains Top Global Threat Across 19-Country Survey" .

pewresearch.org . Pew Research Center.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2022.

Only statistically significant differences shown.

^ Howe, Peter D.; Mildenberger, Matto; Marlon, Jennifer R.; Leiserowitz, Anthony (1 January 2015).

"Geographic variation in opinions on climate change at state and local scales in the USA" .

Nature Climate Change .

5 (6): 596– 603.

Bibcode : 2015NatCC...5..596H .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate2583 .

ISSN 1758-678X .

S2CID 54549073 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2017 .

^ Morrison, David (2018). "Some Good News on Climate: A Big Shift among TV Weathercasters".

Skeptical Inquirer .

42 (5): 6.

^ Boykoff, M.; Boykoff, J. (July 2004).

"Balance as bias: global warming and the US prestige press" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change Part A .

14 (2): 125– 136.

Bibcode : 2004GEC....14..125B .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2003.10.001 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 November 2015.

^ Dispensa, Jaclyn Marisa; Brulle, Robert J.

(2003). "Media's social construction of environmental issues: focus on global warming – a comparative study".

International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy .

23 (10): 74– 105.

doi : 10.1108/01443330310790327 .

ISSN 0144-333X .

S2CID 144662365 .

^ David, Adam (20 September 2006).

"Royal Society tells Exxon: stop funding climate change denial" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2014 . Retrieved 12 January 2009 .

^ Sandell, Clayton (3 January 2007).

"Report: Big Money Confusing Public on Global Warming" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2007 . Retrieved 12 January 2009 .

^ Nelson, Joshua (2020).

"Petro-masculinity and climate change denial among white, politically conservative American males" .

International Journal of Applied Psychoanalytic Studies .

17 (4): 282– 295.

doi : 10.1002/aps.1638 .

ISSN 1556-9187 .

S2CID 214241307 – via ResearchGate.

^ Daggett, Cara (2018).

"Petro-masculinity: Fossil Fuels and Authoritarian Desire" .

Millennium: Journal of International Studies .

47 (1): 25– 44.

doi : 10.1177/0305829818775817 .

ISSN 0305-8298 .

^ McKenna, Phil (13 September 2018).

"National Teachers Group Confronts Climate Denial: Keep the Politics Out of Science Class" .

InsideClimate News .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2020 .

^ Maza, Cristina (11 November 2019).

"Far-Right Climate Denial Is Growing in Europe" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Limb, Lottie (29 November 2023).

"From oil ads to Russian interference: These are the climate lies to look out for at COP28" .

Euronews .

^ "The Kremlin's climate camouflage" .

EUvsDisinfo .

European External Action Service . 2 August 2023.

^ Plottu, Pierre; Macé, Maxime (23 April 2023).

"Climato-scepticisme : "Il y a un ressentiment anti-écologie auprès de populations qui se sentent stigmatisées" " .

Libération (in French).

^ Bentolila, Sacha; Bornstein, Roman; Calatayud, Benoît (28 April 2023).

"Climatoscepticisme : le nouvel horizon du populisme français" .

Fondation Jean-Jaurès (in French).

^ Woessner, Géraldine (8 April 2023).

"Steven Koonin, la coqueluche des climatosceptiques" .

Le Point (in French) . Retrieved 10 May 2023 .

^ "Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I – Chapter 3: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change" .

science2017.globalchange.gov . U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP): 1– 470. 2017. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019.

Adapted directly from Fig. 3.3.

^ Bergquist, Magnus; Thiel, Maximilian; Goldberg, Matthew H.; van der Linden, Sander (21 March 2023).

"Field interventions for climate change mitigation behaviors: A second-order meta-analysis" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

120 (13): e2214851120.

Bibcode : 2023PNAS..12014851B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2214851120 .

PMC 10068847 .

PMID 36943888 .

(Table 1) — Explained by Thompson, Andrea (19 April 2023).

"What Makes People Act on Climate Change, according to Behavioral Science" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2023.

^ Data from Allew, Matthew; Marlon, Jennifer; Goldberg, Matthew; Maibach, Edward; et al. (27 September 2022).

"Experience with global warming is changing people's minds about it" . Yale Program on Climate Change Communication.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023.

● Full technical article (pay wall): Allew, Matthew; Marlon, Jennifer; Goldberg, Matthew; Maibach, Edward; et al. (4 August 2022).

"Changing minds about global warming: vicarious experience predicts self‑reported opinion change in the USA" .

Climatic Change .

173 (19): 19.

Bibcode : 2022ClCh..173...19B .

doi : 10.1007/s10584-022-03397-w .

S2CID 251323601 .

(Fig. 2 on p. 12) ( preprint ) ^ a b Sharry, John.

"How to turn climate-change denial into acceptance and action" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Lewandowsky, Stephan (17 April 2014).

"From conspiracy theories to climate change denial, a cognitive psychologist explains" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Wong-Parodi, Gabrielle; Feygina, Irina (8 January 2020).

"Understanding and countering the motivated roots of climate change denial" .

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability .

42 : 60– 64.

Bibcode : 2020COES...42...60W .

doi : 10.1016/j.cosust.2019.11.008 .

ISSN 1877-3435 .

^ O'Connor, Mary Catherine (26 April 2017).

"How to Reason with the Climate Change Denier in Your Life" .

Outside Online .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Ronald Bailey (11 August 2005).

"We're All Global Warmers Now" .

Reason Online . Archived from the original on 24 October 2006 . Retrieved 27 April 2008 .

^ Bailey, Ronald (2 February 2007).

"Global Warming—Not Worse Than We Thought, But Bad Enough" .

Reason . Archived from the original on 10 April 2007 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 .

^ Lerner, Sharon (28 April 2017).

"How a Professional Climate Change Denier Discovered the Lies and Decided to Fight for Science" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ "Former climate denier turned realist rallies businesses to take action" .

New Hope Network . 14 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Ahmed, Amel (16 April 2018).

"Ex-'Professional Climate Denier' Aims to Convince Conservatives Threat is Real" .

KQED .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ a b "6 global warming skeptics who changed their minds" .

The Week . 1 September 2010.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Easterbrook, Gregg (24 May 2006).

"Finally Feeling the Heat" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 November 2009 .

^ "Why some Republicans are warming to climate action" .

Christian Science Monitor . 23 May 2017.

ISSN 0882-7729 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Banerjee, Neela (1 August 2012).

"Climate-change denier changes his mind" .

NewsComAu .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Boot, Max (26 November 2018).

"I was wrong on climate change. Why can't other conservatives admit it, too?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2021 . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ Nuccitelli, Dana (8 May 2017).

"Study: to beat science denial, inoculate against misinformers' tricks" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Cook, John (26 October 2016).

"Countering Climate Science Denial and Communicating Scientific Consensus" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedias: Climate science .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.314 .

ISBN 978-0-19-022862-0 .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Kwon, Diana.

"How to Debate a Science Denier" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Lee, McIntyre (8 August 2019).

"How to defend science to climate-change deniers and others who attack it (opinion)" .

Inside Higher Ed .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Kendi, Ibram X. (1 January 2019).

"What the Believers Are Denying" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Renner, Ben (18 January 2020).

"Study Reveals Four 'Pathways To Changing The Minds Of Climate Deniers' " .

Study Finds .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 February 2020 .

^ Nauges, Céline; Wheeler, Sarah Ann (11 October 2018).

"Farmers' climate denial begins to wane as reality bites" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ "Talking About Climate Change in Trump Country" .

Sierra Club . 7 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Harvey, Fiona (9 May 2013).

"Charles: 'Climate change sceptics are turning Earth into dying patient' " .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 10 May 2013 .

^ "Cases Underway to Make Climate Polluters Pay" (PDF) . Center for Climate integrity. 22 February 2024 . Retrieved 1 July 2025 .

^ Yoder, Kate (8 March 2024).

"Big Oil faces a flood of climate lawsuits — and they're moving closer to trial" .

Grist .

^ Kate Yoder; Joseph Winters (2 May 2024).

"New documents show oil executives promoted natural gas as green — but knew it wasn't" .

Grist .

^ Lakhani, Nina; reporter, Nina Lakhani Climate justice (30 June 2025).

"UN expert urges criminalizing fossil fuel disinformation, banning lobbying" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 June 2025 .

Further reading E. Elbeyi, K. Bruhn Jensen, M. Aronczyk, J. Asuka, G. Ceylan, J. Cook, G. Erdelyi, H. Ford, C. Milani, E. Mustafaraj, F. Ogenga, S. Yadin, P. N. Howard, S. Valenzuela (eds.) Elbeyi, Ece; Bruhn Jensen, Klaus; Aronczyk, Melissa; Asuka, Jusen; Ceylan, Gizem; Cook, John; Erdelyi, Gabor; Ford, Heather; Milani, Carlos; Mustafaraj, Eni; Ogenga, Fredrick; Yadin, Sharon; Howard, Philip N.; Valenzuela, Sebastián (June 2025). Brulle, Robert; Jacquet, Jennifer; Lewandowsky, Stephan; Roberts, Timmons (eds.).

"Information Integrity about Climate Science: A Systematic Review" (PDF) . Zurich, Switzerland: International Panel on the Information Environment (IPIE).

doi : 10.61452/BTZP3426 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 June 2025.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Climate change denial .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Climate change denial .

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety v t e Conspiracy theories List of conspiracy theories Overview Core topics Antiscience Cabals deep state éminence grise power behind the throne Civil / Criminal / Political conspiracies Conspiracy Crisis actors Deception Dystopia Espionage Global catastrophe scenarios Hidden message Pseudohistory Pseudoscience Secrecy Secret societies Urban legends and myths Psychology Attitude polarization Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Confirmation bias Denialism Locus of control Manipulation Mass psychogenic illness moral panics Paranoia Psychological projection Astronomy and outer space 2012 phenomenon Nibiru cataclysm Ancient astronauts Apollo Moon landings Flat Earth Hollow Earth Hollow Moon Reptilians UFOs Alien abduction Area 51 Black Knight satellite Cryptoterrestrial / Extraterrestrial / Interdimensional hypothesis Dulce Base Estimate of the Situation (1948) Lake Michigan Triangle MJ-12 Men in black Nazi UFOs Die Glocke Project Serpo Hoaxes Dundy County (1884) Maury Island (1947) Roswell (1947) Twin Falls (1947) Aztec, New Mexico (1949) Southern England (1967) Ilkley Moor (1987) Gulf Breeze (1987–88) Alien autopsy (1995) Morristown (2009) Deaths and disappearances Assassination / suicide theories Zachary Taylor (1850) Louis Le Prince (1890) Lord Kitchener (1916) Tom Thomson (1917) Władysław Sikorski (1943) Benito Mussolini (1945) Adolf Hitler (1945) Subhas Chandra Bose (1945) Johnny Stompanato (1958) Marilyn Monroe (1962) John F. Kennedy (1963) Lee Harvey Oswald (1963) Lal Bahadur Shastri (1966) Harold Holt (1967) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1968) Robert F. Kennedy (1968) Salvador Allende (1973) Aldo Moro (1978) Renny Ottolina (1978) Pope John Paul I (1978) Airey Neave (1979) Olof Palme (1986) Zia-ul-Haq (1988) GEC-Marconi scientists (1980s–90s) Turgut Özal (1993) Vince Foster (1993) Kurt Cobain (1994) Yitzhak Rabin (1995) Diana, Princess of Wales (1997) Vatican murders (1998) Nepalese royal family (2001) Yasser Arafat (2004) Benazir Bhutto (2007) Osama bin Laden (2011) Hugo Chávez (2013) Seth Rich (2016) Alejandro Castro (2018) Jeffrey Epstein (2019) Chan Yin-lam (2019) Sushant Singh Rajput (2020) John McAfee (2021) Accidents / disasters Mary Celeste (1872) RMS Titanic (1912) Great Kantō earthquake (1923) Lynmouth Flood (1952) Dyatlov Pass (1959) Lost Cosmonauts (1950s–60s) JAT Flight 367 (1972) United Air Lines Flight 553 (1972) Itavia Flight 870 (1980) South African Airways Flight 295 (1987) Khamar-Daban (1993) MS Estonia (1994) TWA Flight 800 (1996) EgyptAir Flight 990 (1999) Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 (2014) Other cases Joan of Arc (1431) Yemenite children (1948–54) Elvis Presley (1977) Jonestown (1978) Body double hoax Paul McCartney Avril Lavigne Vladimir Putin Melania Trump Energy, environment Agenda 21 California drought manipulation Climate change denial false theories Free energy suppression HAARP Red mercury False flag allegations USS Maine (1898) RMS Lusitania (1915) Reichstag fire (1933) Pearl Harbor (1941) USS Liberty (1967) Lufthansa Flight 615 (1972) Widerøe Flight 933 (1982) KAL Flight 007 (1983) Mozambican presidential jet (1986) Pan Am Flight 103 (1988) Oklahoma City bombing (1995) 9/11 attacks (2001) advance knowledge WTC collapse Madrid train bombing (2004) London bombings (2005) Smolensk air disaster (2010) Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 (2014) Denial of the 7 October attacks (2023) Gender and sexuality Alpha/beta males Anti-LGBTQ Anti-gender movement Chemicals Drag panic Gay agenda Gay Nazis myth HIV/AIDS stigma United States Homintern Lavender Scare Recruitment Grooming Litter box hoax Transvestigation Finger pinching Gamergate Ideology in incel communities Larries / Gaylors Satanic panic Soy and masculinity Health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccination Autism MMR Thiomersal In chiropractic Misinformation Aspartame Big Pharma Chemtrails COVID-19 Ivermectin Lab leak Vaccines Turbo cancer In Canada / Philippines / United States Ebola Electronic harassment Germ theory denialism GMOs HIV/AIDS denialism Origins theories Oral polio AIDS hypothesis Lepers' plot Medbeds SARS (2003) Water fluoridation Pont-Saint-Esprit mass poisoning Race, religion and/or ethnicity Bhagwa Love Trap CERN ritual hoax COVID-19 and xenophobia Freemasons French Revolution Gas chambers for Poles in Warsaw (1940s) German POWs post-WWII Priory of Sion Product labeling Halal Kosher Tartarian Empire War against Islam White genocide Antisemitic Andinia Plan Blood libel Cohen Plan Doctors' plot During the Black Death Epsilon Team George Soros Holocaust denial Trivialization International Jewish conspiracy Committee of 300 Cultural Bolshevism / Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Judeo-Masonic plot The Protocols of the Elders of Zion World War II Z.O.G.

Judeopolonia Killing of Jesus Kalergi Plan New World Order Rothschilds Stab-in-the-back myth Christian / Anti-Christian Anti-Catholic Jesuits Popish Plot Vatican Bible Giuseppe Siri Islamophobic Counter-jihad Bihar human sacrifice Eurabia Great Replacement Love jihad Proposed "Islamo-leftism" inquiry Trojan Horse scandal Genocide denial / Denial of mass killings Armenian Assyrian Bangladesh Bosnian Cambodian The Holocaust Holodomor Nanjing Rwandan Serbs during WWII Regional Asia India Cow vigilante violence Pakistan Jinnahpur Philippines Tallano gold South Korea Finger-pinching Thailand Finland Plot Americas (outside the United States) Argentina Andinia Plan Canada Avro Arrow cancellation Leuchter report Peru Casa Matusita Venezuela Daktari Ranch affair Golpe Azul Middle East / North Africa In the Arab world 10 agorot Cairo fire Kissinger Plan in Lebanon Israel-related animal theories Iran Western-backed Iranian Revolution Israel Pallywood Russia Alaska payment Dulles' Plan Golden billion Petrograd Military Organization Rasputin Ukraine bioweapons Turkey 2016 coup attempt Ergenekon Operation Sledgehammer Gezi Park protests Sèvres syndrome Üst akıl Other European Euromyth Georgia Global War Party Ireland German Plot Lithuania Statesmen Roman Republic First Catilinarian conspiracy Spain Mano Negra affair Sweden Lilla Saltsjöbadsavtalet UK Clockwork Orange plot Elm Guest House Harold Wilson Voting pencil United States Barack Obama Citizenship Religion Parentage "Obamagate" / Spygate Biden–Ukraine Black helicopters CIA and JFK CIA assistance to bin Laden Clinton body count Cultural Marxism Election denial movement FBI secret society FEMA camps Georgia Guidestones Jade Helm 15 Montauk Project Philadelphia Experiment Pizzagate The Plan Project Azorian QAnon Pastel Incidents Saddam–al-Qaeda Sandy Hook (2012) Springfield pet-eating hoax Trump–Ukraine "Vast right-wing conspiracy" Vietnam War POW/MIA issue / Stab-in-the-back myth 2020 election Italygate "Pence Card" Maricopa County ballot audit Stop the Steal Other Dead Internet theory NESARA/GESARA New Coke Phantom time / New chronology Shadow government claims Bilderberg Illuminati synarchism Shakespearean authorship Pseudolaw Admiralty law Freeman on the land movement Redemption movement Sovereign citizens Strawman theory Tax protesters Satirical Acre Bielefeld Birds Aren't Real Li's field Ted Cruz–Zodiac Killer meme See also Argument from ignorance Conspiracy Encyclopedia Conspiracy fiction Conspirituality Dogma pseudoskepticism Falsifiability Fringe science Historical negationism Online youth radicalization Paranormal Prejudice Hate speech Radicalization Science by press conference Superstition NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5c8z5
Cached time: 20250816083557
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.579 seconds
Real time usage: 3.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28955/1000000
Revision size: 247825/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1017212/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15335/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 42/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1342759/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.347/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27152170/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3281.324      1 -total
 63.99% 2099.838      1 Template:Reflist
 20.10%  659.450    129 Template:Cite_web
 15.76%  517.181     97 Template:Cite_news
 14.70%  482.502     68 Template:Cite_journal
  4.24%  139.064     10 Template:Annotated_link
  4.12%  135.192     24 Template:Cite_book
  4.09%  134.214      2 Template:Excerpt
  3.88%  127.224     26 Template:Rp
  3.83%  125.771      5 Template:Quote_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12474403:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816083557 and revision id 1306153246. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate_change_denial&oldid=1306153246 " Categories : Climate change denial Climate change and society Conspiracy theories promoted by Donald Trump Earth science conspiracy theories Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from April 2021 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with excerpts Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2024 Articles with limited geographic scope from August 2019 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from November 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles needing cleanup from November 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Climate change denial 36 languages Add topic

