Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shape of punctuation marks 2 Marks similar to European punctuation 3 Other punctuation Toggle Other punctuation subsection 3.1 Punctuation marks 3.2 Typographic styles 3.3 Apostrophe 4 Use of punctuation marks 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Chinese punctuation 4 languages العربية Български Français 吴语 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Punctuation used with Chinese characters Writing systems that use Chinese characters also include various punctuation marks , derived from both Chinese and Western sources. Historically, jùdòu ( 句读 ; 句讀 ) annotations were often used to indicate the boundaries of sentences and clauses in text. The use of punctuation in written Chinese only became mandatory during the 20th century, due to Western influence. Unlike modern punctuation, judou marks were added by scholars for pedagogical purposes and were not viewed as integral to the text. Texts were therefore generally transmitted without judou . In most cases, this practice did not interfere with the interpretation of a text, although it occasionally resulted in ambiguity.

[ A ] The first book to be printed with modern punctuation was Outline of the History of Chinese Philosophy ( 中國哲學史大綱 ) by Hu Shih , published in 1919. Traditional poetry and calligraphy maintains the punctuation-free style. However, most editions of classical texts published since the 1930s are punctuated with fully modern punctuation (or at least using the modern equivalents of the traditional judou marks).

The usage of punctuation in China is regulated by the Chinese national standard GB/T 15834–2011 "General rules for punctuation" ( 標點符號用法 ; 标点符号用法 ; biāodiǎn fúhào yòngfǎ ).

[ 2 ] Shape of punctuation marks [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Examples of handwritten punctuation (circles in red ink) at the bottom-right or -center of characters. From the Yongle Encyclopedia .

1912 textbook of the Republic of China 's Commercial Press depicting the sinking of the Titanic , with punctuation marks to the right of characters Many ancient Chinese books contain thousands of words with no spaces between them; however, when necessary to explicitly denote a pause or break, judou marks such as "。" and "、" were used.

Similar to the development of punctuation in Europe , there were varying types of judou marks. For instance, a Song dynasty print of Chronicles of Huayang used full-width spaces to denote a stop, [ citation needed ] [ 3 ] whereas a print of Jingdian Shiwen from the same period simply used " 。 " and " 、 " marks.

[ citation needed ] Qu Yuan 's Li Sao used the character 兮 and grammatical particles to denote stops, similar to judou marks.

[ 4 ] In Written Chinese, each character conforms to a roughly square frame, so the entire text can fit into a grid.
Because of this, East Asian punctuation marks are larger than their European counterparts, as they should occupy a square area that is the same size as the characters around them. These punctuation marks are called fullwidth to contrast them from halfwidth European punctuation marks.

Chinese characters can be written horizontally or vertically . Some punctuation marks adapt to this change in direction: the parentheses, square brackets, square quotation marks, book title marks, ellipsis marks, and dashes all rotate 90° clockwise when used in vertical text.

The three underline -like punctuation marks in Chinese (proper noun mark, wavy book title mark, and emphasis mark) rotate and shift to the left side of the text in vertical script (shifting to the right side of the text is also possible, but this is outmoded and can clash with the placement of other punctuation marks).

Marks similar to European punctuation [ edit ] Marks imported from Europe are fullwidth instead of halfwidth like their original European counterparts, thus incorporating more space, and no longer need to be followed by an additional space in typesetting: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ⟨　⟩ (U+3000 FULLWIDTH SPACE ) is the space , but takes the width of a full hanzi.

， (U+FF0C FULLWIDTH COMMA ) is the comma (,). It cannot be used for enumerating a list; see "enumeration comma" below.

！ (U+FF01 FULLWIDTH EXCLAMATION MARK ) is the exclamation mark (!).

？ (U+FF1F FULLWIDTH QUESTION MARK ) is the question mark (?).

； (U+FF1B FULLWIDTH SEMICOLON ) is the semicolon (;).

： (U+FF1A FULLWIDTH COLON ) is the colon (:).

（ ） (U+FF08 FULLWIDTH LEFT PARENTHESIS ), (U+FF09 FULLWIDTH RIGHT PARENTHESIS ) are parentheses (round brackets).

There are two kinds of square brackets : ［］ (U+FF3B FULLWIDTH LEFT SQUARE BRACKET ), (U+FF3D FULLWIDTH RIGHT SQUARE BRACKET ) 【 】 (U+3010 LEFT BLACK LENTICULAR BRACKET ), (U+3011 RIGHT BLACK LENTICULAR BRACKET ) Other punctuation [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Other punctuation symbols are more different, in shape or usage: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Punctuation marks [ edit ] Period ( 。 ) The Chinese period (U+3002 IDEOGRAPHIC FULL STOP ) is a fullwidth small circle ( simplified Chinese : 句号 ; traditional Chinese : 句號 ; pinyin : jùhào ; lit.

'sentence mark'). In horizontal writing, the period is placed in the middle 。 , however in Mainland China it is placed in the bottom left 。 ; in vertical writing, it is placed below and to the right of the last character ︒ (U+FE12 PRESENTATION FORM FOR VERTICAL IDEOGRAPHIC FULL STOP ) in Mainland China , and in the middle 。 in Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Macau .

[ 6 ] Quotation marks ( 「…」 , ﹁…﹂ , “…” ) Traditional Chinese does not use European quotation marks. Its double and single quotation marks are fullwidth 『 』 (U+300E LEFT WHITE CORNER BRACKET , U+300F RIGHT WHITE CORNER BRACKET ) and 「 」 (U+300C LEFT CORNER BRACKET , U+300D RIGHT CORNER BRACKET ). The double quotation marks are used when embedded within single quotation marks: 「…『…』…」 . In vertical text, quotation marks are rotated 90° clockwise ( ﹁…﹂ (U+FE41 PRESENTATION FORM FOR VERTICAL LEFT ANGLE BRACKET , U+FE42 PRESENTATION FORM FOR VERTICAL RIGHT CORNER BRACKET )).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Simplified Chinese officially prescribes European-style quotation marks for horizontal text and Chinese quotation marks for vertical text. Single quotation marks are used when embedded within double quotation marks: “…‘…’…” .

These quotation marks are fullwidth in printed matter but share the same codepoints as the European quotation marks in Unicode , so they require a Chinese-language font to be displayed correctly. In vertical text, corner brackets rotated 90° clockwise ( ﹃…﹁…﹂…﹄ ), are used similar to Traditional Chinese but in reverse clamping order, with double quotation on the outside and single quotation on the inside. However, corner brackets are commonly encountered in situations that normally necessitate European punctuation, including in official contexts and media.

[ 9 ] Enumeration comma ( 、 ) A sign in a Zhuhai park, which, if we reproduce enumeration commas in English, can be rendered nearly word-for-word as: "It is strictly forbidden to pick flowers、 fruit、leaves, [or to] dig out roots、medicinal plants!" The enumeration comma (U+3001 IDEOGRAPHIC COMMA ) or "dun comma" ( simplified Chinese : 顿号 ; traditional Chinese : 頓號 ; pinyin : dùnhào ; lit.

'pause mark') must be used instead of the regular comma when separating words constituting a list.

Chinese language does not traditionally observe the English custom of a serial comma (the comma before conjunctions in a list), although the issue is of little consequence in Chinese at any rate, as the English "A, B, and C" is more likely to be rendered in Chinese as " A、B及C " or more often as " A、B、C ", without any word for "and", see picture to the right.

[ 6 ] Middle dot ( · ) Chinese uses a middle dot to separate characters in non-Han personal names, such as Tibetan, Uyghur, etc. For example "Nur Bekri" ( نۇر بەكرى ), the name of a Chinese politician of Uyghur descent is rendered as " 努爾·白克力 ". " Leonardo da Vinci " is often transcribed to Mandarin as: 李奧納多·達·文西 . The middle dot is also fullwidth in printed matter, while the halfwidth middle dot [·] is also used in computer input, which is then rendered as fullwidth in Chinese-language fonts.

In Taiwan, the hyphenation point ([‧], U+2027 HYPHENATION POINT ) is used instead for the same purpose.

[ 10 ] [ failed verification – see discussion ] They can also be used to represent decimal points in Chinese. For example "3.5" becomes 「三‧五」 .

[ 11 ] Title marks ( 《…》, 〈…〉, ﹏﹏﹏ ) For titles of books, films, and so on, Simplified Chinese officially uses fullwidth double angle brackets [ 12 ] 《 》 (U+300A LEFT DOUBLE ANGLE BRACKET , U+300B RIGHT DOUBLE ANGLE BRACKET ), and fullwidth single angle brackets 〈 〉 (U+3008 LEFT ANGLE BRACKET , U+3009 RIGHT ANGLE BRACKET ).

The latter is used when embedded within the former: 《…〈…〉…》 . Although ﹏﹏﹏ (wavy underline, U+FE4F WAVY LOW LINE ) is the officially prescribed title mark by Taiwan's Ministry of Education (especially for handwriting), when typing, square brackets 【 】 and double quotation marks 『 』 are also de facto used, if not prescribed by dictionaries in a manner akin to Korean and Japanese; Simplified Chinese often does likewise for song titles. In practice, Traditional Chinese , single title marks are also used for articles in or sections of a book, a rule that is also officially prescribed for Simplified Chinese .

Furthermore, unsanctioned and alternate usage of Western or Chinese quotation marks is rather common, especially so for Chinese quotation marks in Traditional Chinese newspapers; this "unsanctioned practice" is also commonly found in Japanese and Korean.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Ellipsis ( …… ) In Chinese, the ellipsis is written with six dots (not three) occupying the same space as two characters in the center of a line.

[ 2 ] [ 13 ] Unicode provides an explicitly centered U+22EF ⋯ MIDLINE HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS character [ 14 ] in addition to the inexplicit U+2026 … HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS character.

[ 15 ] Two-em dash ( ⸺ ) Similarly, the two-em dash ( U+2E3A ⸺ TWO-EM DASH ) is written so that it occupies the space of two em dash characters in the center of the line. There should be no breaking in the line.

[ 2 ] To represent the two-em dash character ([⸺]), one can write two consecutive em dashes ([——], U+2014 U+2014). Chinese dash is Chinese : 破折號 ; pinyin : pòzhéhào ; lit.

'Break/Fold Mark'.

En dash ( – ) When connecting two words to signify a range, Chinese generally uses an en dash occupying the space of one character (e.g.

1月—7月 "January to July", which can also be written 1月至7月, with the character 至 in place of the dash). A single em dash character or a tilde may also be used.

[ 16 ] Wave dash ( ～ ) The wave dash ( U+301C 〜 WAVE DASH , simplified Chinese : 浪纹 ; traditional Chinese : 浪紋 ; pinyin : làng wén ) is used in the Chinese language to signify a numerical range (e.g. 5～20個字 "5 to 20 words"). Additionally, there is another Unicode character called the fullwidth tilde ( U+FF5E ～ FULLWIDTH TILDE , Chinese : 全形波浪號 ; pinyin : quán xíng bōlàng hào ) which is often used as an alternative form of the wave dash symbol. The wave dash is more commonly but not exclusively used when the numbers are estimates (e.g.

circa dates and temperatures in weather forecasts).

For the most part, however, the en dash and wavy dash are interchangeable; usage is largely a matter of personal taste or institutional style. Note that the wave dash ([〜]) and the fullwidth tilde ([～]) should not be confused with the wavy dash character ( U+3030 〰 WAVY DASH , simplified Chinese : 浪线 ; traditional Chinese : 浪線 ; pinyin : làng xiàn ). In Japanese , the wavy dash is used as an emphatic form of the katakana-hiragana prolonged sound mark .

In informal use (such as texting ), wavy dashes are also used to indicate a prolonged vowel similar to informal English's repeated letters (e.g.

哇～～ "waaah") or to indicate stress in places where English would employ an emphatic tone marked variously by italics or bolding (e.g.

要～～ "I want it!").

[ 6 ] Spacing Similar to the spacing between letters ( kerning ) in European languages, Chinese writing uses a very narrow space between characters, though it does not observe the equivalent to the wider space between words except on rare occasions. Chinese –  particularly classical Chinese –  is thus a form of scriptio continua and it is common for words to be split between lines with no marking in the text equivalent to the English hyphen .

When a space is used, it is also fullwidth (U+3000 IDEOGRAPHIC SPACE : ⟨　⟩ ).

One instance of its usage is as an honorific marker . A modern example in 20th century Taiwan, is found in the reference to Chiang Kai-shek as 先‌總‌統　蔣‌公 (Former President, Lord Chiang), in which the preceding space serves as an honorific marker for 蔣公 . This use is also still current in very formal letters or other old-style documents, [ 6 ] as well as religious scripture.

When Chinese is romanized , spaces are used to assist in reading. Rules vary between systems but most commonly –  as in Hanyu Pinyin –  the spaces properly occur between semantic divisions (i.e., words) but in practice are often placed between phonetic divisions (i.e., individual characters). In the Wade–Giles system , separate characters within a word were noted by hyphens but this is increasingly uncommon.

Asterisk ( * ) Mainland Chinese supply chains often use an asterisk in place of a multiplication sign (×) to specify product dimensions. For example "10×200×350" becomes "10*200*350".

Example of Chinese products using asterisks as punctuation for product dimensions.

Typographic styles [ edit ] The following are commonly suggested typographical styles; however, they are rarely carried out in practice and often only used when necessary. Proper name marks and title marks are primarily used in textbooks and official documents in Hong Kong , Macau , and Taiwan .

Proper name mark ( __ ) A proper name mark (an underline ) is occasionally used, especially in teaching materials and some movie subtitles . When the text runs vertically, the appropriate name mark is written as a line to the characters' left (to the right in some older books).

Title mark ( ﹏﹏ ) A title mark is a wavy underline ( ﹏﹏ , U+FE4F WAVY LOW LINE ) used instead of the regular book title marks whenever the proper noun mark is used in the same text.

Emphasis mark For emphasis, Chinese uses emphasis marks instead of italic type . Each emphasis mark is a single dot placed under each character to be emphasized (for vertical text, the dot is placed to the right-hand side of each character). Although frequent in printed matter, emphasis marks are rare online, as most word processors do not support them. However, support in HTML has been possible by adding the CSS property text-emphasis-style .

Death-indication mark ( 姓名 ) A death-indication mark ( simplified Chinese : 示亡号 ; traditional Chinese : 示亡號 ; pinyin : shìwánghào ) marks a person's recent death. Typographically, it consists of a black border around the person's name. It is supported by most word processors and is supported in CSS through the border property. It is used in lists or bibliographical data, for example. Lin Suifang ( 林穗芳 ) suggests that this practice may have entered the Chinese language in the fifties when it was supposedly adopted from translations from Russian; he does not cite any sources for this statement, however.

[ 17 ] Apostrophe [ edit ] There is no equivalent of the apostrophe in Chinese. Therefore, it is omitted in translated foreign names such as " O'Neill ". Likewise, the hyphen is used only when writing translated foreign names with hyphens. Otherwise, it is not used in Chinese and is omitted when translating compound words.

Use of punctuation marks [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Several punctuation marks have ranges of use that differ from the way they are used in English, though some functions may overlap.

， The comma is used to join clauses that deal with a certain topic or line of thinking. As such, what would appear to an English speaker to be a comma splice is very commonly seen in Chinese writing. Often, the entirety of a long paragraph can consist of clauses joined by commas, with the sole period coming only at the end. Unlike in English, a comma is allowed between a subject and its predicate.

； The semicolon is frequently used to demarcate parallel structures in a paragraph.

「...」 Quotation marks, in addition to being used around quotations, are also commonly used for emphasis and to indicate proper nouns and titles, and also to enclose metaphors that do not explicitly state it is a metaphor. (e.g. 「毛球」跑出來了, i.e. The 'hairball' ran out.) — — The use of a second em dash to close a parenthetical thought is rare. Instead, a comma is usually used, or sometimes no punctuation at all.

In Pinyin , the apostrophe (') ( 隔音符號 , géyīn fúhào, 'syllable-dividing mark') is before a syllable starting with a vowel (a, o, or e) in a multiple-syllable word when the syllable does not start the word. It is commonly thought that this apostrophe should be used when there could be ambiguity regarding the syllables used (e.g. xian and Xi'an or bing'an and bin'gan).

See also [ edit ] East Asian punctuation Japanese punctuation Korean punctuation Line breaking rules in East Asian languages Notes [ edit ] ^ For example, this passage " 卒為善士則之野有眾逐虎 " in Mencius 7B "Wholeheartedly" ( 孟子·盡心下 )  has been punctuated as " 卒為善士。則之野。有眾逐虎。 ; 'Ultimately', 'he became a great gentleman. Thereupon he went to the countryside. There was a crowd in pursuit of a tiger'"; or as " 卒為善。士則之。野有眾逐虎。 ; 'Ultimately', 'he became great. Gentlemen took him as a model. In the countryside there was a crowd in pursuit of a tiger.'"; or as " 卒為善士則。之野。有眾逐虎。 ; 'Ultimately', 'he became a model for great gentlemen. He went to the countryside. There was a crowd in pursuit of a tiger.'". The first was given by the Han dynasty scholar Zhao Qi ( 趙岐 ) and was the traditional reading accepted by Song scholar Zhu Xi , Qing scholar Jiao Xun [ zh ] , etc. The second reading is favored by 13th-century scholars Liu Changshi (劉昌詩), Zhou Mi [ zh ] , etc. The third reading is proposed by modern scholars Wang Changlin (2002, 64) as well as Qin Hualin & Ling Yu (2005, 31).

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Van Els, Paul (February 2021).

"Moral Beauty and the Beast: Ethical Dilemmas in the Mencius" , Vol. 35 . p. 18-19 of pp. 13–45 ^ a b c Zhonghua renmin gongheguo guojia zhiliang jiandu jianyan jianyi zongju (30 December 2011), 中华人民共和国国家标准 GB/T 15834–2011：标点符号用法 [ National Standard of the People's Republic of China GB/T 15834–2011: General Rules for Punctuation ] (PDF) (in Chinese), archived from the original (PDF) on 9 November 2016 , retrieved 24 January 2014 ^ 常璩 (1809).

華陽國志: 十二卷 (in Chinese). 李氏萬卷樓.

^ "Lísāo" 离骚 .

Gǔshī wén wǎng 古诗文网 (in Simplified Chinese). Archived from the original on 14 June 2018.

^ Halfwidth and Fullwidth Forms (PDF) , The Unicode Consortium, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2016 , retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e f g h CJK Symbols and Punctuation (PDF) , The Unicode Consortium, archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 , retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ a b c CJK Compatibility Forms (PDF) , The Unicode Consortium, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 February 2016 , retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ 中華民國教育部國語推行委員會，《重訂標點符號手冊》，中華民國八十六年三月台灣學術網路三版。 ^ 中華人民共和國國家標準，《標點符號用法》，1995年12月13日發布，1996年6月1日實施。 ^ General Punctuation (PDF) , The Unicode Consortium, archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 , retrieved 9 February 2016 .

^ "《重訂標點符號手冊》修訂版－－間隔號" .

^ CJK Symbols and Punctuation (PDF) , The Unicode Consortium , archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2009 , retrieved 6 November 2009 .

^ "Shānjié hào" 刪節號 .

"Chóng dìng biāodiǎn fúhào shǒucè" xiūdìng bǎn 《重訂標點符號手冊》修訂版 (in Chinese). Jiaoyu bu . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ Mathematical Operators (PDF) , Unicode Consortium, p. 7, archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2018 , retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ General Punctuation (PDF) , Unicode Consortium, p. 4, archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2018 , retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ Chinese Layout Task Force.

"Requirements for Chinese Text Layout" . W3C. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016 . Retrieved 1 May 2016 .

^ Lin, Suifang (2000).

Biāodiǎn fúhào xuéxí yǔ yìngyòng 标点符号学习与应用 [ The Study and Application of Punctuation Marks ] (in Chinese) (1 ed.). Beijing: People's Press .

ISBN 7-01-003043-X .

OCLC 45138497 . p. 397: 50年代初通过翻译俄语书刊进入汉语 External links [ edit ] 《重訂標點符號手冊》修訂版 – official website of the Revised Handbook of Punctuation, December 2008 Edition 重訂標點符號手冊 –  Chinese punctuation marks manual, published by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China Revised Handbook of Punctuation –  was published in December 2008 by the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China (Taiwan) 中華人民共和國國家標準標點符號用法 – The PRC 's National Standards on the Usage of Punctuation Marks (in Chinese) The Unicode Consortium v t e Chinese language Sinitic languages Major linguistic groups Mandarin Northeastern Changchun Harbin Shenyang Taz Beijing Beijing Taiwan Jilu Tianjin Jinan Jiaoliao Dalian Qingdao Weihai Central Plains Dongping Gangou Guanzhong Xi'an Luoyang Xuzhou Dungan Xinjiang Southwestern Sichuanese Chengdu–Chongqing (?) Minjiang Leshan Renshou–Fushun [ zh ] Zigong Kunming Nanping Wuhan Gui–Liu Wuming Jianghuai Nanjing Nantong Nanping Lanyin Lanzhou dialect [ zh ] Ürümqi dialect [ zh ] Xinjiang Other Junjiahua Qinjiang Gyami Jin Zhangjiakou–Hohhot Zhi–Yan Wu Taihu Shanghai Suzhou Wuxi Changzhou (?) Hangzhou Shaoxing Ningbo Jinxiang Jiangyin Shadi Taizhou Wu Taizhou Tiantai Oujiang Wenzhou Rui'an Wencheng Wuzhou Jinhua Chu–Qu Quzhou Jiangshan Qingtian Xuanzhou Xuancheng Huizhou Ji-She [ zh ] Xiu-Yi [ zh ] Qi-De [ zh ] Yanzhou [ zh ] Jing-Zhan [ zh ] Gan Chang–Du Nanchang Yi–Liu Ying–Yi Da–Tong Xiang Changyi Changsha Loushao Shuangfeng Xiangxiang Wugang Ji–Xu Yong–Quan Qiyang Min Eastern Houguan [ zh ] Fuzhou Fuqing Changle Gutian Matsu Fu–Ning [ zh ] Ningde Fu'an Other Manjiang Zhongshan Longdu Nanlang Pu–Xian Putian Xianyou Southern Hokkien Quanzhou Zhangzhou Amoy Chawan Taiwan Philippines Penang Medan Singapore Southern Malaysia Teochew Swatow Haklau Pontianak Zhongshan Sanxiang Other Zhenan Longyan Leizhou Zhanjiang Hainan Wenchang Haikou Banqiao Inland Northern Jian'ou Jianyang Central Shao–Jiang Hakka Huiyang [ zh ] Changting Meixian Pontianak Singkawang Taiwan Sixian Hailu Raoping Tingzhou Wuhua Yue Yuehai Guangzhou Hong Kong Malaysia Xiguan Jiujiang Shiqi Weitou Dapeng Yunfu Siyi Taishan Xinhui [ zh ] Other Gao–Yang Goulou Wu–Hua Yong–Xun Luo–Guang Qin–Lian Pinghua Northern Pinghua Tongdao Younian Southern Pinghua Yongjiang Guandao Rongjiang Unclassified Shaozhou Tuhua Xiangnan Tuhua Danzhou Badong Yao Shehua Waxiang Yeheni Huizhou Mai Laobeizi (?) Macro-Bai Bai Cai-Long Caijia Longjia Luren Standard forms of Chinese Mandarin ( Standard Chinese ) Sichuanese Taiwanese Philippine Malaysian Singaporean Other varieties Cantonese Hokkien Hakka History, phonology, and grammar History Old Chinese Eastern Han Middle Chinese Old Mandarin Middle Mandarin Proto-Min Proto-Hakka Ba–Shu Gan Phonology Historical Old Old National Cantonese Hokkien Northern Wu Mandarin Literary and colloquial readings Grammar Numerals Classifiers Honorifics Cantonese grammar Classical grammar Idioms Chengyu Xiehouyu Written Chinese and input methods Literary forms Official Classical Adoption in Japan in Vietnam Vernacular Written Cantonese Written Dungan Written Hokkien Written Sichuanese Scripts Logographic Script styles Oracle bone Bronze Seal Clerical Semi-cursive Cursive Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Punctuation Braille Cantonese Mainland Chinese Taiwanese Two-cell Phonetic Romanization Gwoyeu Romatzyh Hanyu Pinyin MPS II Postal Tongyong Pinyin Wade–Giles EFEO Lessing-Othmer Yale Cyrillization Dungan Cyrillic Bopomofo Cantonese Bopomofo Taiwanese Phonetic Symbols Taiwanese kana Taiwanese Hangul Xiao'erjing Nüshu Input methods Logographic Biaoxingma Boshiamy [ zh ] Cangjie Simplified CKC Dayi Stroke count Wubi (Wang Ma) ZhengMa Q9 Pinyin Google Microsoft Sogou List of varieties of Chinese NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dmmfj
Cached time: 20250817212202
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.750 seconds
Real time usage: 0.880 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9415/1000000
Revision size: 27996/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 289108/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12476/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71254/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.428/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17586820/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  736.363      1 -total
 20.21%  148.790      2 Template:Reflist
 18.50%  136.202      1 Template:Chinese_language
 18.16%  133.704      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 16.56%  121.945     38 Template:Lang
 15.46%  113.871     15 Template:Navbox
 14.39%  105.936      1 Template:Efn-ua
 14.22%  104.723      1 Template:Efn
 12.50%   92.030      8 Template:Citation
 12.08%   88.948      6 Template:Unichar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15853334:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817212202 and revision id 1304425880. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chinese_punctuation&oldid=1304425880 " Categories : Punctuation of specific languages Chinese orthography Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Simplified Chinese-language sources (zh-hans) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from February 2019 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles needing additional references from February 2016 Articles containing Uyghur-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2021 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 00:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chinese punctuation 4 languages Add topic

