Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Mathematical philosophy 3 Newton's other beliefs 4 Popularization 5 Influence on other scholars 6 References Toggle the table of contents Newtonianism 8 languages العربية فارسی Français Galego Português Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical principle of applying Newton's methods in a variety of fields Title page of Isaac Newton's Opticks Newtonianism is a philosophical and scientific doctrine inspired by the beliefs and methods of natural philosopher Isaac Newton . While Newton's influential contributions were primarily in physics and mathematics, his broad conception of the universe as being governed by rational and understandable laws laid the foundation for many strands of Enlightenment thought. Newtonianism became an  influential intellectual program that applied Newton's principles in many avenues of inquiry, laying the groundwork for modern science (both the natural and social sciences), in addition to influencing philosophy, political thought and theology.

Background [ edit ] Newton's Principia Mathematica , published by the Royal Society in 1687 [ 1 ] but not available widely and in English until after his death, is the text generally cited as revolutionary or otherwise radical in the development of science.

[ 2 ] The three books of Principia , considered a seminal text in mathematics and physics, are notable for their rejection of hypotheses in favor of inductive and deductive reasoning based on a set of definitions and axioms. This method may be contrasted to the Cartesian method of deduction based on sequential logical reasoning, and showed the efficacy of applying mathematical analysis as a means of making discoveries about the natural world.

[ 2 ] Newton's other seminal work was Opticks , printed in 1704 in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , of which he became president in 1703. The treatise, which features his now famous work on the composition and dispersion of sunlight, is often cited as an example of how to analyze difficult questions via quantitative experimentation. Even so, the work was not considered revolutionary in Newton's time.

[ 2 ] One hundred years later, however, Thomas Young would describe Newton's observations in Opticks as "yet unrivalled... they only rise in our estimation as we compare them with later attempts to improve on them." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Mathematical philosophy [ edit ] The first edition of Principia features proposals about the movements of celestial bodies which Newton initially calls "hypotheses"—however, by the second edition, the word "hypothesis" was replaced by the word "rule", and Newton had added to the footnotes the following statement: ...

I frame no hypotheses . For whatever is not deduced from the phenomena is to be called a hypothesis; and hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, whether of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy.

[ 5 ] Newton's work and the philosophy that enshrines it are based on mathematical empiricism , which is the idea that mathematical and physical laws may be revealed in the real world via experimentation and observation.

[ 2 ] However, Newton's empiricism is balanced against an adherence to an exact mathematical system, and that in many cases the "observed phenomena" upon which Newton built his  theories were actually based on mathematical models, which were representative but not identical to the natural phenomena they described.

[ 2 ] Newtonian doctrine can be contrasted with several alternative sets of principles and methods such as Cartesianism , Leibnizianism and Wolffianism .

Newton's other beliefs [ edit ] Despite his reputation for empiricism in historical and scientific circles, Newton was deeply religious and believed in the literal truth of Scripture , taking the story of Genesis to be Moses' eyewitness account of the creation of the Solar System . Newton reconciled his beliefs by adopting the idea that the Christian God set in place at the beginning of time the "mechanical" laws of nature, but retained the power to enter and alter that mechanism at any time.

[ 6 ] Newton further believed that the preservation of nature was in itself an act of God, stating that "a continual miracle is needed to prevent the Sun and fixed stars from rushing together through Gravity".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Popularization [ edit ] Portrait of French physicist and Newtonian Émilie du Châtelet Between 1726 and 1729, French author, philosopher, and historian Voltaire was exiled in England, where he met several English scholars and devotees to the Newtonian system of thought. Voltaire would later bring these ideas back to France with his publication of Lettres Philosophiques and Philosophie de Newton ,  which popularized Newton's intellectual practices and general philosophy.

[ 8 ] Later, prominent natural philosopher and friend of Voltaire, Émilie du Châtelet , would publish a French translation of Principia , which met with great success in France.

[ 6 ] While Newton was opposed by some members of the religious community for his non-Trinitarian beliefs about God, others believed science itself to be a philosophical exercise, that if done correctly, would lead its practitioners to a greater knowledge and appreciation of God.

[ 9 ] In 1737, Italian scholar Count Francesco Algarotti published a book entitled Newtonianismo per le dame overro dialoghi sopre la luce e i colori , which aimed to introduce female audiences to the work of Newton. The text explained the principles of Newton's Opticks while avoiding much of the mathematical rigor of the work in favor of a more "agreeable" text. The book was later published with a title that made no reference to women, leading some to believe that the female branding of the book was a ploy to avoid censorship.

[ 6 ] Influence on other scholars [ edit ] Scottish philosopher David Hume , likely inspired by the methods of analysis and synthesis which Newton developed in Opticks , was a strong adherent of Newtonian empiricism in his studies of moral phenomena.

[ 10 ] Newton and his philosophy of Newtonianism arguably led to the popularization of science in Europe—particularly in England, France, [ 6 ] and Germany [ 9 ] —catalyzing the Age of Enlightenment .

References [ edit ] ^ Sir Isaac Newton (5 February 2016).

The Principia: The Authoritative Translation and Guide: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-96481-5 .

^ a b c d e Cohen, Ierome Bernard (2002-01-01).

The Newtonian revolution : with illustrations of the transformation of scientific ideas .

Cambridge Univ. Press .

ISBN 9780521273800 .

OCLC 265462302 .

^ Young, Thomas (1802-01-01). "The Bakerian Lecture: On the Theory of Light and Colours".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London .

92 : 12– 48.

doi : 10.1098/rstl.1802.0004 .

ISSN 0261-0523 .

^ Dalitz, R. H.; Nauenberg, Michael (2000-01-01).

The foundations of Newtonian scholarship . World Scientific Pub.

ISBN 9789810239206 .

OCLC 42968133 .

^ Newtonian Studies .

Harvard University Press . 1965-01-01.

ISBN 978-0674181854 .

OCLC 941275050 .

^ a b c d e Force, James E.; Hutton, Sarah (2010-01-01).

Newton and Newtonianism: new studies . Kluwer Academic.

ISBN 9781402022388 .

OCLC 827177278 .

^ "A new theory of the earth, from its original to the consummation of all things wherein the creation of the world in six days, the universal deluge, and the general conflagration, as laid down in the Holy Scriptures, are shewn to be perfectly agreeable to reason and philosophy : with a large introductory discourse concerning the genuine nature, stile, and extent of the Mosaick history of the creation / by William Whiston ..." name.umdl.umich.edu . 1696 . Retrieved 2017-05-05 .

^ Bell, Arthur E. (1961).

Newtonian Science . London: Edward Arnold.

^ a b Rogers, Moira R. (2003-01-01).

Newtonianism for the ladies and other uneducated souls : the popularization of science in Leipzig, 1687-1750 . P. Lang.

ISBN 978-0820450292 .

OCLC 469855126 .

^ Demeter, Tamás (2016).

David Hume and the culture of Scottish Newtonianism : methodology and ideology in Enlightenment inquiry . Brill.

ISBN 9789004327313 .

OCLC 960722703 .

v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newtonianism&oldid=1282269542 " Categories : Isaac Newton Metatheory of science Naturalism (philosophy) 18th century in philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Newtonianism 8 languages Add topic

