Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Rankings 3 Quality and safety 4 Research 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Brigham and Women's Hospital 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano עברית മലയാളം مصرى Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′10″N 71°06′25″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.336152°N 71.106834°W ﻿ / 42.336152; -71.106834 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts Hospital in Massachusetts, United States Brigham and Women's Hospital Mass General Brigham Geography Location 75 Francis Street Boston, Massachusetts, United States Coordinates 42°20′10″N 71°06′25″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.336152°N 71.106834°W ﻿ / 42.336152; -71.106834 Organization Type Teaching Affiliated university Harvard University Services Emergency department Level I trauma center Beds 793 Helipads Helipad ( FAA LID : MA39 ) Number Length Surface ft m H1 54 16 Rooftop, metal Public transit access MBTA Bus 8, 19, 39, 47, 60, 65, 66, CT2, CT3 Green Line D, E History Opened 1980 Links Website brighamandwomens .org Lists Hospitals in Massachusetts Brigham and Women's Hospital ( BWH or The Brigham ) is a teaching hospital of Harvard Medical School and the largest hospital in the Longwood Medical Area in Boston , Massachusetts . Along with Massachusetts General Hospital , it is one of the two founding members of Mass General Brigham , the largest healthcare provider in Massachusetts. Giles Boland, MD, serves as the hospital's current president.

[ 1 ] Brigham and Women's Hospital conducts the second largest hospital-based research program in the world, with an annual research budget of more than $630 million.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Brigham and Women's Hospital was established with the 1980 merger of three Harvard-affiliated hospitals: Peter Bent Brigham Hospital (established in 1913); Robert Breck Brigham Hospital (established in 1914); and Boston Hospital for Women (established in 1966 as a merger of Boston Lying-In Hospital, established in 1832, and Free Hospital for Women, established in 1875).

[ citation needed ] In 1954, the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital became the location for the first-ever successful kidney transplant, performed on identical twins, Ronald Hendrick (the donor) and Richard Hendrick (the recipient).

J. Hartwell Harrison , Chief of the Urology Department, operated on the donor, and Joseph Murray was the surgeon for the recipient. Murray later received a Nobel Prize for this and other work. Dr.

Samuel A. Levine introduced the arm-chair treatment of myocardial infarction in the 1950s and his protégé Dr.

Bernard Lown was an early innovator in the development of the coronary care unit in the 1960s.

[ 3 ] After a 10-year affiliation with Faulkner Hospital in the Jamaica Plain section of Boston, BWH merged with the community hospital in 2012 to form Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital.

[ 4 ] In April 2017, Brigham and Women's announced they would be offering voluntary buyouts to 1,600 staff in an effort to control costs. The hospital was profitable, but this move was due to higher labor and other costs amid stagnant payments from insurance companies . The hospital also needed to pay for two large projects, a $550 million new outpatient and research building that opened the previous year and a $335 million new software system launched in 2015.

[ 5 ] Also in April 2017, the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts announced that Brigham and Women's Hospital and its nonprofit hospital and physicians network, Partners HealthCare, agreed to pay a $10 million fine to resolve allegations that a stem cell research lab fraudulently obtained federal grant funding .

[ 6 ] In the late 2010s, Brigham Health contracted with Evergrande to provide medical training and consulting to set up the private Boao Evergrande International Hospital in China. The venture struggled due to lack of patients; the contract was allowed to lapse and Brigham branding was removed by mid-2021.

[ 7 ] 221 Longwood Avenue, formerly the Boston Lying-In Hospital building, part of Brigham and Women's Hospital but separate from the main building at 15–75 Francis Street; view from Longwood Avenue Former site of the Free Hospital for Women across the street from Olmsted Park . This institution was absorbed into Brigham and Women's Hospital.

Remaining entrance for the original site of the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital, established in 1913 Rankings [ edit ] Brigham and Women's Hospital has consistently been recognized as a top hospital in the nation by U.S. News & World Report and in 2025 was ranked as the joint #1 hospital in Massachusetts, alongside Massachusetts General Hospital .

In 2024, Brigham and Women’s Hospital was ranked first in the nation for obstetrics and gynecology for the third consecutive year and was ranked nationally in 12 specialties, including in diabetes & endocrinology (#2 in the nation), cancer (#4 in the nation), and rheumatology (#4 in the nation).

Quality and safety [ edit ] In the early 1990s, BWH pioneered computerized physician order entry to prevent medication errors. BWH has received patient safety awards for its electronic Medication Administration Record (eMAR) and barcoding system, which places barcodes on patients' medications, name bands, and nurses' badges.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Research [ edit ] BRI has worked on regenerative medicine, designing nanoparticles to attack different cancer types and starting a clinical trial for a type of Alzheimer's disease vaccine. BWH research also includes population studies including the Nurses' Health Study and Physicians' Health Study.

[ 8 ] In 2017, the hospital began the first human clinical trials to reverse the aging process using NAD + . The trials are headed by biologist David Andrew Sinclair .

[ 10 ] In 2019, BWH opened the Brigham Preventive Genomics Clinic, [ 11 ] becoming one of the first hospitals in the United States [ 12 ] to offer DNA sequencing, reporting, and interpretation of disease-associated genes to healthy patients seeking to reduce their risk of future disease.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Channing Home References [ edit ] ^ "Robert Higgins, MD, MSHA President, Brigham and Women's Hospital" .

Brigham and Women's Hospital . Brigham Health . Retrieved February 15, 2023 .

^ "Awards, Honors & Grants News – Brigham and Women's Hospital" .

^ Julian, D (September 2001).

"The evolution of the coronary care unit" .

Cardiovascular Research .

51 (4): 621– 624.

doi : 10.1016/S0008-6363(01)00365-0 .

PMID 11530092 .

^ "Preliminary Review of PHS Proposed Acquisition" (PDF) .

mass.gov . Commonwealth of Massachusetts Health Policy Commission. December 18, 2013. pp. 1, 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 17, 2014 . Retrieved November 8, 2014 .

PHS is now called Mass General Brigham ^ Dayal McCluskey, Priyanka (April 27, 2017).

"Brigham and Women's offers buyouts to 1,600 workers" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ Finucane, Martin (April 27, 2017).

"Partners, Brigham and Women's to pay $10m in research fraud case" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved April 27, 2017 .

^ Deirdre Fernandes; Rebecca Ostriker; Liz Kowalczyk; Patricia Wen (December 26, 2021).

"How Brigham Health helped create a Chinese hospital for elites — and almost nobody came" .

The Boston Globe .

^ a b "Boston Hospital & Medical Center" . Brigham and Women's Hospital. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020 . Retrieved April 2, 2018 .

^ Cooley, Thomas W.; May, Dianne; Alwan, Michael; Sue, Caron (December 15, 2012). "Implementation of computerized prescriber order entry in four academic medical centers".

American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy .

69 (24): 2166– 2173.

doi : 10.2146/ajhp120108 .

PMID 23230041 .

^ "Scientists unveil a giant leap for anti-aging" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved April 2, 2018 .

^ "Brigham and Women's launches preventive genomics clinic" .

Beckers Hospital Review . August 20, 2019.

^ "Concierge DNA Testing: Boston Doctors And Genetic Counselors Consult, But It Will Cost You" .

www.wbur.org . August 16, 2019.

^ Robbins,STAT, Rebecca.

"Top U.S. Medical Centers Roll Out DNA Sequencing Clinics for Healthy Clients" .

Scientific American .

External links [ edit ] Official Brigham and Women's Hospital website [ usurped ] Brigham and Women's Hospital Affiliation and information [ usurped ] v t e Massachusetts trauma centers List of hospitals in Massachusetts Level I Baystate Medical Center Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Medical Center Brigham and Women's Hospital Lahey Hospital and Medical Center Massachusetts General Hospital Tufts Medical Center UMass Memorial Health Care Level II South Shore Hospital St. Luke's Hospital Level III Anna Jaques Hospital Berkshire Medical Center Beverly Hospital Cape Cod Hospital Good Samaritan Medical Center Lawrence General Hospital Lowell General Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital Salem Hospital Pediatric Level I Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Massachusetts General Hospital for Children UMass Memorial Health Care Pediatric Level II Baystate Medical Center v t e Massachusetts hospitals Active Barnstable County Cape Cod Hospital Falmouth Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Cape Cod Berkshire County Austen Riggs Center Berkshire Medical Center Fairview Hospital VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Bristol County Arbour-Fuller Hospital Morton Hospital and Medical Center St. Luke's Hospital Taunton State Hospital Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Hospital Essex County Lawrence General Hospital Salem Hospital Franklin County VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampden County Baystate Health Holyoke Medical Center Mercy Medical Center Providence Behavioral Health Hospital Soldiers' Home in Holyoke VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampshire County Cooley Dickinson Hospital Northampton Veterans Affairs Medical Center Middlesex County Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center Cambridge Hospital CHA Everett Hospital Emerson Hospital Lahey Hospital & Medical Center Lowell General Hospital McLean Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital MetroWest Medical Center Mount Auburn Hospital Newton-Wellesley Hospital Saints Medical Center Somerville Hospital Tewksbury Hospital Winchester Hospital Nantucket County Nantucket Cottage Hospital Norfolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital - Milton Norwood Hospital South Shore Hospital Wrentham State School Plymouth County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth Boston Medical Center – South Bridgewater State Hospital Brockton Hospital VA Boston Healthcare System Suffolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Boston Medical Center – Brighton Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Floating Hospital for Children Franciscan Children's Joslin Diabetes Center Lemuel Shattuck Hospital Massachusetts Eye and Ear Massachusetts General Hospital New England Baptist Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Tufts Medical Center VA Boston Healthcare System Worcester County Adcare Hospital Athol Memorial Hospital Federal Medical Center, Devens Hahnemann Hospital Jewish Healthcare Center Milford Regional Medical Center Memorial Hospital Saint Vincent Hospital 2021 strike UMass Memorial Health Care VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Worcester Recovery Center and Hospital Defunct Barnstable County 551st United States Air Force Hospital Barnstable County Hospital Berkshire County North Adams Regional Hospital Bristol County Lovering Colony State Hospital Paul A. Dever State School Truesdale Hospital Dukes County Penikese Island Leper Hospital Essex County Benjamin Stickney Cable Memorial Hospital Children's Island Sanitarium Danvers State Hospital Essex Hospital Saugus General Hospital Hampden County Monson Developmental Center Hampshire County Belchertown State School Northampton State Hospital Westover Air Force Base Hospital Middlesex County Boston Regional Medical Center Community Memorial Hospital Gaebler Children's Center Lovell General Hospital Metropolitan State Hospital Middlesex County Hospital Murphy Army Hospital Nashoba Valley Medical Center Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Norfolk County Foxborough State Hospital Medfield State Hospital New England Sinai Hospital Pondville State Hospital Quincy Medical Center Plymouth County Cranberry Specialty Hospital Lakeville Hospital Suffolk County Adams-Nervine Asylum Boston City Hospital Boston Consumptives Hospital Boston Emergency and General Hospital Boston Psychopathic Hospital Boston State Hospital Carney Hospital Dimock Community Health Center Complex Massachusetts Homeopathic Hospital Naval Hospital Boston New England Hospital for Women and Children Worcester County Dale General Hospital Gardner State Hospital Grafton State Hospital Lyman School for Boys Rutland Heights State Hospital State Reform School for Boys Templeton Developmental Center Westborough State Hospital Worcester City Hospital Worcester County Hospital Worcester State Hospital Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brigham_and_Women%27s_Hospital&oldid=1304594250 " Categories : 1980 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard Medical School Hospitals established in 1980 Hospitals in Boston Roxbury, Boston Teaching hospitals in Massachusetts Trauma centers Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 00:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brigham and Women's Hospital 10 languages Add topic

