Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition in international human rights law 2 Geneva Conventions 3 Definition in regional human rights law 4 Relationship with other rights 5 Fair-trial rights Toggle Fair-trial rights subsection 5.1 In civil and criminal proceedings 5.2 In administrative proceedings 5.3 In special proceedings 6 In the United Kingdom 7 Juries and a fair trial 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Right to a fair trial 31 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Civil and human right Criminal procedure Criminal trials and convictions Rights of the accused Appeal Bail Double jeopardy 2 Exclusionary rule 1 Fair trial Jury trial Trial as an adult Presumption of innocence Pre-trial Counsel Self-incrimination Rights of the victim Clearance rate Criminal justice Right to an effective remedy Speedy trial Victims' rights Verdict Acquittal Conviction Conviction rate Guilt Not proven 3 Directed verdict Sentencing Custodial Disparity Discharge Guidelines Totality 5, 6 Mandatory Periodic Dangerous offender 4, 5 Capital punishment Execution warrant Cruel and unusual punishment Imprisonment Life Indefinite Legal remedy Loss of rights Reparation Restitution Reform Suspended Three-strikes law Zero tolerance Post-sentencing Criminal justice Exoneration Parole Probation Habitual offender Life licence 6 Miscarriage of justice Pardon Recidivism Rehabilitation Restorative justice Sex offender registry Sexually violent predator laws 1 Tariff 6 Related areas of law Civil procedure Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Portals Law portal 1 US courts 2 Not in English/Welsh courts 3 Scottish courts 4 English/Welsh courts 5 Canadian courts 6 UK courts v t e A fair trial is a trial which is "conducted fairly, justly, and with procedural regularity by an impartial judge".

[ 1 ] Various rights associated with a fair trial are explicitly proclaimed in Article 10 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Fourth , Fifth , Sixth , Seventh , and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution , and Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights , in addition to numerous other constitutions and declarations throughout the world. There is no binding international law that defines what is not a fair trial; for example, the right to a jury trial and other important procedures vary from nation to nation.

[ 2 ] Definition in international human rights law [ edit ] The right to fair trial is very helpful to explore in numerous declarations which represent customary international law , such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR).

[ 3 ] Though the UDHR enshrines some fair trial rights, such as the presumption of innocence until the accused is proven guilty, in Articles 6, 7, 8 and 11, [ 4 ] the key provision is Article 10 which states that: [ 5 ] Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, in the determination of his rights and obligations and of any criminal charge against him.

Some years after the UDHR was adopted, [ when?

] the right to a fair trial was defined in more detail in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). The right to a fair trial is protected in Articles 14 and 16 of the ICCPR which is binding in international law on those states that are party to it.

[ 6 ] Article 14(1) establishes the basic right to a fair trial, article 14(2) provides for the presumption of innocence , and article 14(3) sets out a list of minimum fair trial rights in criminal proceedings. Article 14(5) establishes the right of a convicted person to have a higher court review the conviction or sentence, and article 14(7) prohibits double jeopardy .

[ 7 ] Article 14(1) states that: [ 8 ] All persons shall be equal before the courts and tribunals. In the determination of any criminal charge against him, or of his rights and obligations in a suit at law, everyone shall be entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law. The press and the public may be excluded from all or part of a trial for reasons of morals, public order or national security in a democratic society, or when the interest of the private lives of the parties so requires, or to the extent strictly necessary in the opinion of the court in special circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interests of justice; but any judgement rendered in a criminal case or in a suit at law shall be made public except where the interest of juvenile persons otherwise requires or the proceedings concern matrimonial disputes or the guardianship of children.

Geneva Conventions [ edit ] The Geneva Conventions (GC) and their Additional Protocols (APs) require that any prisoners of war facing a judicial proceeding receive a fair trial.

[ 9 ] For example, Articles 102–108 of the 1949 Third Geneva Convention detail requirements for the fairness of trials against prisoners of war.

[ 9 ] Other provisions require a "fair and regular trial"; "safeguards of proper trial and defence"; an "impartial and regularly constituted court respecting the generally recognized principles of regular judicial procedure"; a "regularly constituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples"; and "court offering the essential guarantees of independence and impartiality".

[ 9 ] Definition in regional human rights law [ edit ] The right to a fair trial is enshrined in articles 3, 7 and 26 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR).

[ 3 ] The right to a fair trial is also enshrined in articles 5 , 6 and 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights and articles 2 to 4 of the 7th Protocol to the convention.

[ 3 ] The right to a fair trial is furthermore enshrined in articles 3, 8, 9 and 10 of the American Convention on Human Rights .

[ 3 ] Relationship with other rights [ edit ] The right to equality before the law is sometimes regarded as part of the right to a fair trial. It is typically guaranteed under a separate article in international human rights instruments . The right entitles individuals to be recognised as subject, not as object, of the law.

International human rights law permits no derogation or exceptions to this human right.

[ 10 ] Closely related to the right to a fair trial is the prohibition on ex post facto law , or retroactive law, which is enshrined in human rights instrument separately from the right to fair trial and can not be limited by states according to the European Convention on Human Rights and the American Convention on Human Rights .

[ 3 ] Speedy justice tends to correlate with quality and fairness of justice.

[ 11 ] Right to speedy trial and Right to a fair trial can be difficult to combine.

[ 12 ] Fair-trial rights [ edit ] The right to a fair trial has been defined in numerous regional and international human rights instruments . It is one of the most extensive human rights and all international human rights instruments enshrine it in more than one article.

[ 13 ] The right to a fair trial is one of the most litigated human rights and substantial case law that has been established on the interpretation of this human right.

[ 10 ] Despite variations in wording and placement of the various fair trial rights, international human rights instrument define the right to a fair trial in broadly the same terms.

[ 4 ] The aim of the right is to ensure the proper administration of justice. As a minimum the right to fair trial includes the following fair trial rights in civil and criminal proceedings: [ 3 ] the right to be heard by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal the right to a public hearing the right to be heard within a reasonable time the right to counsel the right to interpretation [ 3 ] States may limit the right to a fair trial or derogate from the fair trial rights only under circumstances specified in the human rights instruments.

[ 3 ] In civil and criminal proceedings [ edit ] The European Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights have clarified that the right to a fair trial applies to all types of judicial proceedings, whether civil or criminal . According to the European Court of Human Rights, Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights and the fair trial rights apply to all civil rights and obligations created under domestic law and therefore to all civil proceedings (see Apeh Uldozotteinek Szovetsege and Others v. Hungary 2000).

[ 3 ] In administrative proceedings [ edit ] Both the European Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights have clarified that the right to a fair trial applies not only to judicial proceedings, but also administrative proceedings. If an individual's right under the law is at stake, the dispute must be determined through a fair process.

[ 3 ] In special proceedings [ edit ] In Europe special proceeding may also be subject to Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights .

[ 14 ] In Mills v. the United Kingdom 2001 the European Court of Human Rights held that a court-martial was subject to Article 6 because of the defendants had been accused of what the court considered to be serious crime, assault with a weapon and wounding.

The African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR) frequently deals with instances where civilians are tried by military tribunals for serious crimes. The ACHPR has held that on the face of it military courts to do not satisfy civilians' right to a fair trial (see Constitutional Rights Project v. Nigeria ). In this respect the ACHPR has reaffirmed the right to counsel as essential in guaranteeing a fair trial. The ACHPR held that individuals have the right to choose their own counsel and that giving the military tribunal the right to veto a counsel violates the right to a fair trial.

[ 15 ] In the United Kingdom [ edit ] Right to a fair trial in the United Kingdom is guaranteed by the Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which is incorporated in UK law as Schedule 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998 .

[ 16 ] Between 1971 and 1975, the right to a fair trial was suspended in Northern Ireland . Suspects were simply imprisoned without trial, and interrogated by the British army for information. This power was mostly used against the Catholic minority. The British government supplied deliberately misleading evidence to the European Court of Human Rights when it investigated this issue in 1978.

[ 17 ] The Irish government and human rights group Amnesty International requested that the ECHR reconsider the case in December 2014.

[ 18 ] Three court cases related to the Northern Ireland conflict that took place in mainland Britain in 1975 and 1976 have been accused of being unfair, resulting in the imprisonment of the Birmingham Six , Guildford Four and Maguire Seven . These convictions were later overturned, though an investigation into allegations that police officers perverted the course of justice failed to convict anyone of wrongdoing.

The United Kingdom created an act – the Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997 – which led to the creation of the Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC).

[ 19 ] It allowed for secret evidence to be stated in court and provided provisions for the anonymity of the sources and information itself. The judge has the power to clear the courtroom of the public and press, and the appellant if need be, if sensitive information must be relayed. The appellant is provided with a Special Advocate, who is appointed in order to represent their interests; no contact can be made with the appellant after seeing the secret evidence. SIAC is mostly used for deportation cases and other cases of public interest.

[ 20 ] Secret evidence has seen increased use in UK courts.

[ when?

] Some [ weasel words ] argue that this undermines the British criminal justice system, as this evidence may not come under proper democratic scrutiny. Secret evidence can now be used in a wide range of cases including deportations hearings, control orders proceedings, parole board cases, asset-freezing applications, pre-charge detention hearings in terrorism cases, employment tribunals, and planning tribunals.

[ citation needed ] Juries and a fair trial [ edit ] The rationale for a jury was that it offers a check against state power.

[ citation needed ] Under Article 6 of the ECHR , the right to a fair trial implies that accused and public must be able to understand the verdict.

[ according to whom?

] Trials decided by jury, as they do not provide reasons for their decision, therefore do not allow for this.

[ 21 ] In Taxquet v Belgium [ 22 ] a violation of article 6(1) was found. The court also implied a right to a reasoned verdict, irrespective of whether that was given by a judge or a jury.

Under ECHR case law, jury decisions can also be problematic in circumstances where juries draw adverse inferences from trial judges' directions in contravention of Article 6(3) (b) and (c).

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Access to justice Change of venue Four freedoms Jus de non evocando Impartiality Legal aid Natural justice Presumption of guilt Law reform Judicial reform Judicial review References [ edit ] ^ "Legal Definition of FAIR TRIAL" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2022-01-05 .

^ Doswald-Beck, Louise.

Fair Trial, Right to, International Protection , Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law ^ a b c d e f g h i j Doebbler, Curtis (2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ a b Alfredsson, Gudmundur; Eide, Asbjorn (1999).

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: a common standard of achievement . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 225.

ISBN 978-90-411-1168-5 .

^ "Universal declaration of Human Rights" . United Nations.

^ Doebbler, Curtis (2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. p. 107.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ Alfredsson, Gudmundur; Eide, Asbjorn (1999).

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: a common standard of achievement . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. pp.

225– 226.

ISBN 978-90-411-1168-5 .

^ "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" . Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Archived from the original on 2008-07-05.

^ a b c Nehal Bhuta, Joint Series on International Law and Armed Conflict: Fair Trial Guarantees in Armed Conflict , EJIL: Talk!

Blog of the European Journal of European Law (September 22, 2016).

^ a b Doebbler, Curtis (2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. p. 110.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ Melcarne, Alessandro; Ramello, Giovanni B.; Spruk, Rok (2021).

"Is justice delayed justice denied? An empirical approach" .

International Review of Law and Economics .

65 : 105953.

doi : 10.1016/j.irle.2020.105953 .

^ Easton, Jo (2018). "Where to Draw the Line? Is Efficiency Encroaching on a Fair Justice System?".

The Political Quarterly .

89 (2): 246– 253.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.12487 .

ISSN 0032-3179 .

^ Doebbler, Curtis (2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. pp.

107– 108.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ The immunity could not be an obstacle: on the one hand, following a immunity resolution of the Senate, the judicial proceeding may raise jurisdictional dispute before the Constitutional Court ( ... ); on the other side (….) the citizen may submit an appeal to the European Court of Human Rights Buonomo, Giampiero (2002).

"L'Italia "difende" il Regno Unito in nome del procuratore Cordova" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-26 .

^ Doebbler, Curtis (2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ "Article 6: Fair trials" .

Liberty . 31 August 2010 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ 'British ministers sanctioned torture of NI internees' (5 June 2014) ^ "Bid to reopen NI 'torture' case" .

BBC News . 2 December 2014 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Special Immigration Appeals Commission Act 1997" .

legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 20 September 2015 .

^ "Apply to the Special Immigration Appeals Commission" .

justice.gov.uk . Retrieved 20 September 2015 .

^ Lemmens, P. (2014). "The right to a fair trial and its multiple manifestations". In E. Brems & J. Gerards (Eds.), Shaping Rights in the ECHR: The Role of the European Court of Human Rights in Determining the Scope of Human Rights (pp. 294-314). Cambridge Books Online: Cambridge University Press.

^ "HUDOC - European Court of Human Rights" .

coe.int . Retrieved 20 September 2015 .

^ "HUDOC - European Court of Human Rights" .

coe.int . Retrieved 20 September 2015 .

v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_a_fair_trial&oldid=1297548835 " Categories : Criminal law Criminal procedure Types of trials Human rights by issue Prisoners' and ex-prisoners' rights Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2015 Vague or ambiguous time from September 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 22:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to a fair trial 31 languages Add topic

