Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Missions 2 Flybys Toggle Flybys subsection 2.1 Pioneer 11 flyby 2.2 Voyagers 3 Cassini orbiter 4 Future missions 5 Proposed missions 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Exploration of Saturn 16 languages العربية Български Català Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Русский Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of the exploration of Saturn Artist's concept of Cassini 's orbit insertion around Saturn The exploration of Saturn has been performed solely by crewless probes. Three missions were flybys, which formed an extended foundation of knowledge about the system. The Cassini–Huygens spacecraft, launched in 1997, was in orbit from 2004 to 2017.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Missions [ edit ] A list of previous and upcoming missions to the outer Solar System (including Saturn ) can be found at the List of missions to the outer planets article.

Flybys [ edit ] Pioneer 11 flyby [ edit ] Pioneer 11 image of Saturn.

Saturn was first visited by Pioneer 11 in September 1979. It flew within 20,000 kilometres (12,000 mi) of the top of the planet's cloud layer. Low-resolution images were acquired of the planet and a few of its moons; the resolution of the images was not good enough to discern surface features. The spacecraft also studied the rings; among the discoveries were the thin F-ring and the fact that dark gaps in the rings are bright when viewed towards the Sun, or in other words, they are not empty of material.

Pioneer 11 also measured the temperature of Titan at 250 K .

[ 3 ] Voyagers [ edit ] Main article: Voyager program In November 1980, the Voyager 1 probe visited the Saturn system. It sent back the first high-resolution images of the planet, rings, and satellites. Surface features of various moons were seen for the first time. Because of the earlier discovery of a thick atmosphere on Titan, the Voyager controllers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory elected for Voyager 1 to make a close approach of Titan. This greatly increased knowledge of the atmosphere of the moon, but also proved that Titan's atmosphere is impenetrable in visible wavelengths, so no surface details were seen. The flyby also changed the spacecraft's trajectory out from the plane of the Solar System which prevented Voyager 1 from completing the Planetary Grand Tour of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto.

Almost a year later, in August 1981, Voyager 2 continued the study of the Saturn system. More close-up images of Saturn's moons were acquired, as well as evidence of changes in the rings.

Voyager 2 probed Saturn's upper atmosphere with its radar, to measure temperature and density profiles.

Voyager 2 found that at the highest levels (7 kilopascals pressure) Saturn's temperature was 70 K (−203 °C) (i.e. 70 degrees above absolute zero), while at the deepest levels measured (120 kilopascals) the temperature increased to 143 K (−130 °C). The north pole was found to be 10 K cooler, although this may be seasonal. Unfortunately, during the flyby, the probe's turnable camera platform stuck for a couple of days and some planned imaging was lost. Saturn's gravity was used to direct the spacecraft's trajectory towards Uranus.

The probes discovered and confirmed several new satellites orbiting near or within the planet's rings. They also discovered the small Maxwell and Keeler gaps in the rings.

Cassini orbiter [ edit ] Saturn eclipses the Sun, as seen from Cassini .

Animation of Cassini 's trajectory around Saturn from 1 May 2004 to 15 September 2017 Cassini · Saturn · Enceladus · Titan · Iapetus On July 1, 2004, the Cassini–Huygens spacecraft performed the SOI (Saturn Orbit Insertion) maneuver and entered into orbit around Saturn. Before the SOI, Cassini had already studied the system extensively. In June 2004, it had conducted a close flyby of Phoebe , sending back high-resolution images and data.

The orbiter completed two Titan flybys before releasing the Huygens probe on December 25, 2004.

Huygens descended onto the surface of Titan on January 14, 2005, sending a flood of data during the atmospheric descent and after the landing. During 2005 Cassini conducted multiple flybys of Titan and icy satellites.

On March 10, 2006, NASA reported that the Cassini probe found evidence of liquid water reservoirs that erupt in geysers on Saturn's moon Enceladus .

[ 4 ] On September 20, 2006, a Cassini probe photograph revealed a previously undiscovered planetary ring, outside the brighter main rings of Saturn and inside the G and E rings.

[ 5 ] In July 2006, Cassini saw the first proof of hydrocarbon lakes near Titan's north pole, which was confirmed in January 2007. In March 2007, additional images near Titan's north pole discovered hydrocarbon "seas", the largest of which is almost the size of the Caspian Sea .

In 2009, the probe discovered and confirmed four new satellites. Its primary mission ended in 2008, when the spacecraft completed 74 orbits around the planet. In 2010, the probe began its first extended mission, the Cassini Equinox Mission. The Cassini Solstice Mission, the second mission extension, lasted through September 2017.

[ 6 ] The mission ended on September 15, 2017, after a planned atmospheric entry into the planet Saturn.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Future missions [ edit ] NASA's Dragonfly spacecraft will launch in 2028 to visit the Saturn system, with the objective of landing on the moon Titan .

[ 7 ] Proposed missions [ edit ] This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( June 2024 ) Missions to Saturn face competition from missions to other Solar System bodies The Titan Saturn System Mission (TSSM) was a joint NASA / ESA proposal for an exploration of Saturn and its moons [ 8 ] Titan and Enceladus , where many complex phenomena have been revealed by the recent Cassini–Huygens mission. TSSM was competing against the Europa Jupiter System Mission proposal for funding. In February 2009 it was announced that ESA/NASA had given the EJSM mission priority ahead of TSSM, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] although TSSM will continue to be studied for a later launch date. The Titan Saturn System Mission (TSSM) was created by the merging of the ESA's Titan and Enceladus Mission (TandEM) with NASA's Titan Explorer 2007 flagship study.

Other proposed missions to the Saturn system were: 2010 JPL: Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) [ 11 ] 2011 Titan Mare Explorer (TiME); an aquatic lander that would explore the methane lakes of the moon Titan .  This mission was given US$3 million in May 2011 to develop a detailed concept study as a part of the NASA Discovery program.

2012 DLR : Enceladus Explorer (EnEx), a lander with an ice mole.

[ 12 ] 2012 JPL: Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) a sample-return.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] 2015 JPL: Enceladus Life Finder (ELF) [ 16 ] 2020 Applied Physics Laboratory : Enceladus Orbilander [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Exploration of Mercury Exploration of Venus Exploration of Mars Exploration of Jupiter Exploration of Uranus Exploration of Neptune References [ edit ] ^ a b Brown, Dwayne; Cantillo, Laurie; Dyches, Preston (September 15, 2017).

"NASA's Cassini Spacecraft Ends Its Historic Exploration of Saturn" .

NASA . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ a b Chang, Kenneth (September 14, 2017).

"Cassini Vanishes Into Saturn, Its Mission Celebrated and Mourned" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 15, 2017 .

^ "Pioneer Mission Description Page" .

spaceprojects.arc.nasa.gov . December 6, 1998. Archived from the original on 1998-12-06.

^ "Cassini–Huygens: News" . Archived from the original on March 3, 2008.

^ New Ring Spotted Around Saturn Archived 2006-09-20 at the Wayback Machine – Article on CNN.com.

^ "Cassini-Huygens: Introduction" . December 17, 2008. Archived from the original on 2008-12-17.

^ Foust, Jeff (28 November 2023).

"NASA postpones Dragonfly review, launch date" .

SpaceNews.com . Retrieved 28 November 2023 .

^ "ESA Science & Technology – TandEM/TSSM" .

sci.esa.int .

^ "NASA – NASA and ESA Prioritize Outer Planet Missions" .

www.nasa.gov . Archived from the original on 2010-10-04 . Retrieved 2021-08-18 .

^ "Jupiter in space agencies' sights" . February 18, 2009 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

^ Kane, Van (3 April 2014).

"Discovery Missions for an Icy Moon with Active Plumes" .

The Planetary Society . Retrieved 2015-04-09 .

^ Brabaw, Kasandra (April 7, 2015).

"IceMole Drill Built to Explore Saturn's Icy Moon Enceladus Passes Glacier Test" .

Space.com . Retrieved 2015-04-09 .

^ Wall, Mike (December 6, 2012).

"Saturn Moon Enceladus Eyed for Sample-Return Mission" .

Space.com . Retrieved 2015-04-10 .

^ Tsou, Peter; Anbar, Ariel; Atwegg, Kathrin; Porco, Carolyn; Baross, John; McKay, Christopher (2014).

"LIFE – Enceladus Plume Sample Return via Discovery" (PDF) .

45th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference . Retrieved 2015-04-10 .

^ Tsou, Peter (2013).

"LIFE: Life Investigation For Enceladus – A Sample Return Mission Concept in Search for Evidence of Life" .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory . Archived from the original (.doc) on 2015-09-01 . Retrieved 2015-04-10 .

^ "ENCELADUS LIFE FINDER: THE SEARCH FOR LIFE IN A HABITABLE MOON" (PDF) .

www.hou.usra.edu .

^ MacKenzie, Shannon M; Kirby, Karen W; Greenauer, Peter J; Neveu, Marc; Gold, Rob; Davila, Alfonso; Lunine, Jonathan I; Cable, Morgan; Craft, Kate; Eigenbrode, Jennifer; Glein, Christopher; Hofgartner, Jason; Mckay, Christopher; Phillips-Lander, Charity; Waite, Hunter; Burton, Dana; Seifert, Helmut; Boye, Jeff; Brock, Spencer; Chen, Michelle; Coker, Rob; Colonel, Grace; Criss, Tom; Crowley, Doug (2020-10-14).

"Enceladus Orbilander: A Flagship Mission Concept for Astrobiology" (PDF) .

NASA Technical Reports Server (NTRS) . Retrieved 2024-05-05 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hannu Karttunen; et al. (1996), Fundamental Astronomy (3rd ed.), New York: Springer, ISBN 978-3-540-60936-0 , retrieved February 21, 2012 .

NASA/JPL–Caltech (October 18, 2010).

"Voyager Science Results: Saturn" .

voyager.jpl.nasa.gov . Retrieved February 21, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn v t e Saturn Outline Geography Dragon Storm Great White Spot Saturn Electrostatic Discharges Hexagon Magnetosphere Rings Moons S/2009 S 1 Ring moonlets Pan Daphnis Atlas Prometheus Pandora Epimetheus Janus Aegaeon Mimas Methone Anthe Pallene Enceladus Tethys Telesto Calypso Dione Helene Polydeuces Rhea Titan Hyperion Iapetus Inuit group Kiviuq Paaliaq Siarnaq Gallic group Albiorix Norse group Phoebe Astronomy Delta Octantis Saturn-crossing minor planets Solar eclipses on Saturn Exploration Cassini–Huygens ( Huygens ) timeline retirement Pioneer 11 Voyager program Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Related Fiction The Day the Earth Smiled In Saturn's Rings (2018 documentary) Category v t e Exploration of the Solar System Timeline of Solar System exploration Exploration of Mercury Venus Moon Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto Artificial objects On extraterrestrial surfaces Moon Venus Mars Titan Deep-space missions Heliocentric orbit Leaving the Solar System Lists Solar System probes Minor planets and comets visited by spacecraft Missions to minor planets Missions to comets Landings on extraterrestrial bodies Objects at Lagrange points Space exploration outline timeline v t e Spacecraft missions to Saturn Past Flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Orbiters Cassini–Huygens timeline retirement Landers Huygens (on Titan) Planned Dragonfly (to Titan, 2028) Proposed Saturn , rings Kronos Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe SPRITE Titan Saturn System Mission Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Breakthrough Enceladus mission Enceladus Life Finder Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Explorer Life Investigation For Enceladus Titan AVIATR Oceanus TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Several moons Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan There are no ongoing missions to Saturn v t e Voyager program Spacecraft Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Components MHW-RTG (a radioisotope thermoelectric generator ) Cosmic Ray Subsystem (CRS) Infrared interferometer spectrometer and radiometer (IRIS) Plasma Wave Subsystem (PWS) Voyager Golden Record ( contents ) Images Pale Blue Dot Family Portrait Related Grand Tour program Gravity assist Specific orbital energy of Voyager 1 Titan IIIE NASA Deep Space Network Antennas Voyager paradox Observation targets Exploration of Jupiter and its moon Io with volcanos Masubi Pele Prometheus Surt and its rings Exploration of Saturn and its moon Enceladus with craters Dunyazad Shahrazad Exploration of Uranus and its rings Exploration of Neptune and its moon Triton Interstellar mission Heliosphere , Heliopause , Termination shock , Anomalous cosmic rays , Heliosheath , Interstellar space Popular culture Neptune All Night The Farthest (2017 documentary film) v t e Solar System Sun Mercury Venus Earth Mars Ceres Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Planets , dwarfs , minors Terrestrials Mercury Venus Earth Mars Giants Gas Jupiter Saturn Ice Uranus Neptune Dwarfs Ceres Orcus Pluto Haumea Quaoar Makemake Gonggong Eris Sedna Large Minor Planets Salacia Varuna Ixion List Moons Earth Moon Claimed Mars Phobos Deimos Jupiter Ganymede Callisto Io Europa all 97 Saturn Titan Rhea Iapetus Dione Tethys Enceladus Mimas Hyperion Phoebe all 274 Uranus Titania Oberon Umbriel Ariel Miranda all 28 Neptune Triton Proteus Nereid all 16 Pluto Charon Nix Hydra Kerberos Styx Orcus Vanth Haumea Hiʻiaka Namaka Quaoar Weywot Makemake S/2015 (136472) 1 Gonggong Xiangliu Eris Dysnomia Exploration ( outline ) Colonization Discovery astronomy historical models timeline Space probes timeline list Human spaceflight space stations list programs Mercury Venus Moon mining Mars Ceres Asteroids mining Comets Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Pluto Deep space Hypothetical objects Bagby's moon Chiron Coatlicue Counter-Earth Chrysalis Fifth Giant Hyperion Lilith Mercury's moon Neith Nemesis Nibiru Petit's moon Phaeton Planet Nine Effects Planet Ten Planet V Planet X Subsatellites Synestia Theia Themis Tyche Vulcan Vulcanoids Waltemath's moons Lists Comets Possible dwarf planets Gravitationally rounded objects Minor planets Natural satellites Solar System models Solar System objects by size by discovery date Interstellar and circumstellar molecules Rings Planetary Jovian Saturnian ( Rhean ?) Uranian Neptunian Minor objects' Charikloan Chironean Haumean Quaoarian Formation, evolution , contents, and History Star formation Accretion Accretion disk Excretion Capture theory Capture of Triton Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Coatlicue Co-orbital configuration Trojan moons Co-orbital moons Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disk instability EXCEDE Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Curation Sample-return mission Frost/Ice/Snow line Giant-impact hypothesis Grand tack hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Hill sphere Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium/space Interstellar cloud Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kordylewski cloud Kuiper belt Kuiper cliff Late Heavy Bombardment Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Nice model Nice 2 model Five-planet Nice model Oort cloud Oort limit Outer space Planet Disrupted Migration System Planetesimal Formation Merging stars Protoplanetary disk Ring system Roche limit vs. Hill sphere Rubble pile Scattered disc Small Solar System bodies Asteroid belt Asteroids Ceres Vesta Pallas Hygiea active List families PHA exceptional Kirkwood gap Centaurs Comets Damocloids Meteoroids Minor planets names and meanings moons Planetesimal Planetary orbit-crossers Mercury Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Trojans Venus Earth Mars Jupiter Trojan camp Greek camp Saturn Uranus Neptune Near-Earth objects NEAs Trans-Neptunian objects Kuiper belt Cubewanos Plutinos Detached objects Sednoids Scattered disc Hills cloud Oort cloud Oort limit Related Double planet Lagrange point Moonlet Syzygy Tidal locking Outline of the Solar System Solar System portal Astronomy portal Earth sciences portal Solar System → Local Interstellar Cloud → Local Bubble → Gould Belt → Orion Arm → Milky Way → Milky Way subgroup → Local Group → Local Sheet → Virgo Supercluster → Laniakea Supercluster → Local Hole → Observable universe → Universe Each arrow ( → ) may be read as "within" or "part of".

Portals : Stars Spaceflight Outer space Science Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exploration_of_Saturn&oldid=1294287509 " Categories : Saturn Spaceflight Discovery and exploration of the Solar System Solar System Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from June 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Exploration of Saturn 16 languages Add topic

