Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Academic career 3 Post retirement 4 References Toggle the table of contents Anthony J. Marsella Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychiatrist Anthony J. Marsella Born ( 1940-09-12 ) September 12, 1940 Cleveland , Ohio , U.S.

Died November 10, 2024 (2024-11-10) (aged 84) Atlanta , Georgia , U.S.

Occupation(s) Psychiatrist, Writer, Academic Children 2 Anthony J. Marsella (1940-2024) was an American author and academic who was a professor emeritus of psychology at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa .  He was a pioneer in the study of cultural determinants of psychopathology and therapies, and a leader in cross-cultural psychology and global and international psychology. Many of his writings are considered essential reading for students and scholars in psychology, psychiatry, and the social sciences. During his career he challenged the ethnocentricity and inherent cultural and racial biases of Western psychology and psychiatry.

Early life [ edit ] Anthony Joseph Marsella was born on September 12, 1940 into an immigrant Sicilian-American family in Cleveland , Ohio . His academic and extracurricular record resulted in his selection as 'Teenager of the Year' in Cleveland, which came with an appearance on the The Ed Sullivan Show .

Academic career [ edit ] Marsella studied at Baldwin-Wallace College in Berea, Ohio where he received his B.A. degree with Honors in Psychology in 1962.

[ 1 ] During his undergraduate years, he was a volunteer at local mental hospitals where he interacted with severely disturbed clients, stimulating a lifelong interest in schizophrenia, mood disorders, and trauma, that subsequently became the topic of his doctoral dissertation in clinical psychology at Pennsylvania State University , University Park, Pennsylvania , in 1968. In the course of his doctoral work, he minored in cultural anthropology and philosophy of science.

After completing an internship at Worcester State Hospital , Worcester, Massachusetts , Marsella received an appointment as a Fulbright Research Scholar to Ateneo De Manila University , Quezon City , Philippines , where he taught and conducted research on social stress and psychopathology in urban Manila . Marsella subsequently served as field research director for a large-scale psychiatric epidemiological survey in the jungles of Sarawak , Borneo designed to determine rates of mental illness among Chinese, Malay, and Iban (an indigenous tribal group) populations.

Following a post-doctoral year as a Culture and Mental Health Fellow at the East-West Center/SSRI in Honolulu , Marsella was appointed to the faculty of the Department of Psychology at the University of Hawai`i , a position he held until he retired in 2003. Between the years 1985-1989, he served as Vice President for Academic Affairs at the University of Hawai`i. He was most Emeritus Professor of Psychology, and Past Director of the World Health Organization Psychiatric Research Center in Honolulu , Past Director of the Clinical Studies Program, and Past Director of the Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance Program at the University of Hawai`i.

Marsella published over twenty edited and authored books, and more than 300 book chapters, journal articles, technical reports, book reviews, and popular national and international press/media service articles. He was awarded numerous research and training grants and contracts in the areas of cross-cultural psychopathology and psychotherapy, PTSD, social stress and coping, schizophrenia, disasters, and the global challenges of our times. He served on many journal editorial boards, and scientific and professional advisory committees.

Marsella received the Medal of Highest Honor from Soka University in Tokyo , Japan , for his contributions to the academy and to the promotion of international peace. In 1996, the American Psychological Association selected Dr. Marsella for the Distinguished Contributions to the International Advancement of Psychology Award. He was listed in Who's Who in America in 1996. In November, 1999, he was awarded an honorary doctorate degree – Doctoris Honoris Causa by the University of Copenhagen , Denmark .

In 2003, Psychologists for Social Responsibility (PsySR) created the annual Anthony J. Marsella Prize for Peace and Social Justice in honor of his work.

[ 2 ] Post retirement [ edit ] After retiring from the University of Hawai`i, Mānoa after 35 years, Marsella made his home in Atlanta , Georgia , where he lived for two decades. In a 2008 essay, Identity: Beyond Self, Culture, Nation, and Humanity to "Lifeism" he advocated for Lifeism , identification with life, as our most essential and most authentic identity.

[ 3 ] Marsella passed away peacefully on November 10, 2024 after a long period of illness, at his home, survived by his wife of 50 years, Joy who retired as an English professor from UH Mānoa, [ 4 ] two daughters, and four grandchildren.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Yamada, Ann-Marie; Higginbotham, Nick (2025).

"Anthony J. Marsella (1940–2024)" .

American Psychologist .

doi : 10.1037/amp0001522 .

^ "The Anthony J. Marsella Award" .

psysr.net . Psychologists for Social Responsibility . Retrieved May 26, 2025 .

^ Marsella, Anthony J.

"Identity: Beyond Self, Culture, Nation, and Humanity to "Lifeism" " .

transcend.org . Transcend Media Services . Retrieved May 26, 2025 .

^ "In memoriam: UH trailblazing cultural psychology leader" .

hawaii.edu .

University of Hawaiʻi . Retrieved May 26, 2025 .

^ "OBITUARY Anthony Joseph Marsella" .

dignitymemorial.com . SCI Shared Resources, LLC . Retrieved May 26, 2025 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of an American psychologist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthony_J._Marsella&oldid=1302675062 " Categories : 1940 births Baldwin Wallace University alumni Academics from Cleveland Pennsylvania State University alumni Ateneo de Manila University alumni 20th-century American psychologists 21st-century American psychologists University of Hawaiʻi faculty 2024 deaths American psychologist stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 22:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthony J. Marsella Add languages Add topic

