Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Naming conventions 3 Personal name 4 Names of names 5 Brand names 6 Religious names Toggle Religious names subsection 6.1 Biblical names 6.2 Indian name 6.3 Quranic names (Arabic names) 7 Name use by animals and plants 8 Named entities 9 See also 10 References 11 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Name 108 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar Башҡортса Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Eʋegbe Farefare فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha La .lojban.

Македонски Malagasy मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Mfantse မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 ߒߞߏ Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangcah پنجابی Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sakizaya Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça Tayal తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Twi Tyap Українська اردو Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One or more words used to refer to something "Names" redirects here. For other uses, see Names (disambiguation) and Name (disambiguation) .

Names of the 2002 Bali bombings victims in Indonesia A name is a term used for identification by an external observer. They can identify a class or category of things, or a single thing, either uniquely, or within a given context. The entity identified by a name is called its referent . A personal name identifies, not necessarily uniquely, a specific individual human. The name of a specific entity is sometimes called a proper name (although that term has a philosophical meaning as well) and is, when consisting of only one word, a proper noun . Other nouns are sometimes called " common names " or ( obsolete ) " general names ". A name can be given to a person, place, or thing; for example, parents can give their child a name or a scientist can give an element a name.

Etymology The word name comes from Old English nama ; cognate with Old High German (OHG) namo , Sanskrit नामन् ( nāman ), Latin nomen , Greek ὄνομα ( onoma ), and Persian نام ( nâm ), from the Proto-Indo-European (PIE) *h₁nómn̥ .

[ 1 ] Outside Indo-European, it can be connected to Proto-Uralic *nime .

Naming conventions A naming convention is a set of agreed, stipulated, or generally accepted standards, norms, social norms, or criteria for naming things.

Parents may follow a naming convention when selecting names for their children. Some have chosen alphabetical names by birth order. In some East Asian cultures it is common for one syllable in a two-syllable given name to be a generation name which is the same for immediate siblings. In many cultures it is common for the son to be named after the father or a grandfather. In certain African cultures, such as in Cameroon, the eldest son gets the family name for his given name. In other cultures, the name may include the place of residence, or the place of birth.

Major naming conventions include: In astronomy , astronomical naming conventions In biology , binomial nomenclature In chemistry , chemical nomenclature In classics , Roman naming conventions In computer programming , identifier naming conventions In computer networking , computer naming schemes In planetary science , planetary nomenclature In sciences generally, systematic names for a variety of things Products may follow a naming convention.

Automobiles typically have a binomial name, a "make" (manufacturer) and a "model", in addition to a model year, such as a 2007 Chevrolet Corvette . Sometimes there is a name for the car's "decoration level" or "trim line" as well: e.g., Cadillac Escalade EXT Platinum , after the precious metal.

Computers often have increasing numbers in their names to signify the next generation.

Courses at schools typically follow a naming convention: an abbreviation for the subject area and then a number ordered by increasing level of difficulty.

Many numbers (e.g., bank accounts, government IDs, credit cards, etc.) are not random but have an internal structure and convention. Virtually all organizations that assign names or numbers will follow some convention in generating these identifiers. Airline flight numbers, Space Shuttle flight numbers , even phone numbers all have an internal convention.

Personal name Main article: Personal name A signature is a person's own handwritten name A personal name is an identifying word or words by which an individual is intimately known or designated.

[ 2 ] In many countries, it is traditional for individuals to have a personal name (also called a given name or first name) and a surname (also called a last name or family name because it is shared by members of the same family).

[ 3 ] Some people have two surnames, one inherited from each parent. In most of Europe and the Americas, the given name typically comes before the surname, whereas in parts of Asia and Hungary the surname comes before the given name ( Eastern name order ). In some cultures it is traditional for a woman to take her husband's surname when she gets married.

A common practice in many countries is patronym which means that a component of a personal name is based on the given name of one's father. A less common practice in countries is matronym which means that a component of a personal name is based on the given name of one's mother. In some East Asian cultures , it is traditional for given names to include a generation name , a syllable shared between siblings and cousins of the same generation.

Middle names are also used by many people as a third identifier, and can be chosen for personal reasons including signifying relationships, preserving pre-marital/maiden names (a popular practice in the United States), and to perpetuate family names. The practice of using middle names dates back to ancient Rome, where it was common for members of the elite to have a praenomen (a personal name), a nomen (a family name, not exactly used the way middle names are used today), and a cognomen (a name representing an individual attribute or the specific branch of a person's family).

[ 4 ] Middle names eventually fell out of use, but regained popularity in Europe during the nineteenth century.

[ 4 ] Besides first, middle, and last names, individuals may also have nicknames , aliases , or titles . Nicknames are informal names used by friends or family to refer to a person ("Chris" may be used as a short form of the personal name "Christopher"). A person may choose to use an alias, or a fake name, instead of their real name, possibly to protect or obscure their identity. People may also have titles designating their role in an institution or profession (members of royal families may use various terms such as king , Queen , duke , or duchess to signify their positions of authority or their relation to the throne).

[ 3 ] Names of names Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e In onomastic terminology, personal names of men are called andronyms (from Ancient Greek ἀνήρ / man, and ὄνομα / name), [ 5 ] while personal names of women are called gynonyms (from Ancient Greek γυνή / woman, and ὄνομα / name).

[ 6 ] Names of humans ( anthroponyms ) Name of ...

Name of name Full name of a person Personal name First name of a person Given name Family name Surname Residents of a locality Demonym Ethnic group Ethnonym False or assumed name Pseudonym Pseudonym of an author Pen name Pseudonym of a performer Stage name Other names -onym-suffixed words Names of non-human entities Name of a...

Name of name Any geographical object Toponym Body of water Hydronym Mountain or hill Oronym Region or country Choronym Any inhabited locality Econym Village Comonym Town or city Astionym Cosmic object Cosmonym Star Astronym Other names -onym-suffixed words Brand names Main article: Brand Developing a name for a brand or product is heavily influenced by marketing research and strategy to be appealing and marketable. The brand name is often a neologism or pseudoword , such as Kodak or Sony .

Religious names The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Religious name Two charts from an Arabic copy of the Secretum Secretorum for determining whether a person will live or die based on the numerical value of the patient's name.

In the ancient world, particularly in the ancient near-east ( Israel , Mesopotamia , Egypt , Persia ) names were thought to be extremely powerful and act, in some ways, as a separate manifestation of a person or deity.

[ 7 ] This viewpoint is responsible both for the reluctance to use the proper name of God in Hebrew writing or speech, as well as the common understanding in ancient magic that magical rituals had to be carried out "in [someone's] name". By invoking a god or spirit by name, one was thought to be able to summon that spirit's power for some kind of miracle or magic (see Luke 9:49, in which the disciples claim to have seen a man driving out demons using the name of Jesus ). This understanding passed into later religious tradition, for example the stipulation in Catholic exorcism that the demon cannot be expelled until the exorcist has forced it to give up its name, at which point the name may be used in a stern command which will drive the demon away.

Biblical names Main article: List of biblical names In the Old Testament , the names of individuals are meaningful, and a change of name indicates a change of status. For example, the patriarch Abram and his wife Sarai were renamed " Abraham " and " Sarah " at the institution of the Abrahamic covenant ( Genesis 17 :4, 17:15). Simon was renamed Peter when he was given the Keys to Heaven . This is recounted in the Gospel of Matthew chapter 16, which according to Roman Catholic teaching [ 8 ] was when Jesus promised to Saint Peter the power to take binding actions.

[ 9 ] Proper names are "saturated with meaning".

[ 10 ] Throughout the Bible , characters are given names at birth that reflect something of significance or describe the course of their lives. For example: Solomon meant peace , [ 11 ] and the king with that name was the first whose reign was without war .

[ 12 ] Likewise, Joseph named his firstborn son Manasseh (Hebrew: "causing to forget")(Genesis 41:51); when Joseph also said, "God has made me forget all my troubles and everyone in my father's family." Biblical Jewish people did not have surnames which were passed from generation to generation. However, they were typically known as the child of their father. For example: דוד בן ישי (David ben Yishay) meaning, David , son of Jesse (1 Samuel 17:12,58). Today, this style of name is still used in Jewish religious rites.

Indian name Main article: Indian name Indian names are based on a variety of systems and naming conventions , which vary from region to region. Names are also influenced by religion and caste and may come from epics .

India 's population speaks a wide variety of languages and nearly every major religion in the world has a following in India. This variety makes for subtle, often confusing, differences in names and naming styles. Due to historical Indian cultural influences , several names across South and Southeast Asia are influenced by or adapted from Indian names or words.

For some Indians, their birth name is different from their official name; the birth name starts with a randomly selected name from the person's horoscope (based on the nakshatra or lunar mansion corresponding to the person's birth).

Many children are given three names, sometimes as a part of religious teaching.

Quranic names (Arabic names) Further information: List of characters and names mentioned in the Quran We can see many Arabic names in the Quran and in Muslim people, such as Allah, Muhammad, Khwaja, Ismail, Mehboob, Suhelahmed, Shoheb Ameena, Aaisha, Sameena, Rumana, Swaleha, etc.

The names Mohammed and Ahmed are the same, for example Suhel Ahmad or Mohammad Suhel are the same. There are many similar names in Islam and Christianity, such as Yosef (Islamic)/Joseph (Christian), Adam/Adam, Dawood/David, Rumana/Romana, Maryam/Mary, Nuh/Noah, etc.

Name use by animals and plants Main article: Common name Further information: List of historical common names and List of animal names The use of personal names is not unique to humans.

Dolphins [ 13 ] and green-rumped parrotlets [ 14 ] also use symbolic names to address contact calls to specific individuals. Individual dolphins have distinctive signature whistles, to which they will respond even when there is no other information to clarify which dolphin is being referred to.

Named entities This section is an excerpt from Named entity .

[ edit ] In information extraction , a named entity is a real-world object , such as a person, location, organization, product, etc., that can be denoted with a proper name . It can be abstract or have a physical existence. Examples of named entities include Barack Obama , New York City , Volkswagen Golf , or anything else that can be named. Named entities can simply be viewed as entity instances (e.g., New York City is an instance of a city ).

From a historical perspective, the term Named Entity was coined during the MUC-6 evaluation campaign [ 15 ] and contained ENAMEX (entity name expressions e.g. persons, locations and organizations) and NUMEX (numerical expression).

A more formal definition can be derived from the rigid designator by Saul Kripke . In the expression "Named Entity", the word "Named" aims to restrict the possible set of entities to only those for which one or many rigid designators stands for the referent.

[ 16 ] A designator is rigid when it designates the same thing in every possible world. On the contrary, flaccid designators may designate different things in different possible worlds.

As an example, consider the sentence, "Biden is the president of the United States". Both "Biden" and the "United States" are named entities since they refer to specific objects ( Joe Biden and United States ). However, "president" is not a named entity since it can be used to refer to many different objects in different worlds (in different presidential periods referring to different persons, or even in different countries or organizations referring to different people). Rigid designators usually include proper names as well as certain natural terms like biological species and substances.

There is also a general agreement in the Named Entity Recognition community to consider temporal and numerical expressions as named entities, such as amounts of money and other types of units, which may violate the rigid designator perspective.

The task of recognizing named entities in text is Named Entity Recognition while the task of determining the identity of the named entities mentioned in text is called Named Entity Disambiguation . Both tasks require dedicated algorithms and resources to be addressed.

[ 17 ] See also Endonym and exonym - native and non-native names Human names List of adjectival forms of place names Name calling – a form of verbal abuse Name change Names of God Numeral (linguistics) Onomastics – the study of proper names Popular cat names Title (publishing) References ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 September 2008 .

; The asterisk before a word indicates that it is a hypothetical construction, not an attested form.

^ "personal name" .

Merriam-Webster.com . Merriam-Webster.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ a b "General words for names, and types of name" .

macmillandictionary.com . Macmillan Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ a b Fabry, Merrill (16 August 2016).

"Now You Know: Why Do We Have Middle Names?" (web article) .

Time . Time.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ Room 1996 , p. 6.

^ Barolini 2005 , p. 91, 98.

^ "Egyptian Religion", E. A. Wallis Budge", Arkana 1987 edition, ISBN 0-14-019017-1 ^ Catechism of the Catholic Church, para 881: "The episcopal college and its head, the Pope" Archived 2010-09-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Routledge Companion to the Christian Church by Gerard Mannion and Lewis S. Mudge (Jan 30, 2008) ISBN 0415374200 page 235 ^ Baruch Hochman, Character in Literature (Cornell University Press, 1985), 37.

^ Campbell, Mike.

"Meaning, origin and history of the name Solomon" .

Behind the Name .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2018 . Retrieved 27 December 2018 .

^ "Solomon, the King" .

www.dawnbible.com .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 27 December 2018 .

^ "Dolphins Name Themselves With Whistles, Study Says" . National Geographic News. 8 May 2006. Archived from the original on 14 November 2006.

^ Berg, Karl S.; Delgado, Soraya; Okawa, Rae; Beissinger, Steven R.; Bradbury, Jack W. (1 January 2011).

"Contact calls are used for individual mate recognition in free-ranging green-rumped parrotlets, Forpus passerinus" .

Animal Behaviour .

81 (1): 241– 248.

doi : 10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.10.012 .

ISSN 0003-3472 .

S2CID 42150361 .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2011 . Retrieved 25 October 2020 .

^ Grishman, Ralph; Sundheim, Beth (1996).

Design of the MUC-6 evaluation (PDF) . TIPSTER '96 Proceedings.

^ Nadeau, David; Sekine, Satoshi (2007).

A survey of named entity recognition and classification (PDF) . Lingvisticae Investigationes.

^ Nouvel, Damien; Ehrmann, Maud; Rosset, Sophie (2015). Wiley (ed.).

Named Entities for Computational Linguistics .

ISBN 978-1-84821-838-3 .

Sources Barolini, Teodolinda, ed. (2005).

Medieval Constructions in Gender And Identity: Essays in Honor of Joan M. Ferrante . Tempe: Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies.

ISBN 9780866983372 .

Bruck, Gabriele vom; Bodenhorn, Barbara, eds. (2009) [2006].

An Anthropology of Names and Naming (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[ permanent dead link ] Fraser, Peter M.

(2000). "Ethnics as Personal Names".

Greek Personal Names: Their Value as Evidence (PDF) . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

149– 157. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 October 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

Roberts, Michael (2017). "The Semantics of Demonyms in English".

The Semantics of Nouns . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

205– 220.

ISBN 978-0-19-873672-1 .

Room, Adrian (1996).

An Alphabetical Guide to the Language of Name Studies . Lanham and London: The Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 9780810831698 .

Further reading "Names" by Sam Cumming, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP), a philosophical dissertation on the syntax and semantics of names Pilcher, Jane (2017).

"Names, Bodies and Identities" (PDF) .

Sociology .

50 (4): 764– 779.

doi : 10.1177/0038038515582157 .

S2CID 145136869 .

Matthews, Elaine; Hornblower, Simon; Fraser, Peter Marshall, Greek Personal Names: Their Value as Evidence , Proceedings of the British Academy (104), Oxford University Press , 2000.

ISBN 0-19-726216-3 Name and Form – from Sacred Texts Buddhism External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Name .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to names .

Lexicon of Greek Personal Names , Oxford (over 35,000 published names) Behind The Name , The etymology of first names The Name Tradition In The Christian Culture Kate Monk's Onomastikon Names over the world throughout the history "Name" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes v t e Personal names and anthroponymy Personal name Birth name Given name Surname patrilineal matrilineal affixes nobiliary particle By sequence Given name list Middle name Surname list By trait Diminutive Double-barrelled Epithet animal common plant Eponymic Matronymic Metonymic Mononymic Occupational Patronymic surname Sobriquet Teknonymic Toponymic surname Patrial Unisex Virtue By life situation Aptronym Birth name Code name Maiden and married names Necronym Posthumous name Temple name Placeholder name Notname Regnal name Slave name Pseudonyms ( list ) Art name bugō Nicknames list hypocorism list of monarchs nom de guerre Pen name heteronym Ring name shikona Stage name list list of mononyms Username By culture ( surnames ) East Asia Amami Chinese art courtesy generation titles Hong Kong Formosan Japanese Korean Okinawan Vietnamese Northern Asia and Central Asia Kalmyk Manchu Mongolian Sakha Tibetan North Africa and Western Asia Afghan Arabic Azerbaijani Berber Coptic Hebrew Mandaean Pashtun Persian Somali Tatar Turkish Oceania Australian Aboriginal Fijian Hawaiian Māori Vanuatuan Sub-Saharan Africa Ashanti Congolese Eritrean and Ethiopian Ewe Ghanaian Igbo Yoruba Zimbabwean Europe, Americas, and Australasia Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Celtic Cornish Irish Manx Scottish Welsh Germanic Dutch English American African-American Canadian German Gothic Icelandic Scandinavian Swedish Romance Catalan French Italian Occitan Portuguese Roman praenomen nomen cognomen agnomen Romanian Spanish Latin America Slavic Bulgarian Croatian Czech East Slavic Belarusian Russian Ukrainian Kashubian Macedonian Polish Serbian Slovak Suffixes Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Other Albanian Armenian Basque Georgian Greek ancient Cypriot South and Southeast Asia Balinese Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Filipino Indonesian Chinese Javanese Cambodian Malaysian Mizo (Lushai) Indian Lao Pakistani Sindhi Sinhalese Tamilian Thai By religion Christian biblical papal saint Buddhist surname Dharma Jewish Hebrew surname Mandaean Theophoric Manners of address ( list ) Of authority and of honour Styles Honorific diplomatic imperial, royal, and noble judiciary religious ecclesiastical Pre-nominal letters Suffix emeritus Post-nominal letters academic orders , decorations , and medals Titles Academic Imperial, royal and noble chivalric courtesy false hereditary subsidiary substantive Military professional Academic educational honorary Corporate Diplomatic Judicial Religious ecclesiastical papal Related traditions Baptism Name day Calendar of saints Related Acronym Anonymity Anthropomorphism personification national Call sign Deadnaming Endonym and exonym Family Galton–Watson process Legal name name change Namesake Naming taboo Nomenclature nomen nescio Misnomer Onomastics -onym Personal identity identifier Proper noun Signature monogram royal cypher khelrtva signum manus tughra Surnames by country Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐qk2xq
Cached time: 20250818140856
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.745 seconds
Real time usage: 0.949 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3584/1000000
Revision size: 21127/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129423/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4301/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 109773/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.503/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18948722/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  794.025      1 -total
 18.24%  144.845      1 Template:Reflist
 11.54%   91.635      3 Template:Lang
 10.34%   82.140      1 Template:Linguistics
 10.21%   81.081      6 Template:Cite_web
 10.09%   80.142      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.97%   55.348      1 Template:Excerpt
  6.95%   55.221      1 Template:Short_description
  5.87%   46.625      2 Template:Sister_project
  5.68%   45.093      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:164226:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818140856 and revision id 1306357728. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Name&oldid=1306357728 " Categories : Names Lexicography Concepts in logic Philosophical logic Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Articles with limited geographic scope from October 2017 Articles with excerpts All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 09:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Name 108 languages Add topic

