Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Proponents and views Toggle Proponents and views subsection 2.1 Georgism 2.1.1 Equal right of land 2.2 Socialism 2.2.1 Equal liberty 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Law of equal liberty 6 languages العربية Asturianu Español Português Română Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fundamental precept of liberalism and socialism Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e The law of equal liberty is the fundamental precept of liberalism and socialism .

[ 1 ] Stated in various ways by many thinkers, it can be summarized as the view that all individuals must be granted the maximum possible freedom as long as that freedom does not interfere with the freedom of anyone else.

[ 2 ] While socialists have been hostile to liberalism, which is accused of "providing an ideological cover for the depredation of capitalism", scholars have stated that "the goals of liberalism are not so different from those of the socialists", although this similarity in goals has been described as being deceptive due to the different meanings liberalism and socialism give to liberty, equality and solidarity , including the meaning, implications and norms of equal liberty derived from it.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] In his Second Treatise of Government (1689), [ 5 ] John Locke wrote: "A state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another; there being nothing more evident, than that creatures of the same species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without subordination or subjection, unless the lord and master of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty." [ 6 ] In "A Full Vindication of the Measures of the Congress", written in 1774, [ 7 ] Alexander Hamilton wrote: "All men have one common original, they participate in one common nature, and consequently have one common right. No reason can be assigned why one man should exercise any power over his fellow creatures more than another, unless they voluntarily vest him with it." [ 8 ] In Social Statics (1851), [ 9 ] Herbert Spencer defined it as a natural law "that every man may claim the fullest liberty to exercise his faculties compatible with the possession of like liberty to every other man." [ 10 ] Stated another way by Spencer, "each has freedom to do all that he wills provided that he infringes not the equal freedom of any other." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] American individualist anarchist and libertarian socialist Benjamin Tucker defined equal liberty as "the largest amount of liberty compatible with equality and mutuality of respect, on the part of individual's living in society, for their respective spheres of action." [ 14 ] Proponents and views [ edit ] Georgism [ edit ] Equal right of land [ edit ] In 1775, Thomas Spence published a pamphlet titled Rights of Man [ 15 ] based on the law of equal liberty and stressed the equal right to land. According to Spence, we have equal rights to land as we have equal rights to life and liberty. To deny to some people this right "is in effect denying them a right to live. For the right to deprive anything of the means of living, supposes a right to deprive it of life." [ 16 ] In 1795, Thomas Paine wrote Agrarian Justice , [ 17 ] stating: "Liberty and property are words that express every thing we possess that is not of an intellectual quality. Property is of two kinds. First, natural property, or that which is of the Creator's making, as Earth, Air, and Water. Secondly, artificial or acquired property, or that which is of man’s making or producing. Of this there can be no equality, because, in order to participate equally, it is first necessary that every man produces it equally, which is never the case; and if it were every man keeping his own, would be the same as participation. The equality of natural property is the subject treated of in this work. Every person born into the world is born the rightful proprietor of a certain species of property, or the value thereof." [ 18 ] In Social Statics , Herbert Spencer based his political philosophy on the law of equal liberty. He pointed out that denying an equal right to use land could result in non landers being evicted from the planet and contradicts the law of equal freedom. This point was made further by land reformists especially championed by Henry George in Progress and Poverty , [ 19 ] where he sought to address this by preferably taxing land values.

[ 20 ] George disagreed with Spencer that the equal right to use land implied that land should be nationalized. George criticized Spencer's lack of adherence to his own conclusions in A Perplexed Philosopher [ 21 ] and stated that equal right to use land does not imply the joint-ownership of land, therefore all that is necessary to achieve the law of equal freedom was to tax land with a land value tax which would disincentivise landbanking.

[ 22 ] Socialism [ edit ] Equal liberty [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Anarchism and socialism 's idea of equal liberty rests on political, social and economic equality of opportunity .

[ 23 ] Saul Newman 's equal liberty is "'the idea that liberty and equality are inextricably linked, that one cannot be had without the other'. They both belong to the category of emancipation, they mutually resonate, and they are situated in a collective context. Equality does not come secondary to liberty, as usually happens under the liberal reading; the demand for it goes beyond the formal equality of rights and there is no tension between the two, no separation and conflict between individuals as passive recipients within society. Liberty is collective, as is its realization, being shared instead of diminished and being 'only imaginable in the contest of the liberty of all', and accompanied also by social and economic equality. The principle of equal-liberty is an 'open-ended horizon that allows for endless permutations and elaborations. Moreover, it is closer to anarchist political ethics: transcending the socialist as well as the liberal tradition, it entails that liberty and equality cannot be implemented within the state, and it interrogates all forms of domination and hierarchy." [ 24 ] Mikhail Bakunin , who famously proclaimed that "[w]e are convinced that freedom without Socialism is privilege and injustice, and that Socialism without Freedom is slavery and brutality", [ 25 ] stated that "I am truly free only when all human beings, men and women, are equally free. The freedom of other men, far from negating or limiting my freedom, is, on the contrary, its necessary premise and confirmation." [ 23 ] Benjamin Tucker 's notion of equal liberty implies that "each person is equally free to pursue his or her self-interest, and is bound only by 'a mutuality of respect.'" [ 14 ] Tucker stated that this is a contract or social convention rather than a natural right, writing: "Now equal liberty itself being a social convention (for there are no natural rights), it is obvious that anarchism recognizes the property of compelling individuals to regard one social convention. But it does not follow from this that it recognizes the propriety of compelling individuals to regard any and all social convention. Anarchism protects equal liberty (of which property based on labor is simply an expression in a particular sphere), not because it is a social convention, but because it is equal liberty, that is, because it is anarchism itself." [ 14 ] Tucker stated that equal liberty should be protected through voluntary association rather than through government because the latter is the negation of equal liberty.

[ 14 ] According to John F. Welsh, equal liberty is "an absolute or first principle for Tucker since it appears as a core concept in all of his writing. He makes it abundantly clear that equal liberty is inextricably tied to his notions of both anarchism and self-ownership. Tucker equates equal liberty with anarchism." [ 14 ] Although claiming that equal liberty is a social construction rather than a natural right, Tucker "infuses the notion with the rhetoric of rights, including the concepts of duty and compulsion." [ 14 ] For Tucker, people have "a duty to respect each other's rights, assuming the word 'right' to be used in the sense of the limit which the principle of equal liberty logically places upon might", referencing Max Stirner 's egoist anarchism .

[ 14 ] In addition, "man's only duty is to respect others' 'rights'" and that "man's only right over others is to enforce that duty." [ 14 ] Welsh states that Tucker based his notions of equal liberty on "the distinction between invasion and resistance, between government and defense." [ 14 ] Tucker used the term invasion to refer to the "line inside of which liberty of action", i.e.

positive liberty , "does not conflict with others' liberty of action." [ 14 ] For Paul Eltzbacher , people have the right to resist invasion and defend or protect their personal liberty. Eltzbacher wrote that "[t]he individual has the right to repel invasion of his sphere of action." [ 14 ] According to Welsh, Tucker proposed that "the law of equal liberty be given some teeth through the creation of 'defensive associations' that would act coercively on behalf of the anarchistic principle of equal liberty, prohibiting and demanding redress for invasive acts." [ 14 ] Richard P. Hiskes states in Community Without Coercion: Getting Along in the Minimal State that "the criticism of individualism for its alleged lack of communal sentiment is false: individualism as a means of political organization is capable of preserving individual liberty and providing for the welfare of all persons in society." [ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Egalitarianism Equality before the law Harm principle Left-libertarianism Left-wing politics Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Lockean proviso Non-aggression principle Georgism Geolibertarianism Mutualism (economic theory) Right-libertarianism References [ edit ] ^ Newman, Saul (2011).

Politics of Postanarchism (reprint ed.). Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. p. 21.

ISBN 9780748654161 .

^ Propp, Steven H. (2002).

Inquiries: Philosophical: How and Why Do People Disagree?

. Bloomington. p. 139.

ISBN 9781475900538 .

^ Boyd, Tony; Harrison, Kevin, eds. (2003).

Understanding Political Ideas and Movements . Manchester, England: Manchester University Press. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 9780719061516 .

^ Anton, Anatole; Schmitt, Richard (2012).

Taking Socialism Seriously . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. pp.

220– 222.

ISBN 9780739166352 .

^ Locke, John (1821) [1689]. "II".

Second Treatise of Government . Whitmore and Fenn, and C. Brown. p. 189.

^ Hittinger, John (2002).

Liberty, Wisdom, and Grace: Thomism and Democratic Political Theory (illustrated ed.). Lanham: Lexington Books. p. 101.

ISBN 9780739104125 .

^ Hamilton, Alexander (15 December 1774).

"A Full Vindication of the Measures of the Congress" . National Archives of Founders Online. In Syrett, Harold C., ed. (1961).

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton .

1 (1768–1778). New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 45–78.

^ White, Morton (1989).

Philosophy, The Federalist, and the Constitution (reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 28.

ISBN 9780195363074 .

^ Spencer, Herbert (1851). "Chapter 4".

Social Statics: Or, the Conditions Essential to Human Happiness Specified, and the First of Them Developed . London: Chapman.

^ Sprading, Charles (2015).

Liberty and the Great Libertarians (illustrated ed.). Auburn: Mises Institute. p. 214.

ISBN 9781610161077 .

^ Offer, John (2000).

Herbert Spencer: Critical Assessments (illustrated ed.).

IV . London: Taylor & Francis. p. 82.

ISBN 9780415181877 .

^ Shah, Part J., ed. (2004).

Morality of Markets . New Delhi: Academic Foundation. p. 92.

ISBN 9788171883660 .

^ Pierson, Christopher (2020).

Just Property: Property in an Age of Ideologies .

III . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 9780191090790 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Welsh, John F. (2010).

Max Stirner's Dialectical Egoism: A New Interpretation (illustrated ed.). Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 129.

ISBN 9780739141564 .

^ Spence, Thomas (1793) [1775].

Rights of Man . Newcastle upon Tyne: The Philosophical Society. Retrieved 1 October 2020 – via Thomas Spence Society.

^ Hampsher-Monk, Iain, ed. (2005).

The Impact of the French Revolution: Texts from Britain in the 1790s (illustrated ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 278.

ISBN 9780521570053 .

^ Paine, Thomas; Pratt, Julian; Spence, Thomas (2017). [1795].

Agrarian Justice . Earthsharing Devon.

ISBN 9780244600006 .

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) . Retrieved 1 October 2020 – via Earthsharing Devon.

^ Paine, Thomas; Pratt, Julian; Spence, Thomas (2017). [1795].

Agrarian Justice . Earthsharing Devon. p. 23.

ISBN 9780244600006 .

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) . Retrieved 1 October 2020 – via Earthsharing Devon.

^ George, Henry (1879).

Progress and Poverty: An Enquiry Into the Cause of Industrial Depressions, and of Increase of Want with Increase of Wealth. The Remedy . London: K. Paul, Trench & Company.

^ Wenzer, Kenneth C. (1997).

An Anthology of Single Land Tax Thought (illustrated ed.). Rochester: University of Rochester Press.

ISBN 9781878822925 .

^ George, Henry (1879).

A Perplexed Philosopher . New York: Doubleday, Page & Company.

^ Smith, George H. (2 July 2013).

"Herbert Spencer, Henry George, and the Land Question" .

Libertarianism . Retrieved 1 October 2020.

^ a b Jun, Nathan (2011).

Anarchism and Political Modernity (illustrated ed.). London: A&C Black. p. 124.

ISBN 9781441166869 .

^ Egoumenides, Magda (2014).

Philosophical Anarchism and Political Obligation . New York: Bloomsbury Publishing USA. p. 90.

ISBN 9781441124456 .

^ Garner, Jason (2016).

Goals and Means: Anarchism, Syndicalism, and Internationalism in the Origins of the Federación Anarquista Ibérica . Oakland: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849352260 .

^ Hiskes, Richard P. (1982).

Community Without Coercion: Getting Along in the Minimal State . Newark: University of Delaware Press.

ISBN 9780874131789 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Hiskes, Richard P. (1982).

Community Without Coercion: Getting Along in the Minimal State . Newark: University of Delaware Press.

ISBN 9780874131789 .

Sprading, Charles (2015).

Liberty and the Great Libertarians (illustrated ed.). Auburn: Mises Institute.

ISBN 9781610161077 .

Welsh, John F. (2010).

Max Stirner's Dialectical Egoism: A New Interpretation (illustrated ed.). Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780739141564 .

Further reading [ edit ] Boaz, David, ed. (2015).

The Libertarian Reader: Classic & Contemporary Writings from Lao-Tzu to Milton Friedman (reprint re-edition ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9781476752891 .

Doherty, Brian (2009).

Radicals for Capitalism: A Freewheeling History of the Modern American Libertarian Movement . London: Hachette UK.

ISBN 9780786731886 .

v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Libertarian socialism Schools of thought Anarchism Collectivist anarchism Anarchist communism Anarcho-syndicalism Guild socialism Marxism Autonomism Chalieu–Montal Tendency Council communism Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Johnson–Forest Tendency Situationism Utopian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Class conflict Common ownership Decentralization Economic democracy Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Worker cooperative Workers' control Workers' self-management Models Communalism Decentralized planning Economic democracy Guild socialism Inclusive Democracy Market abolitionism Participatory economics Socialization People 19th c.

Charles Fourier Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin Joseph Déjacque Thomas Hodgskin Peter Kropotkin Gustav Landauer Herbert Marcuse William Morris Antonie Pannekoek Francesc Pi i Margall Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Wilhelm Reich Rudolf Rocker Otto Rühle 20th c.

Michael Albert Murray Bookchin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky G. D. H. Cole Takis Fotopoulos Paul Goodman Robin Hahnel Daniel Guérin Chris Pallis Significant events International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Related Communism Democratic socialism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Socialism Syndicalism Critique of political economy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐b952q
Cached time: 20250816133830
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.951 seconds
Real time usage: 1.131 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2850/1000000
Revision size: 17242/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 325921/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1921/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 138865/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.614/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8071442/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  795.992      1 -total
 50.31%  400.490     10 Template:Navbox
 44.32%  352.776     14 Template:Excerpt
 32.50%  258.711      1 Template:Anarchism
 19.15%  152.467      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.65%  148.437      1 Template:Reflist
 15.64%  124.526      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 13.23%  105.342      1 Template:Liberalism
 11.94%   95.002     21 Template:ISBN
  7.68%   61.169      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6805098:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816133830 and revision id 1304687555. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_equal_liberty&oldid=1304687555 " Categories : Classical liberalism Left-libertarianism Liberalism Libertarian socialism Herbert Spencer Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law of equal liberty 6 languages Add topic

