Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overarching goals of Article 6 Toggle Overarching goals of Article 6 subsection 1.1 Raised ambition 1.2 Supporting sustainable development 1.3 Ensuring environmental integrity 2 Three approaches to international cooperation Toggle Three approaches to international cooperation subsection 2.1 Article 6.2: Cooperative Approaches 2.2 Article 6.4: Mechanism to promote climate action and support sustainable development 2.3 Article 6.8: Non-market-based approaches 3 Open issues and current negotiations Toggle Open issues and current negotiations subsection 3.1 Open issues 3.2 Outlook 4 References Toggle the table of contents Cooperative mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 2 languages Deutsch Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement ) Part of the 2015 climate change treaty This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cooperative mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated . The reason given is: Based on the "outlook" section at the bottom, it appears the article has not been updated since before the 2018 COP in Katowice..

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Article 6 of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change enables parties to cooperate in implementing their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). Among other things, this means that emission reductions can be transferred between countries and counted towards NDCs. As of September 2024, rules to avoid double counting have yet to be agreed.

[ 1 ] Overarching goals of Article 6 [ edit ] Voluntary cooperation provided for under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement serves a number of goals.

[ 2 ] These are outlined below.

Raised ambition [ edit ] International cooperation under Article 6 is designed to raise ambition. With regard to climate action, this is generally understood as cooperation being used to enable the participating countries to achieve more ambitious emission reduction targets. Worthy of note here is that under the Paris Agreement, the idea of raised ambition is not restricted purely to climate change mitigation . It also includes measures and targets for climate change adaptation .

Supporting sustainable development [ edit ] The cooperation mechanisms must support sustainable development . While the main focus of cooperation is placed on avoiding greenhouse gas emissions, other sustainability issues must also be addressed.

Ensuring environmental integrity [ edit ] The cooperative mechanisms must also ensure the environmental integrity of the cooperation and transfer process. That means that the mechanisms may not be used to circumvent climate action ambition in the countries involved. For example, the transfer of emission reductions from one country to another must not lead to the countries’ respective climate action efforts being any less than they would be without the cooperative mechanism.

Three approaches to international cooperation [ edit ] The Paris Agreement offers three ways in which Parties may cooperate on a voluntary basis.

Article 6.2: Cooperative Approaches [ edit ] Article 6.2 enables Parties to cooperate with one another directly without using an international mechanism. For example, climate change mitigation activities can be implemented in one country and the resulting emission reductions can be transferred to another country and counted towards its nationally determined contribution (NDC).

In addition to the requirement to promote sustainable development and ensure environmental integrity, use of Article 6.2 also requires transparent processes and accurate accounting of emission reductions achieved. The latter is designed to prevent emission reductions being counted more than once – for example, towards the environmental audit of the country in which the climate action took place and also of the country to which the emission reductions were transferred.

Article 6.2 could be used in a situation where national or regional instruments such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) are linked with comparable systems in order to create a common, cross-border carbon market . National and bilateral carbon credit-based systems operated outside the realm of the UNFCCC could also be used under Article 6.2. At the climate change conference in Paris , a working programme was adopted to develop guidelines on using this cooperation form.

[ 3 ] Article 6.4: Mechanism to promote climate action and support sustainable development [ edit ] Another approach to international cooperation involves the use of the newly developed mechanism to contribute to the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and support sustainable development (Article 6.4). In contrast to the instruments used in direct bilateral cooperation, this mechanism is supervised by a body commissioned by the Conference of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (COP). The COP will (possibly at COP29 [ 4 ] ) also adopt rules, processes and procedures which must be complied with when implementing activities under Article 6.4 This will ensure that both design and implementation of climate change mitigation activities as well as the verification of the emission reductions achieved meet standardised requirements. As with bilateral cooperation under Article 6.2, emission reductions achieved with the Article 6.4 mechanism in one country can be transferred to another country and counted towards its NDC.

Like the other forms of cooperation under Article 6, these activities must contribute to raised ambition and support sustainable development. One particular feature of the mechanism contained in Article 6.4 is the explicit goal of contributing to global emission reductions (Article 6.4 (d)). The activities conducted under Article 6.4 should not therefore result in a simple zero-sum game, as was the case with the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), its predecessor mechanism, and must instead lead to an absolute reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions overall.

Yet another feature of the mechanism is the goal of involving private sector stakeholders in climate change mitigation activities (Article 6.4 (b)). This will be done by offering suitable incentives. The approach gives non-state actors the opportunity to make use of the mechanism contained in Article 6.4.

Article 6.8: Non-market-based approaches [ edit ] As a third option, Article 6.8 allows the use of non-market-based approaches. As the name clearly suggests, market-based climate change mechanisms play no role whatsoever in this approach.

While the other two approaches focus on cooperation in implementing climate action, the range of opportunities for cooperation under Article 6.8 is significantly broader. In addition to climate action and climate change adaptation , they also cover technology transfer and capacity-building measures. How these approaches are to work has still to be agreed – the details will be fleshed out over the next few years in the development of a framework for non-market-based approaches.

Open issues and current negotiations [ edit ] In Paris, the Parties agreed on a rough framework and goals for the cooperative mechanisms. How these goals are to be achieved and how the mechanisms are expected to work remains unclear.

[ as of?

] Both are being addressed in the current climate change negotiations which are shaped by differing political standpoints and numerous open issues concerning technical matters, structure, and design.

[ 5 ] Open issues [ edit ] One key issue involves the extent to which activities conducted under Article 6 are to be regulated and monitored. While some countries (such as Brazil and also the EU ) call for Article 6 activities to be subject to stringent rules and monitored and overseen by a centralised institution, others (such as Japan, China, and India) would like to see greater flexibility.

[ 6 ] Differing standpoints exist as to the scope of applicability of the mechanism to promote climate action and support sustainable development contained in Article 6.4. While some countries, including Brazil, would like to see a continuation of the project-based approach used under the CDM, others favour a broader-based mechanism that also takes in programmes and sectoral approaches.

[ 7 ] The situation in other areas is less clear: discussions are still underway as to what the non-market-based approach actually entails and how it can be distinguished from existing forms of cooperation. An element of progress has been made in this regard, for example with the identification of activities which could benefit from the approach, including the withdrawal of subsidies for fossil fuels .

[ 6 ] Apart from the issues outline above, there are also technical matters that must be addressed. One such issue is the linkage of Article 6 with the transparency framework of the Paris Agreement and the reporting requirements regarding the use of Article 6. Hence, countries using Article 6 will have to submit an additional layer of information.

[ 8 ] Other issues include the establishment and use of robust accounting rules for transferred emission reductions. The differences in the nationally determined contributions (NDCs) submitted by Parties to the Paris Agreement highlight the challenges faced: to prevent transferred emission reductions from being counted more than once and thus undermining the environmental integrity of the Paris Agreement, reductions which are exported from one country and counted towards another country's NDC must be deducted from the exporting country's national emissions budget. However, if the two countries have differing NDCs, for example with differing target years, then robust accounting could well be rendered impossible.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] These and other technical matters must be clarified before the mechanisms can be used.

Outlook [ edit ] Following the adoption of the Paris Agreement, the task now at hand is to flesh out the details regarding the design and structure of the cooperation mechanisms. At the climate change conference in Marrakesh in 2016 (COP22), Parties exchanged their views and opinions regarding the role of Article 6 and identified those areas in which a consensus had been reached and where a common understanding had still to be agreed. A key element in that process is the opportunity for Parties to submit their standpoint in the form of “submissions” to the UNFCCC.

After the first round of submissions in the lead up to COP22, it was agreed in Marrakesh to introduce a further round of submissions which would be used as the basis for the next round of climate change negotiations during the interim sessions in Bonn .

[ 13 ] The submissions displayed a wide range of views, which challenged the negotiations on this issue at the UN Climate Change Conference in Bonn in November 2017 (COP23). Although a large number of controversial topics and open issues remain even after the negotiations in Bonn, all the proposals are now available in written, structured form, showing where the key areas of consensus and contention are. At COP23, the co-chairs of the working group were tasked with producing an informal note, which were revised at the first part of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) negotiation session in Bonn (SBSTA 48) in April and May 2018. Parties agreed to use the revised informal notes to further advance the negotiations.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Between then and spring 2018, these were to be used to draft a proposal for a consolidated text which could take the negotiations a significant step further.

[ 7 ] Time is of the essence in this regard: in Marrakesh, it was agreed that the Paris Agreement rule book should be adopted at COP 24 at the end of 2018 (Decision 1/CP.22, para 12).

References [ edit ] ^ https://www.economist.com/the-americas/2024/09/19/can-the-voluntary-carbon-market-save-the-amazon [ bare URL ] ^ Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015, Addendum, Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session, FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016 ( No. FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1) . Bonn: UNFCCC. 2016.

^ Decision 1/CP.21, para 36. in UNFCCC. Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015, Addendum, Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session, FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016 (No. FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1) . Bonn: UNFCCC. 2016.

^ "Cop: Article 6 carbon trading decision stuck" .

www.argusmedia.com . Retrieved 2023-12-16 .

^ Marcu, Andrei (2017).

"Issues for Discussion to Operationalise Article 6 of the Paris Agreement" (PDF) . International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development.

^ a b Decision 1/CP.21, para 36. in UNFCCC. Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twenty-first session, held in Paris from 30 November to 13 December 2015, Addendum, Part two: Action taken by the Conference of the Parties at its twenty-first session, FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, 29 January 2016 (No. FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1). Bonn: UNFCCC . Bonn: UNFCCC. 2016.

^ a b Obergassel, W.; Arens, C.; Hermwille, L.; Kreibich, N.; Mersmann, F.; Ott, H. E.; Wang-Helmreich, H. (2017).

Setting Sails for Troubled Waters. An Assessment of the Marrakech Climate Conference (Conference Report) . Wuppertal: Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy.

^ Decoding Article 6 of the Paris Agreement (PDF) . Mandaluyong: Asian Development Bank. April 2018.

^ Hood, C.; Briner, G.; Rocha, M. (2014).

"GHG or not GHG: Accounting for Diverse Mitigation Contributions in the Post-2020 Climate Framework" (PDF) .

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, International Energy Agency . Retrieved 23 November 2017 .

^ Howard, A.; Chagas, T.; Hoogzaad, J.; Hoch, S. (2017).

Features and implications of NDCs for carbon markets . Swedish Energy Agency, The Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature-Conversation, Building and Nuclear Safety, The Federal Office for the Environment.

^ Schneider, L-; Broekhoff, D.; Cames, M.; Füssler, J.; La Hoz Theuer, S. (2016).

Robust Accounting of International Transfers under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement – Preliminary Findings Discussion Paper . Bonn: UNFCCC.

^ Lazarus, M.; Kollmuss, A.; Schneider, L. (2014).

"Single-year mitigation targets: Uncharted territory for emissions trading and unit transfers. Working Paper" (PDF) .

Stockholm Environment Institute, Working Paper .

2014– 1.

^ Greiner, D.S.; Michaelowa, D. A. (2018).

Cooperative approaches under Art. 6.2 of the Paris Agreement (PDF) . Amsterdam: Climate Focus.

^ "Revised informal note containing draft elements of the guidance on cooperative approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement" (PDF) .

UNFCCC . May 2018.

^ "Revised informal note containing draft elements of the rules, modalities and procedures for the mechanism established by Article 6, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement" (PDF) .

UNFCCC . May 2018.

^ "Revised informal note containing draft elements of the draft decision on the work programme under the framework for non-market approaches referred to in Article 6, paragraph 8, of the Paris Agreement" (PDF) .

UNFCCC . May 2018.

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cooperative_mechanisms_under_Article_6_of_the_Paris_Agreement&oldid=1305612700 " Category : United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2023 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 03:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cooperative mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement 2 languages Add topic

