Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic concepts 2 Special principle of relativity Toggle Special principle of relativity subsection 2.1 In Newtonian mechanics 2.2 In special relativity 3 General principle of relativity Toggle General principle of relativity subsection 3.1 General relativity 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Principle of relativity 38 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Physics principle stating that the laws of physics must be the same in all reference frames Special relativity Principle of relativity Theory of relativity Formulations Foundations Einstein's postulates Inertial frame of reference Speed of light Maxwell's equations Lorentz transformation Consequences Time dilation Length contraction Relativistic mass Mass–energy equivalence Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Relativistic disk Bell's spaceship paradox Ehrenfest paradox Spacetime Minkowski spacetime Spacetime diagram World line Light cone Dynamics Proper time Proper mass Four-momentum History Precursors Galilean relativity Galilean transformation Aether theories Hyperbolic quaternions People Einstein Sommerfeld Michelson Morley FitzGerald Herglotz Lorentz Poincaré Minkowski Fizeau Abraham Born Planck von Laue Ehrenfest Tolman Dirac Physics portal Category v t e In physics , the principle of relativity is the requirement that the equations describing the laws of physics have the same form in all admissible frames of reference .

For example, in the framework of special relativity , the Maxwell equations have the same form in all inertial frames of reference . In the framework of general relativity, the Maxwell equations or the Einstein field equations have the same form in arbitrary frames of reference.

Several principles of relativity have been successfully applied throughout science , whether implicitly (as in Newtonian mechanics ) or explicitly (as in Albert Einstein 's special relativity and general relativity ).

Basic concepts [ edit ] Main articles: Galilean invariance and History of special relativity Certain principles of relativity have been widely assumed in most scientific disciplines. One of the most widespread is the belief that any law of nature should be the same at all times; and scientific investigations generally assume that laws of nature are the same regardless of the person measuring them. These sorts of principles have been incorporated into scientific inquiry at the most fundamental of levels.

Any principle of relativity prescribes a symmetry in natural law: that is, the laws must look the same to one observer as they do to another. According to a theoretical result called Noether's theorem , any such symmetry will also imply a conservation law alongside.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] For example, if two observers at different times see the same laws, then a quantity called energy will be conserved . In this light, relativity principles make testable predictions about how nature behaves.

Special principle of relativity [ edit ] See also: Inertial frame of reference According to the first postulate of the special theory of relativity: [ 3 ] Special principle of relativity : If a system of coordinates K is chosen so that, in relation to it, physical laws hold good in their simplest form, the same laws hold good in relation to any other system of coordinates K' moving in uniform translation relatively to K.

— Albert Einstein: The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity , Part A, §1 This postulate defines an inertial frame of reference .

The special principle of relativity states that physical laws should be the same in every inertial frame of reference , but that they may vary across non-inertial ones. This principle is used in both Newtonian mechanics and the theory of special relativity . Its influence in the latter is so strong that Max Planck named the theory after the principle.

[ 4 ] The principle requires physical laws to be the same for any body moving at constant velocity as they are for a body at rest. A consequence is that an observer in an inertial reference frame cannot determine an absolute speed or direction of travel in space,  and may only speak of speed or direction relative to some other object.

The principle does not extend to non-inertial reference frames because those frames do not, in general experience, seem to abide by the same laws of physics. In classical physics , fictitious forces are used to describe acceleration in non-inertial reference frames.

In Newtonian mechanics [ edit ] Main article: Galilean invariance The special principle of relativity was first explicitly enunciated by Galileo Galilei in 1632 in his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems , using the metaphor of Galileo's ship .

Newtonian mechanics added to the special principle several other concepts, including laws of motion, gravitation, and an assertion of an absolute time . When formulated in the context of these laws, the special principle of relativity states that the laws of mechanics are invariant under a Galilean transformation .

In special relativity [ edit ] Main article: Special relativity Joseph Larmor and Hendrik Lorentz discovered that Maxwell's equations , used in the theory of electromagnetism , were invariant only by a certain change of time and length units. This left some confusion among physicists, many of whom thought that a luminiferous aether was incompatible with the relativity principle, in the way it was defined by Henri Poincaré : The principle of relativity, according to which the laws of physical phenomena should be the same, whether for an observer fixed, or for an observer carried along in a uniform movement of translation; so that we have not and could not have any means of discerning whether or not we are carried along in such a motion.

— Henri Poincaré, 1904 [ 5 ] In their 1905 papers on electrodynamics , Henri Poincaré and Albert Einstein explained that with the Lorentz transformations the relativity principle holds perfectly. Einstein elevated the (special) principle of relativity to a postulate of the theory and derived the Lorentz transformations from this principle combined with the principle of the independence of the speed of light (in vacuum) from the motion of the source. These two principles were reconciled with each other by a re-examination of the fundamental meanings of space and time intervals.

The strength of special relativity lies in its use of simple, basic principles, including the invariance of the laws of physics under a shift of inertial reference frames and the invariance of the speed of light in vacuum. (See also: Lorentz covariance .) It is possible to derive the form of the Lorentz transformations from the principle of relativity alone. Using only the isotropy of space and the symmetry implied by the principle of special relativity, one can show that the space-time transformations between inertial frames are either Galilean or Lorentzian. Whether the transformation is actually Galilean or Lorentzian must be determined with physical experiments. It is not possible to conclude that the speed of light c is invariant by mathematical logic alone. In the Lorentzian case, one can then obtain relativistic interval conservation and the constancy of the speed of light.

[ 6 ] General principle of relativity [ edit ] The general principle of relativity states: [ 7 ] All systems of reference are equivalent with respect to the formulation of the fundamental laws of physics.

— C. Møller The Theory of Relativity , p. 220 That is, physical laws are the same in all reference frames—inertial or non-inertial. An accelerated charged particle might emit synchrotron radiation , though a particle at rest does not. If we consider now the same accelerated charged particle in its non-inertial rest frame, it emits radiation at rest.

Physics in non-inertial reference frames was historically treated by a coordinate transformation , first, to an inertial reference frame, performing the necessary calculations therein, and using another to return to the non-inertial reference frame. In most such situations, the same laws of physics can be used if certain predictable fictitious forces are added into consideration; an example is a uniformly rotating reference frame , which can be treated as an inertial reference frame if one adds a fictitious centrifugal force and Coriolis force into consideration.

The problems involved are not always so trivial. Special relativity predicts that an observer in an inertial reference frame does not see objects he would describe as moving faster than the speed of light. However, in the non-inertial reference frame of Earth , treating a spot on the Earth as a fixed point, the stars are observed to move in the sky, circling once about the Earth per day. Since the stars are light years away, this observation means that, in the non-inertial reference frame of the Earth, anybody who looks at the stars is seeing objects which appear, to them, to be moving faster than the speed of light.

Since non-inertial reference frames do not abide by the special principle of relativity, such situations are not self-contradictory .

General relativity [ edit ] Main article: General relativity General relativity was developed by Einstein in the years 1907–1915. General relativity postulates that the global Lorentz covariance of special relativity becomes a local Lorentz covariance in the presence of matter. The presence of matter "curves" spacetime , and this curvature affects the path of free particles (and even the path of light). General relativity uses the mathematics of differential geometry and tensors in order to describe gravitation as an effect of the geometry of spacetime . Einstein based this new theory on the general principle of relativity and named the theory after the underlying principle.

See also [ edit ] Background independence Conjugate diameters Cosmic microwave background radiation Equivalence principle Galilean relativity General relativity including Introduction to general relativity Invariant List of textbooks on relativity Newton's laws Preferred frame Principle of covariance Principle of locality Principle of uniformity Special relativity Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Deriglazov, Alexei (2010).

Classical Mechanics: Hamiltonian and Lagrangian Formalism . Springer. p. 111.

ISBN 978-3-642-14037-2 .

Extract of page 111 ^ Schwarzbach, Bertram E.; Kosmann-Schwarzbach, Yvette (2010).

The Noether Theorems: Invariance and Conservation Laws in the Twentieth Century . Springer. p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-387-87868-3 .

Extract of page 174 ^ Einstein, A., Lorentz, H. A., Minkowski, H., and Weyl, H. (1952) [1923].

Arnold Sommerfeld (ed.).

The Principle of Relativity: A Collection of Original Memoirs on the Special and General Theory of Relativity . Mineola, NY: Dover Publications. p. 111.

ISBN 0-486-60081-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Weistein, Galina (2015).

Einstein's Pathway to the Special Theory of Relativity . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 272.

ISBN 978-1-4438-7889-0 .

Extract of page 272 ^ Poincaré, Henri (1904–1906).

"The Principles of Mathematical Physics" .

Congress of arts and science, universal exposition, St. Louis, 1904 . Vol. 1. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and Company. pp.

604– 622.

^ Yaakov Friedman, Physical Applications of Homogeneous Balls , Progress in Mathematical Physics 40 Birkhäuser, Boston, 2004, pages 1-21.

^ C. Møller (1952).

The Theory of Relativity (2nd ed.). Delhi: Oxford University Press. p. 220.

ISBN 0-19-560539-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] See the special relativity references and the general relativity references .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has original works on the topic: Relativity English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Relativity: The Special and General Theory Wikibooks: Special Relativity Living Reviews in Relativity – An open access, peer-referred, solely online physics journal publishing invited reviews covering all areas of relativity research.

MathPages – Reflections on Relativity – A complete online course on Relativity.

Special Relativity Simulator A Relativity Tutorial at Caltech – A basic introduction to concepts of Special and General Relativity, as well as astrophysics.

Relativity Gravity and Cosmology – A short course offered at MIT.

Relativity in film clips and animations from the University of New South Wales.

Animation clip visualizing the effects of special relativity on fast moving objects.

Relativity Calculator – Learn Special Relativity Mathematics The mathematics of special relativity presented in as simple and comprehensive manner possible within philosophical and historical contexts.

v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases : National Germany Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐fmqsv
Cached time: 20250812001003
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.486 seconds
Real time usage: 0.632 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1938/1000000
Revision size: 14004/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84352/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3631/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66205/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.324/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8516857/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  548.826      1 -total
 23.60%  129.531      1 Template:Special_relativity_sidebar
 23.25%  127.594      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 21.70%  119.080      1 Template:Reflist
 19.19%  105.309      6 Template:Cite_book
 16.91%   92.802      2 Template:Sister_project
 16.52%   90.651      2 Template:Side_box
 13.74%   75.382      1 Template:Wikisource
 13.30%   73.006      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 12.82%   70.378      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:74327:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001003 and revision id 1288354053. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principle_of_relativity&oldid=1288354053 " Categories : Theory of relativity Theories Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 02:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principle of relativity 38 languages Add topic

