Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Period Toggle Period subsection 1.1 Art 1.2 Vernacular writing 1.3 Secular music 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Trecento 29 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Galego Հայերեն עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian culture and art of 1300–1399 Art of Italy Periods Nuragic Etruscan Ancient Roman Italo-Byzantine Gothic architecture Renaissance painting and sculpture Mannerism Baroque and Rococo Neoclassical and 19th century Modern and contemporary Centennial divisions Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Important art museums Uffizi Pinacoteca di Brera Vatican Museums Villa Borghese Sabauda Gallery Gallerie dell'Accademia Pitti Palace Accademia di Belle Arti Firenze Bargello Important art festivals Venice Biennale Rome Quadriennale Major works The Tribute Money (Masaccio) The Birth of Venus Primavera Mona Lisa The Last Supper Annunciation (Leonardo) Sistine Chapel ceiling Sistine Madonna Pietà The Last Judgment The Creation of Adam David (Michelangelo) The School of Athens The Battle of San Romano Venus of Urbino David (Donatello) The Calling of St. Matthew Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Italian artists Painters Sculptors Architects Photographers Illustrators Italian art schools Bolognese school Ferrarese school Forlivese school Florentine school Lucchese and Pisan School Sienese school Venetian school Art movements Italo-Byzantine Renaissance Pittura infamante Mannerism Baroque Macchiaioli Futurism Novecento Italiano Metaphysical art Scuola Romana Aeropittura Arte Povera Transavantgarde Other topics Italian architecture Sculpture of Italy Timeline of Italian artists to 1800 Raphael Rooms v t e The Trecento ( / t r eɪ ˈ tʃ ɛ n t oʊ / , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] also US : / t r ɛ ˈ -/ , [ 4 ] Italian: [ˌtreˈtʃɛnto] ; short for milletrecento , "1300") refers to the 14th century in Italian cultural history .

[ 5 ] The Trecento is considered to be the beginning of the Italian Renaissance or at least the Proto-Renaissance in art history. The Trecento was also famous as a time of heightened literary activity, with writers working in the vernacular instead of Latin. In music, the Trecento was a time of vigorous activity in Italy, as it was in France , with which there was a frequent interchange of musicians and influences.

Period [ edit ] Art [ edit ] The Trecento is considered to be the beginning of the Italian Renaissance or at least the Proto-Renaissance in art history.  Painters of the Trecento included Giotto di Bondone , as well as painters of the Sienese School , which became the most important in Italy during the century, including Duccio di Buoninsegna , Simone Martini , Lippo Memmi , Ambrogio Lorenzetti and his brother Pietro .  Important sculptors included two pupils of Giovanni Pisano : Arnolfo di Cambio and Tino di Camaino , and Bonino da Campione .

Vernacular writing [ edit ] The Trecento was also famous as a time of heightened literary activity, with writers working in the vernacular instead of Latin.

Dante , Petrarch and Boccaccio were the leading writers of the age.  Dante produced his famous La divina commedia (The Divine Comedy ), now seen as a summation of the medieval worldview, and Petrarch wrote verse in a lyrical style influenced by the Provençal poetry of the troubadours .

Secular music [ edit ] Further information: Music of the Trecento In music, the Trecento was a time of vigorous activity in Italy, as it was in France , with which there was a frequent interchange of musicians and influences. Distinguishing the period from the preceding century was an emphasis on secular song, especially love lyrics; much of the surviving music is polyphonic , but the influence of the troubadours who came to Italy, fleeing the Albigensian Crusade in the early 13th century, is evident. In contrast to the artistic and literary achievements of the century, Trecento music (at least in written form) flourished in the second half of the century, and the period is often extended (especially in English-language scholarship) into the first decades of the 15th century, as a so-called "Long Trecento". Musicians and composers of the Trecento included the renowned Francesco Landini , as well as Maestro Piero , Gherardello da Firenze , Jacopo da Bologna , Giovanni da Cascia , Paolo "Tenorista" da Firenze , Niccolò da Perugia , Bartolino da Padova , Antonio Zachara da Teramo , Matteo da Perugia , and Johannes Ciconia .

See also [ edit ] Duecento – the 13th century in Italian culture Quattrocento – the 15th century in Italian culture Cinquecento – the 16th century in Italian culture Seicento – the 17th century in Italian culture Settecento – the 18th century in Italian culture Ottocento – the 19th century in Italian culture Novecento (disambiguation) - the 20th century in Italian culture Italian Renaissance - started at end of 14th century References [ edit ] ^ "trecento" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "trecento" (US) and "trecento" .

Oxford Dictionaries UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press .

[ dead link ] ^ "trecento" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "Trecento" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ Il Trecento (in Italian) Further reading [ edit ] Long, Michael (1990). "Trecento Italy". In McKinnon, James (ed.).

Antiquity and the Middle Ages: From Ancient Greece to the 15th Century . Music and Society Series. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp.

241– 268.

ISBN 0130361615 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to 14th-century art in Italy at Wikimedia Commons v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trecento&oldid=1275231671 " Categories : Italian Renaissance 14th century in Italy Trecento painters Cultural history of Italy Gothic art Renaissance art Italian Renaissance painters Italian Renaissance sculptors 14th-century Italian artists Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 20:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trecento 29 languages Add topic

