Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Economics 4 Transport 5 Languages 6 Gallery 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Santa Pola 43 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Ladin Lombard Magyar Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°11′23″N 0°33′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.18972°N 0.55556°W ﻿ / 38.18972; -0.55556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

(August 2012) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Spanish article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Santa Pola]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Santa Pola}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Place in Spain Santa Pola Fortress Castle of Santa Pola Flag Coat of arms Santa Pola Location of Santa Pola Show map of Province of Alicante Santa Pola Santa Pola (Valencian Community) Show map of Valencian Community Santa Pola Santa Pola (Spain) Show map of Spain Coordinates: 38°11′23″N 0°33′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.18972°N 0.55556°W ﻿ / 38.18972; -0.55556 Country Spain Autonomous community Valencian Community Province Alicante Comarca Baix Vinalopó Government • Body Ayuntamiento • Alcaldesa Loreto Serrano Pomares ( PP ) Area • Total 58.6 km 2 (22.6 sq mi) Elevation 6 m (20 ft) Population (2022) • Total 37 816 • Density 65,020/km 2 (168,400/sq mi) Demonym(s) santapolero/ra; icositano/na Website www .santapola .es Santa Pola ( Valencian: [ˈsanta ˈpola] ; Spanish: [ˈsanta ˈpola] ) is a coastal town located in the comarca of Baix Vinalopó in the Valencian Community , Spain, by the Mediterranean Sea . It has an area of 58.6 km 2 (23 sq mi) and has a population of 36,174 inhabitants of whom 6,000 are residents of the nearby town of Gran Alacant.

[ 1 ] The town has an important salt evaporation pond known as the salines which remains in business, additionally, most of it is recognized as the Natural Park of Salines de Santa Pola , an important Ramsar site . The town was settled over the ruins of a Roman village called Portus Ilicitanus (literally, Harbour of Elche ); after being abandoned for decades, then a castle was constructed in the 16th century which marked the repopulation of Santa Pola. The town has an archeological museum covering these phases.

Santa Pola is, at present, a coastal fishing and tourist town. Population more than doubles during the summer, with people coming mostly from the rest of the Alicante province , and also from the Basque autonomous community , Madrid , France and the UK , just to mention some. The nearby island of Tabarca (part of Alicante) can be visited by ship.

The new town of Gran Alacant, 5 km (3 mi) north of Santa Pola along the Alicante bay, accounts for about one third of the population of the district.  Next to it is the Carabasi area, a nature reserve. Gran Alacant lies only a few kilometres from Alicante Airport and a few hundred metres from the town of Los Arenales which is located in the Elche district.

In June 2009, the Valencian Government announced that the Alicante Tram system will be extended southwards via Alicante Airport and El Altet, to stations in Gran Alacant and Santa Pola and then onwards to Guardamar and Torrevieja before terminating in Murcia .

Etymology [ edit ] The name is derived from Saint Paula, itself derived from Saint Paul the apostle, who arrived at Tabarca island, as tradition holds. However, it is likely that the name comes from Latin "palus", thence "pauls", finally "pol".

History [ edit ] The first settlements in the area remount to the third millennium BC, proof of which have been tools and paintings from the Neolithic found in the Cueva de las Arañas del Carabassí, as well as remains found from hunter-gatherers of the Palaeolithic in the Cueva de las Teresitas.

During the fourth century BCE, a small walled settlement was built near Vanalopó river. It served mainly as a Greek-Iberia economical hub.
During the first century CE, near the former site a port was built, serving the city of Illici, named Portus Illicitanus ( Greek : Ἰλλικιτάνος Λιμήν ) (cited by Claudius Ptolemy in Geography ).

This port proved paramount for the development of the region's maritime commerce, together with Cartagena's.
In 460 AC, emperor Majorians flotilla set sail to attack north African vandals, but was burnt at that same port.
From the Roman settlement a necropolis is still in place, as well as a fish-salting factory and the Roman House of Palmeral. Their remains are described as back as 1621 by Cristòfol Sanz, although they were excavated during the 20th century.

Economics [ edit ] Economical activity in this region is based on agriculture, craft-making and fishing. 1.3% of the population was dedicated to agriculture in 2003, and that's only successful when coupled with artificial watering systems, needed for the 200 hectares of orange trees (102ha), mandarin trees (74ha), and pomegranate trees (18ha), together with 230ha used for vegetables such as melons, shallots, broccoli, etc.

Transport [ edit ] The following roads run through the municipality of Santa Pola: [ 2 ] CV-92: Former N-332 , connects El Altet with the AP-7 near Pilar de la Horadada .
CV-851: Connects El Altet with Elche .
CV-865: Connects Santa Pola with Elche.

Languages [ edit ] According to article 35 of law n° 4/1983 (23 November), Santa Pola's official language is Valencian , together with Spanish (Spanish Constitution, article n°3, 1978). INE's latest census shows that 90% of the population speaks Valencian. There has been an increased trend in the influx of new language influences, in part due to immigration patterns in the region. This has caused suburbs such as Gran Alacant to have a significant population of English speakers.

Gallery [ edit ] Door to Castle of Santa Pola Tamarit Tower Sunset at las Salinas Castle of Santa Pola, Maritime Museum References [ edit ] ^ "Habitantes Santa Pola 1900-2022" .

foro-ciudad.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 10 January 2023 .

^ Official Road Map (46th ed.). Madrid: Ministry of Public Works. 2006.

ISBN 84-498-0751-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Santa Pola .

Santa Pola , in English.

Santa Pola , City Overview with a Video and Pictures. From a local citizen. In English.

Granalacant Urbanization , Granalacant Urbanization.

Gran Alacant's Website | Devoted to Gran Alacant , http://www.mygranalacant.com v t e Municipalities of Baix Vinalopó / Bajo Vinalopó Crevillent / Crevillente Elx / Elche Santa Pola v t e Municipalities of the province of Alicante Agost Agres Aigües Albatera Alcalalí Alcocer de Planes Alcoleja Alcoy/Alcoi Alfafara Algorfa Algueña Alicante Almoradí Almudaina Altea Aspe Balones Banyeres de Mariola Benasau Beneixama Benejúzar Benferri Beniarbeig Beniardà Beniarrés Benidoleig Benidorm Benifallim Benifato Benigembla Benijófar Benilloba Benillup Benimantell Benimarfull Benimassot Benimeli Benissa Benitaxell Biar Bigastro Bolulla Busot Callosa d'en Sarrià Callosa de Segura Calp Campo de Mirra Castalla Castell de Castells Catral Cañada Cocentaina Confrides Cox Crevillent Daya Nueva Daya Vieja Dolores Dénia El Campello El Ràfol d'Almúnia El Verger Elche Elda Els Poblets Fageca Famorca Finestrat Formentera del Segura Gaianes Gata de Gorgos Gorga Granja de Rocamora El Castell de Guadalest El Fondó de les Neus Guardamar del Segura Hondón de los Frailes Ibi Jacarilla Jalón Jijona/Xixona L'Alfàs del Pi L'Alqueria d'Asnar L'Atzúbia La Nucia La Romana La Torre de les Maçanes La Vall d'Alcalà La Vall de Laguar Llíber Lorcha Los Montesinos Millena Monforte del Cid Monòver Murla Muro de Alcoy Mutxamel Novelda Ondara Onil Orba Orihuela Orxeta Parcent Pedreguer Pego Penàguila Petrel Pilar de la Horadada Pinoso Planes Polop Quatretondeta Rafal Redován Relleu Rojales Sagra Salinas San Fulgencio San Isidro San Miguel de Salinas San Vicente del Raspeig / Sant Vicent del Raspeig Sanet y Negrals Sant Joan d'Alacant Santa Pola Sax Sella Senija Teulada Tibi Tollos Tormos Torrevieja Tàrbena La Vall d'Ebo Vall de Gallinera Villajoyosa/La Vila Joiosa Villena Xàbia v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Santa_Pola&oldid=1288936559 " Categories : Municipalities in the Province of Alicante Greek colonies in Iberia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Use dmy dates from July 2024 Geography articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with possible demonym list Pages with Valencian IPA Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Greek-language text Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 14:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Santa Pola 43 languages Add topic

