Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Scholarship 3 Selected publications 4 Recognition 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Erik Swyngedouw 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geography professor This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Erik Swyngedouw" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Erik Achille Marie Swyngedouw ( pronounced [ˈeːrɪk ˈsʋɪŋɣədʌu] ; born 30 July 1956) is professor of geography at the University of Manchester in the School of Environment, Education and Development and a member of the Manchester Urban Institute.

Background [ edit ] Born in Dutch -speaking Belgium and fluent in Dutch, English , French , and Spanish , he graduated from Sint-Jozefscollege, Hasselt in 1974. He graduated with an MSc in Agricultural Engineering from the Catholic University of Leuven in 1979, with a thesis focussed on agrarian change in the community of Heers . His 1985 Master in Urban and Regional Planning was also from Leuven. He earned his PhD with a thesis entitled "The production of new spaces of production" under the supervision of the renowned Marxist geographer David Harvey at Johns Hopkins University in 1991. From 1988 until 2006, Swyngedouw taught at the University of Oxford , latterly as professor of geography and was a fellow of St. Peter's College . He is currently Professor of Human Geography at the University of Manchester , England . He is also visiting professor at the University of Ghent , Belgium. He has worked and taught in the US, France , Belgium, Spain , Germany , Ecuador , and Greece .

[ 1 ] Scholarship [ edit ] Swyngedouw has committed his studies to political economic analysis of contemporary capitalism, producing several major works on economic globalisation , regional development , finance, and urbanisation . His interests have also included political-ecological themes , and the transformation of nature, urban governance, politics of scale, notably water issues, in Ecuador, Spain, the UK , and elsewhere in Europe .

[ 2 ] His recent work focuses on the democratic politics and the strategies and tactics of new political movements, and the political ecology of desalination. He has published over 100 academic papers in leading academic journals in geography and cognate disciplines and in scholarly books.

Selected publications [ edit ] Swyngedouw, E. with L. Albrechts and D. Van Der Wee. (1984), Een Regionale Atlas van Vlaanderen (A Regional Atlas of Flanders) . Leuven University Press.

Swyngedouw, E. with L. Albrechts, F. Moulaert , P. Roberts. (eds.) (1989), Regional Policy at the Crossroads - European Perspectives . Jessica Kingsley, London.

Swyngedouw, E. with P. Cooke, F. Moulaert , O. Weinstein, P. Wells. (1992), Towards Global Localization: The Computing and Communications Industries in Britain and France , University College London Press, 227pp.

Swyngedouw, E. (1995), La Crisis del Abastecimiento de Agua en Guayaquil , Ed. ILDIS, QUITO.

Swyngedouw, E. with A. Merrifield. (eds.) (1996), The Urbanization of Injustice , Lawrence and Wishart, London, viii, 245 pp. Published in the US (in 1997) New York University Press.

Swyngedouw, E. (1999), "Modernity and Hybridity: Nature, Regeneracionismo, and the Production of the Spanish Waterscape, 1890-1930", Annals of the Association of American Geographers , 89(3), pp. 443–465.

Swyngedouw, E. with Getimis P., Heinelt H., Kafkalas G., Smith R. (eds.) (2002), Participatory Governance in Multi-Level Context: Concepts and Experience . Leske & Budrich, Opladen.

Swyngedouw, E. with F. Moulaert and A. Rodriguez. (eds.) (2003), The Globalized City - Economic Restructuring and Social Polarization in European Cities . Oxford University Press.

Swyngedouw, E. (2004), "Globalisation or 'glocalisation'? Networks, territories and rescaling" , Cambridge Review of International Affairs , 17(1), pp. 25–48.

Swyngedouw, E. (2004), Glocalisations . Temple University Press, Philadelphia, PA.

Swyngedouw, E. (2004), Social Power and the Urbanization of Water - Flows of Power . Oxford University Press.

Heynen, N., Kaika, M. and Swyngedouw, E. (eds.) (2005), In the Nature of Cities: Urban Political Ecology and the Politics of Urban Metabolism . Routledge, London and New York.

Moulaert, F., E. Swyngedouw, S. Gonzalez, F. Martinelli (eds.) (2010).

Can Neighbourhoods Save the City?

Routledge, London and New York.

Swyngedouw, E. (2011).

Interrogating Post-Democracy: Reclaiming Egalitarian Political Spaces Political Geography , 30, pp. 370–380 Swyngedouw, E. (2011) Designing the Post-Political city and the Insurgent Polis . Civic City Cahier 5. Bedford Press, London.

Swyngedouw, E. & J. Wilson (eds.) (2014) The Post-Political and its Discontents: Spaces of De-politicization, Specters of Re-Politicization . Edinburgh University Press.

Swyngedouw, E. (2015), Liquid Power: Contested Hydro-Modernities in Twentieth-Century Spain . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Swyngedouw E. (2018) Promises of the Political. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Recognition [ edit ] Anniversary Award from Environment and Planning A for best paper of the year "Power, Nature and the City. The Conquest of Water and The Political Ecology of Urbanization in Guayaquil, Ecuador: 1880-1980", Environment and Planning A, 29(2), pp. 311–332. (1997) James Blaut Memorial Award, Critical and Socialist Geography Specialty Group, American Association of Geographers (2008).

British Academy Leverhulme Trust Senior Research Fellowship (2011) Honorary Doctorate. University of Malmö, Sweden, (2018) Honorary Doctorate. Roskilde University, Denmark, (2018) Member of Academia Europaea References [ edit ] ^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ "- Geography staff (School of Environment and Development - the University of Manchester)" . Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 22 July 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Erik Swyngedouw homepage at University of Manchester Youtube lecture "H2O does not exist?? Retooling the Washington-Brussels Consensus" Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics ORCID Google Scholar Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erik_Swyngedouw&oldid=1242084261 " Categories : Living people Flemish academics Belgian geographers Belgian emigrants to the United Kingdom Belgian political scientists Johns Hopkins University alumni Fellows of St Peter's College, Oxford Academics of the University of Manchester Political ecologists Urban geographers Members of Academia Europaea Flemish geographers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from October 2019 All BLP articles lacking sources Use dmy dates from May 2020 Pages with Dutch IPA Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 24 August 2024, at 22:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erik Swyngedouw 1 language Add topic

