Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Walther's law 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Sedimentary 2.2 Metamorphic 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Facies 35 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Simple English Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sedimentary facies ) Body of rock with specified characteristic For other uses, see Facies (medical) and Facies (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Feces , Faeces , Fasces , Faces , or Fascism .

Eolianite carbonate facies (Holocene) on Long Island, Bahamas Part of a series on Geology Index Outline Category Glossary History ( Timeline ) Key components Minerals Rock ( Igneous Sedimentary Metamorphic ) Sediment Plate tectonics Strata Weathering Erosion Geologic time scale Laws, principles, theories Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Topics Composition Geochemistry Mineralogy Sedimentology Petrology Structure of Earth Geophysics Landform structures Geomorphology Glaciology Structural Geology Volcanology Geologic history Geological history of Earth Research Branches of geology Geologist ( List) Methods Geological survey Applications Engineering Mining Forensics Military Planetary geology Lists of geological features of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets By planet and body Mercury Venus Moon Mars Vesta Ceres Io Titan Triton Pluto Charon Geology portal v t e In geology , a facies ( / ˈ f eɪ ʃ ɪ .

iː z / FAY -shih-eez , US also / ˈ f eɪ ʃ iː z / FAY -sheez ; same pronunciation and spelling in the plural) [ a ] is a body of rock with distinctive characteristics.

[ 1 ] The characteristics can be any observable attribute of rocks (such as their overall appearance, composition, or condition of formation) and the changes that may occur in those attributes over a geographic area. A facies encompasses all the characteristics of a rock including its chemical, physical, and biological features that distinguish it from adjacent rock.

[ 2 ] The term "facies" was introduced by the Swiss geologist Amanz Gressly in 1838 and was part of his significant contribution to the foundations of modern stratigraphy , [ 3 ] which replaced the earlier notions of Neptunism .

Walther's law [ edit ] Stratigraphic column on the north shore of Isfjord in Svalbard Norway . The vertical succession of rock types (representing sedimentary facies) reflects lateral changes in paleoenvironment.

Walther's law of facies, or simply Walther's law, named after the geologist Johannes Walther , states that the vertical succession of facies reflects lateral changes in environment. Conversely, it states that when a depositional environment "migrates" laterally, sediments of one depositional environment come to lie on top of another.

[ 4 ] In Russia the law is known as Golovkinsky-Walther's law, honoring also Nikolai A. Golovkinsky .

[ 5 ] A classic example of this law is the vertical stratigraphic succession that typifies marine transgressions and regressions .

Types [ edit ] Sedimentary [ edit ] Middle Triassic marginal marine siltstone and sandstone facies exposed in southern Utah Ideally, a sedimentary facies is a distinctive rock unit that forms under certain conditions of sedimentation , reflecting a particular process or environment. Sedimentary facies are either descriptive or interpretative. Sedimentary facies are bodies of sediment that are recognizably distinct from adjacent sediments that resulted from different depositional environments. Generally, geologists distinguish facies by the aspect of the rock or sediment being studied.

[ citation needed ] Facies based on petrological characters (such as grain size and mineralogy ) are called lithofacies , whereas facies based on fossil content are called biofacies .

A facies is usually further subdivided. The characteristics of the rock unit come from the depositional environment and from the original composition. Sedimentary facies reflect their depositional environment, each facies being a distinct kind of sediment for that area or environment.

Since its inception in 1838, the facies concept has been extended to related geological concepts. For example, characteristic associations of organic microfossils, and particulate organic material, in rocks or sediments, are called palynofacies . Discrete seismic units are similarly referred to as seismic facies.

Sedimentary facies are described in a group of "facies descriptors" which must be distinct, reproducible and exhaustive. A reliable facies description of an outcrop in the field would include: composition, texture, sedimentary structure(s), bedding geometry, nature of bedding contact, fossil content and colour.

Metamorphic [ edit ] Main article: Metamorphic facies The sequence of minerals that develop during progressive metamorphism (that is, metamorphism at progressively higher temperatures and/or pressures) define a facies series .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Other pronunciations include / ˈ f eɪ s iː z / FAY -seez and / ˈ f æ ʃ iː z / FASH -eez , but these are so rare that they are not recorded in any major dictionaries (incl. Collins, Merriam-Webster, Oxford (Lexico), and American Heritage).

References [ edit ] The Wikibook Historical Geology has a page on the topic of: Walther's principle ^ Reading, H. G. (1996).

Sedimentary Environments and Facies . Blackwell Scientific Publications.

ISBN 0-632-03627-3 .

^ Parker, Sybil P. (1984).

McGraw-Hill Concise Encyclopedia of Science and Technology . McGraw-Hill. p. 705.

ISBN 0-07-045482-5 .

^ Cross, T. A.; Homewood, P. W. (1997). "Amanz Gressly's role in founding modern stratigraphy".

Geological Society of America Bulletin .

109 (12). Geological Society of America: 1617– 1630.

Bibcode : 1997GSAB..109.1617C .

doi : 10.1130/0016-7606(1997)109<1617:agsrif>2.3.co;2 .

S2CID 73609554 .

^ Stanley, Steven M. (1999).

Earth System History . New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. p. 134.

ISBN 0-7167-2882-6 .

^ Nurgalieva, N. G.; Vinokurov, V. M.; Nurgaliev, D. K. (2007).

"The Golovkinsky strata formation model, basic facies law and sequence stratigraphy concept: Historical sources and relations" .

Russian Journal of Earth Sciences .

9 : 1– 7.

doi : 10.2205/2007ES000222 .

S2CID 55280334 .

The fundamentals of the facies law, known in the West as Walther's Law and in Russia as Golovkinsky-Walther's Law, were also described in Golovkinsky's work long before Walther drew his conclusions on this subject. The present paper shows that the fundamentals of sequence stratigraphy were first set forth in the work of N. A. Golovkinsky.

v t e Geologic principles and processes Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Petrologic principles Intrusive Extrusive Volcanic Exfoliation Weathering Soil formation Diagenesis Compaction Metamorphism Geomorphologic processes Plate tectonics Salt tectonics Tectonic uplift Subsidence Marine transgression Marine regression Sediment transport Fluvial processes Aeolian processes Glacial processes Mass wasting processes Geology portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Facies&oldid=1300598491 " Categories : Metamorphic petrology Petrology Sedimentary rocks Stratigraphy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 08:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Facies 35 languages Add topic

