Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Before conversion 2 Conversion process Toggle Conversion process subsection 2.1 Changeover 2.2 Metrication stalled 3 Common usage today Toggle Common usage today subsection 3.1 Daily usage 3.2 Experience 3.3 Temperature 3.4 Products and retail 3.5 Commercial usage 3.6 Agriculture 3.7 Health care 3.8 Engineering 3.9 Trades 3.10 Firearms 3.11 Print 3.12 Air transportation 3.13 Landholdings 4 Education regarding the imperial system 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Metrication in Canada 2 languages Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1970–1985 conversion to the metric system The metrication logo used in Canada during the 1970s and 1980s Metrication in Canada began in 1970 and ceased in 1985. While Canada has converted to the metric system for many purposes, there is still significant use of non-metric units and standards in many sectors of the Canadian economy and everyday life. This is mainly due to historical ties with the United Kingdom, the traditional use of the imperial system of measurement in Canada, interdependent supply chains with the United States, and opposition to metrication during the transition period.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Before conversion [ edit ] Main article: Imperial units Until the 1970s, Canada traditionally used the imperial measurement system , labelled as "Canadian units of measurement" under Schedule II of the Weights and Measures Act (R.S., 1985, c. W-6).

[ 3 ] These units have the same names and the same values as United States customary units , with the exception of capacity measures such as the gallon . For example, before metrication in Canada, gasoline was sold by the (imperial) gallon (about 4.55 litres ). In cross-border transactions with the United States it was often unclear whether values quoted in gallons were referring to United States gallons (3.79 litres) or imperial gallons.

Conversion process [ edit ] The Liberal federal government of Pierre Trudeau first began implementing metrication in Canada in 1970 with a government agency dedicated to implementing the project, the Metric Commission , being established in 1971 by the Weights and Measures Act . By the mid-1970s, metric product labelling was introduced. In 1972, the provinces agreed to make all road signs metric by 1977. During the Labour Day weekend in 1977, every speed limit sign in the country was changed from mph to km/h. From the same time every new car sold had to have a speedometer that showed speed in km/h and distance in km. The distances on road signs were changed to kilometres during the next few months. Gasoline pumps changed from imperial gallons to litres in 1979.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] There was some resistance to metrication. The metrication of gasoline and diesel fuel sales in 1979 prompted 37 Progressive Conservative Members of Parliament to open a "freedom to measure" gas station in Carleton Place , Ontario, selling gas in both imperial gallons and litres. The city of Peterborough, Ontario , was a noted hotbed of opposition to metrication, having been one of the government's three test centres for the metrication process.

Bill Domm , a Member of Parliament representing the riding of Peterborough, was one of the country's most outspoken opponents of metrication. During this period, a few government employees lost their jobs for their opposition to metrication.

[ 6 ] Neil Fraser , an official with Revenue Canada who publicly opposed mandatory metric conversion, was dismissed for "conduct unacceptable for a public servant".

[ 7 ] Changeover [ edit ] A long-ago-metricated speed-limit sign in Bolton, Ontario , with the old "25 mph" value now showing through the 40 km/h limit Since 1976, the law requires that all prepackaged food products must declare their mass or their volume in metric units , though Canadian imperial units are still legally permitted on packaging.

[ 8 ] Milk has been thoroughly metric since 1980. In April 1975, Fahrenheit temperatures were replaced by Celsius . In September 1975, rainfall was first measured in millimetres and snow in centimetres . Since April 1976, wind speed , visibility , and barometric pressure have been in metric units, with the pressure in kilopascals instead of the hectopascals ( millibars ) used in most of the rest of the world. In September 1977, every speed-limit sign in the country was changed from miles per hour to kilometres per hour .

[ 9 ] Metrication stalled [ edit ] The election of the Progressive Conservative government of Brian Mulroney in 1984 resulted in the abolition of the Metric Commission on March 31, 1985.  This ended the process of affirmative metrication in Canada, and some regulations requiring metric measurements either have been repealed or are no longer enforced.

Training on metric conversion was not universal. Poor metrication training was a contributing factor to Air Canada Flight 143, the so-called Gimli Glider , running out of fuel mid-flight on July 23, 1983.

[ 10 ] Notwithstanding the end of compulsory metrication in Canada, many legacy imperial units are no longer permitted for trade within Canada, and most laws, regulations, and official forms exclusively use metric measurements.

[ citation needed ] However, imperial measures still have legal definitions in Canada and can be used alongside metric units.

[ 3 ] Net quantity declarations on prepackaged products sold to consumers must be stated in metric units.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Common usage today [ edit ] Daily usage [ edit ] Canadians typically discuss the weather in degrees Celsius, purchase gasoline in litres, observe speed limits set in kilometres per hour (km/h), and read road signs and maps displaying distances in kilometres. Cars have metric speedometers and odometers , although most speedometers include smaller figures in miles per hour (mph).

Fuel efficiency for new vehicles is published by Natural Resources Canada in litres per 100 kilometres , ( not kilometres per litre as an analogue of miles per gallon ) and miles per (imperial) gallon.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Window stickers in dealer showrooms often include "miles per gallon" conversions. The railways of Canada such as the Canadian National and Canadian Pacific Kansas City as well as commuter rail services, continue to measure their trackage in miles and speed limits in miles per hour (although urban railways including subways and light rail have adopted metres and kilometres for distances and kilometres per hour for speed limits).

[ 15 ] Canadian railcars show weight figures in both imperial and metric. Canadian railways also maintain use of only imperial measurements to describe train length and height in feet and train masses in short tons .

Canadians typically use a mix of metric and imperial measurements in their daily lives. One area where imperial measures continue to be used, despite official practice, is with respect to human height and weight. Newborns are measured in kilograms at hospitals, but the birth weight and length is also announced to family and friends in pounds, ounces, feet and inches. Although Canadian driver's licences give height in centimetres, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] many Canadians also use feet, inches and pounds to indicate their height and weight. Use of the imperial system also persist where influenced by US trade and manufacture.  Most kitchen appliances in Canada are labelled with both degrees Celsius and Fahrenheit, and metric cooking measures are widely available; but Fahrenheit is often used for cooking due to the import of kitchen appliances from the United States . When it comes to measures for cooking, Canadians typically use a mix of both depending on the recipe and cook book, using a mix of grams, millilitres, cups, ounces and tablespoons, for example.  Canadians also occasionally use Fahrenheit outside of the kitchen, such as when measuring the water temperature in a pool. Stationery and photographic prints are also sold in sizes based on inches and the most popular paper sizes , letter and legal , are sized in imperial units, though many agendas and notebooks are sold in ISO 216 sizes.

Canadian football games continue to be played on fields measured in yards (with a gridiron layout with a length of 100.6 metres, or 110 yards, from one goal line to the other); golfers also expect courses to be measured in yards.

Experience [ edit ] The use of metric or imperial measurements varies by age and region, with metric dominant among those under the age of 50. Canadians who have received only metric instruction in school (from the early 1970s) are more familiar with metric measurements.

Quebec has implemented metrication more fully.

Canadians are exposed to both metric and imperial units, and it is not unusual for there to be references to both metres and feet, square metres and acres, or grams and ounces in the same conversation.

Temperature [ edit ] For weather Celsius is nearly universally used by Canadians and outdoor signs usually display Celsius. However, outdoor window thermometers display temperatures in both Fahrenheit and Celsius. Inside newer buildings, digital and analogue thermostats display temperature settings in degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit.

Environment Canada still offers an imperial unit option beside metric units.

[ 18 ] For baking both Celsius and Fahrenheit are used.

Products and retail [ edit ] Many food and retail products are sold according to metric units, though this is not always the case. The price of a piece of meat, for example a steak, is typically advertised per pound, but the price printed on the package is per kilogram; the latter is calculated. The prices of fruits and vegetables are usually advertised in pounds, although the price per kilogram is also displayed, usually in smaller type. More expensive items such as deli, meats, and fish are often advertised per 100 grams. Many, but not all, products are sold in imperial sizes, but labelled in metric units. An example of this is butter, which is sold in a 454 gram package (and labelled as such), even though it represents one pound (and in many cases is also labelled with the imperial unit). This is known as "soft metric" (as opposed to a "hard metric" system, where packages and measures are generally sold in " round numbers "; in a hard metric system, butter might come in a 500 g package). Mandatory nutrition facts labelling (the Nutrition Facts Table) uses metric units for several basic nutrients, although serving sizes can be described in any form of unit (can, cup, quantity, etc.).

[ 19 ] In restaurants, wine is usually served by the litre, 750 mL (26-imperial-fluid-ounce; 25-US-fluid-ounce) or 500 mL (18-imperial-fluid-ounce; 17-US-fluid-ounce) bottle, but a wine glass is measured in ounces. A 750-millilitre bottle of hard liquor is referred to as a "twenty-sixer" or "two-six" , referring to its volume in imperial fluid ounces, rounded down from 26.4. Similarly, fast food restaurants (e.g.

McDonald's Quarter Pounder ) often advertise measurements of food and drink in US customary units, but converted to metric units, because either the containers are made to US standards, or the franchise is US-based and uses a standard size for its products. Thus in Canada a 20 US fluid ounce bottled soft drink is labelled as 591 mL (or occasionally rounded up to 600 mL). Beer in bottles continues to be 12 imperial fluid ounces (labelled as 341 mL), but beer in cans is filled to 12 US fluid ounces (labelled as 355 mL).

[ 20 ] There is also a larger sized beer bottle which is labelled as containing 1.18 L (42 imperial fluid ounces; 40 US fluid ounces).

[ 20 ] Some of these package sizes have been introduced since Canadian metrication began; for example, the traditional Canadian soft drink can was 10 imperial fluid ounces (284 mL), later marketed as 280 mL. Only in the early 1990s did the US-derived 355 mL size displace it.

Display sizes for screens on television sets and computer monitors almost always have their diagonals measured in inches, although most boxes also state the size in centimetres. Bicycle frames and car wheel diameters are also usually described in inches; tire inflation is in pounds per square inch (psi). Standard and special fasteners like alloys, nuts, bolts, washers, studs, self-tapping, self-drilling screws and socket screws are often quoted in both imperial and metric; products range from 2 ⁄ 56 in (0.91 mm) diameter up to 4 in (100 mm).

[ 21 ] Commercial usage [ edit ] Supermarkets will often advertise foods such as meats and produce "per pound", and small businesses are exempt from having metric scales and legally sell by the pound. While most supermarket scales display both metric and imperial units, [ 22 ] products advertised by the pound in a supermarket flyer are invariably sold to the customer (at the point of sale) based on a price "per 100 grams" or "per kilogram".

Construction materials, including construction lumber and drywall, continue to be sold in imperial measurements; retrofitting metric-sized (designed for 400 mm centres) wallboard on old 16 in (406 mm) spaced studs is difficult. In English-speaking Canada commercial and residential spaces are mostly (but not exclusively) constructed using imperial units and advertised accordingly, while in French-speaking Quebec commercial and residential spaces are constructed in metres and advertised using both metric and imperial units as equivalents.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] However, the zoning by-laws and building codes that govern construction are in metric, although most building codes will also contain imperial equivalents. In addition, rural areas in Western Canada ( Canadian Prairies ) were mapped and segmented using the Dominion Land Survey . This based most rural roads on a mile measurement which when viewed from the air has the appearance of a checkerboard or grid.

[ 25 ] Because of this historical reason, it is still common to refer to distance in miles. In contrast, in much of southern Ontario the basic survey grid was based on a mile-and-a-quarter (1.25 mi), which corresponds almost exactly to a 2-kilometre grid and which makes miles no more natural than kilometres. 1.25 mi is equal to 100 chains (or 10 furlongs ) and it was that sized grid that was used in the original surveys and thus would have been more familiar.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Free trade with the United States has resulted in continued exposure to the US system. Since the United States is Canada's largest trading partner and vice versa, Canadian exporters and importers must be accustomed to dealing in US customary units as well as metric.

Agriculture [ edit ] Canada uses an Avery or imperial bushel (36.369 litres) when selling oats, wheat, and other grains.

[ 28 ] When dealing with the US oat markets though, special attention must be paid to the definition of bushel weight because the US uses a Winchester bushel (35.239 litres).

[ 29 ] In livestock auction markets, cattle are sold in dollars per short hundredweight (cwt; 100 lbs; 45.36 kg), whereas hogs are sold in dollars per hundred kilograms.

[ citation needed ] Health care [ edit ] In the health care system, metric units are often given precedence, although actual metric units may still be different than the United States (for example, for measurements of blood cholesterol , the units are millimole per litre, whereas they are milligram per decilitre in the United States). Most physicians chart patient height and weight in imperial units, and while most growth charts display both systems of measurement, the majority of hospitals officially document such parameters in metric.

[ 30 ] Dieticians still use kilocalories , and doctors use millimetres of mercury .

[ 9 ] While these units are metric derivatives, they are not metric units.

Engineering [ edit ] Because most fasteners, machine parts, pumps, piping, and all building materials are sold in imperial or US customary units, many mechanical and civil engineers in Canada mainly use imperial units for these items. Building codes are in metric while building plans are split, with most commercial and all government building plans in metric measure while residential plans tend to use imperial measure (except in Quebec, where residential building plans are in metric measure).

[ 31 ] [ 24 ] Many chemical, nuclear and electrical engineers and engineering physicists employ metric units. Canadian engineers are not always educated in both systems but become keenly aware of the differences between the imperial, metric and US customary systems once they enter the workforce.

Trades [ edit ] Trades associated with machine work, such as machinists , automotive, and heavy duty technicians, frequently use both metric and imperial. Machines made in Canada often incorporate parts from other countries and thus the finished product may have both metric and imperial parts. Farm and industrial equipment manufactured in Canada will most often use inch system fasteners and structural steel, but fluid capacities are always listed in metric.

Building trades such as plumbing and carpentry often use imperial units. Rough timber, drywall, plywood, fasteners, pipes, and tubing are all sold in imperial units. Nails in hardware stores are measured in inches but sold in metric weight packages.

Electricians in every country use metric units such as volts and amperes, but motors and engines in Canada are still often quoted in horsepower . Electric car motors are rated in kilowatts . However, Canada uses, among other things, the US American wire gauge standard instead of the square millimetre (mm 2 ) used in the IEC 60228 standard of the International Electrotechnical Commission . Conduit sizes are in inch diameters, although some manufacturers include the metric size printed on the conduits – for example, 1 ⁄ 2 in (13 mm), 5 ⁄ 8 in (16 mm), 3 ⁄ 4 in (19 mm).

Firearms [ edit ] Imperial units remain in common use in firearms and ammunition on the international market.

Cartridges may have either commercial or military descriptions.  In the former, the manufacturer will choose a name for proprietary reasons, perhaps to associate the name with a brand or designer, or otherwise distinguish it from comparable cartridges.  Typical terms include bullet or bore diameter, cartridge length or capacity, a proper name or company.  Designs are registered with Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers' Institute (SAAMI) or Commission internationale permanente pour l'épreuve des armes à feu portatives (CIP) for standardization. Canadian industry follows both conventions, but there is little appetite in the Canadian firearms industry or hobby to pursue metrification simply for the sake of conformity when the trade is global.

Military designations use technical nomenclature to avoid confusion or misrouting of supplies.  There are several examples of similar names and similar design dimensions. For example, the civilian cartridge .303 Savage was introduced by the Savage Arms Company in 1894, but is incompatible with the .303 British used throughout the Commonwealth.  The .308 Winchester cartridge derived from the 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge in the 1950s, with slight variations in production but not in external dimensions. All four examples are common small arms cartridges in Canada.

Imperial measures are often encountered in the description of cartridges , even when the cartridge is of a relatively recent product introduction (e.g.

.204 Ruger , .17 HMR , where the calibre is expressed in decimal fractions of an inch ). Ammunition which is classified in metric already is still kept metric (e.g.

9 mm , 7.62 mm ). In the manufacture of ammunition, bullet and powder weights are expressed in terms of grains for both metric and imperial cartridges.  The popular .30-30 Winchester is a 0.30-inch-calibre (7.62 mm) bullet originally loaded with 30 grains (1.9 g) of smokeless gunpowder .

Print [ edit ] Canada uses the inch-based paper standard e.g. the US Letter (8.5 inches × 11 inches), rather than the metric-based A4 paper size (210 mm × 297 mm) used throughout most of the world. The government, however, uses a combination of ISO paper sizes, and CAN 2-9.60M "Paper Sizes for Correspondence" specifies P1 through P6 paper sizes, which are the US paper sizes rounded to the nearest 5 mm.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Air transportation [ edit ] Luggage restrictions and limits at Canadian airports are in metric values with soft imperial conversion values.

[ 34 ] Runway lengths are given in feet and speed in knots [ 35 ] [ 36 ] as in the US. Like a number of metric countries altitude is given in feet.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Fuel is nowadays measured in metric units. The Gimli Glider incident in July 1983 is a famous case of a kilogram–pound mistake, in which the miscalculation of the amount of fuel in an Air Canada airplane with a malfunctioning fuel gauge caused the plane to run out of fuel mid-flight.

Landholdings [ edit ] Land surveys occurred long before the adoption of metric, using imperial units of length and area. Particularly in areas where the Dominion Land Survey was used in western Canada, landholdings are measured in acres and sub-divisions of acres, based on divisions of one square mile as the base unit.

[ 39 ] Education regarding the imperial system [ edit ] Education is nearly entirely metric. However, in 2005, one province (Ontario) announced changes to the secondary school mathematics curriculum that would allow imperial units to be taught along with metric units.

[ 40 ] This marked a departure from previous governments' efforts to make sure that the curriculum used only the metric system. This was done in light of the refusal or reluctance of much of the private sector to metricate; thus students had been leaving school unprepared for the units used in the workplace. Many other provinces and territories also include the imperial system of measurements as part of their educational curriculum.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] See also [ edit ] Chronology and status of metrication by country Metrication opposition Change management , a field studying how changes can be efficiently implemented in modern communities Myanmar units of measurement Metrication in the United States Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage, Weights, and Measures of the United States Weights and Measures Acts (UK) Metrication Ordinance (Hong Kong) Metrication in the United Kingdom Metrication in Australia References [ edit ] ^ "1982: Canadians rebel against metric system - CBC Archives" . Retrieved 2021-01-14 .

^ "A Canadian compromise between metric and imperial - CBC Archives" . Retrieved 2021-01-14 .

^ a b "Weights and Measures Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. W-6)" . Department of Justice . Retrieved 2007-11-14 .

^ Reid, Joseph B.

"Canadian Metrication" .

US Metric Association . Retrieved 2022-01-14 .

^ Trumbull, Robert (1977-09-06).

"METRIC ROAD SIGNS DUE IN CANADA TODAY" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-01-14 .

^ "Fired for opposing metric" . CBC . Retrieved 2008-03-11 .

^ "Civil servant fired for opposing the metric system" .

cbc.ca . CBC Archives. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020.

^ Food Labelling for Industry ^ a b "Metric usage and metrication in other countries" .

U.S. Metric Association . Archived from the original on July 24, 2010.

^ "Jet's Fuel Runs Out after Metric Conversion Errors" .

New York Times . July 30, 1983 . Retrieved 2018-05-20 .

^ Food Safety and Consumer Protection, Canadian Food Inspection Agency (18 May 2018).

"Net Quantity" .

Food Labelling for Industry . Retrieved 7 August 2018 .

^ "Consumer Packaging and Labelling Regulations (C.R.C., c. 417)" . Government of Canada, Department of Justice Canada, Legislative Services Branch . Retrieved 2007-12-01 .

^ "Fuel Consumption Ratings" . Government of Canada. January 2011 . Retrieved 2011-05-18 .

^ "Energuide-vehicles" . 30 April 2018.

^ "A. Classes of Track - Transport Canada" .

www.tc.gc.ca . Archived from the original on 25 August 2012 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "New Driver's Licence and Identification Cards" .

novascotia.ca .

Province of Nova Scotia . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ "Change information on a driver's licence" .

ontario.ca .

Queen's Printer for Ontario . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ Environment Canada weather in imperial units Archived 2014-03-05 at the Wayback Machine and Environment Canada weather in metric units ^ "Interactive tool - Understanding a Food Label" . Canada Food Inspection Agency. 10 June 2014 . Retrieved November 20, 2018 .

^ a b "The Beer Store Price list CANADIAN" . The Beer Store. Archived from the original on 2008-03-03 . Retrieved 2008-03-11 .

^ "Metric Fasteners companies - Displaying all 17" . Canadian Trade Index. Archived from the original on 2015-06-01.

^ Legal for Trade - Canada ^ Canada: Metric System ^ a b Allard, Marie (2015-08-25).

"Système métrique: à quand le virage final?" .

LaPresse.ca (in French).

^ Google Maps view of southwestern Manitoba, near Brandon ^ The Importance of Title Searches Archived 2007-07-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ Land Titles vs. Land Registry ^ Canadian Grain Commission (29 July 2022).

"Test weight conversion charts for Canadian grains" . Government of Canada . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ Marketing Oats in Canada ^ Is My Child Growing Well?

^ Bleasby, John (2 March 2016).

"Canada's march to metric is measured in inches and centimetres" .

Canadian Contractor .

^ Kuhn, Markus.

"International standard paper sizes" . Retrieved 2008-03-06 .

^ "Canadian standard CAN 2-9.60M paper sizes" ^ Carry-On Baggage ^ Canada Flight Supplement . Effective 0901 Z 16 July 2020 to 0901Z 10 September 2020.

^ 1.8. Units of Measure ^ A Common European Transition Altitude ^ Aeronautical Information Publication at EuroControl Basic Log-in (free registration required).

^ R.B. McKercher, "Legal Land Survey" , Encyclopedia of Saskatchewan (Regina: Canadian Plains Research Center, University of Regina, 2006).

^ "The Ontario curriculum Grades 9 and 10 2005 REVISED Mathematics" . Ontario Ministry of Education. 2005 . Retrieved 2007-12-03 .

^ "Outcomes with Assessment Standards for Applied Mathematics 10" (PDF) . Alberta Education/Alberta Learning, Alberta, Canada. August 2002 . Retrieved 2007-12-10 .

^ "Nova Scotia Student: LifeWork Portfolio. A teaching resource" (PDF) . Nova Scotia Department of Education. Province of Nova Scotia. 2005 . Retrieved 2007-12-10 .

^ "Essentials of Mathematics 11 -Measurement Technology" . British Columbia Ministry of Education. November 22, 2000. Archived from the original on May 7, 2008 . Retrieved 2007-12-10 .

^ "Key Concepts in the Curriculum" (PDF) . British Columbia Ministry of Education. February 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-05-15 . Retrieved 2007-12-10 .

^ "Curriculum" . Government of Yukon. 2007-11-22. Archived from the original on 2008-01-11 . Retrieved 2007-12-18 .

^ "Senior 3 Consumer Mathematics (30S) Outcomes by Unit" . Manitoba Department of Education, Citizenship and Youth. Archived from the original on 2007-08-18 . Retrieved 2007-12-10 .

External links [ edit ] For Good Measure: Canada Converts to Metric at CBC Digital Archives CIA World Factbook: Weights & Measures Canada's incomplete metrication v t e Metrication or its opposition by country Australia Barbados Canada Chile Guatemala Hong Kong India Ireland Italy Jamaica Japan Korea North South New Zealand Peru Sweden United Kingdom United States v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metrication_in_Canada&oldid=1306130933 " Categories : Metrication in Canada History of science and technology in Canada Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metrication in Canada 2 languages Add topic

