Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the depiction 2 Treatments by individual artists 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Adoration of the Magi 33 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subject in Christian art For other uses, see Adoration of the Magi (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Adoration of the Magi" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gerard David , Adoration of the Kings , National Gallery, London , circa 1515 Adoration of the Magi , Gentile da Fabriano , 1423 The Adoration of the Magi or Adoration of the Kings or Visitation of the Wise Men is the name traditionally given to the subject in the Nativity of Jesus in art in which the three Magi , represented as kings, especially in the West, having found Jesus by following a star , lay before him gifts of gold , frankincense , and myrrh , and worship him. It is related in the Bible by Matthew 2:11 : "On entering the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother; and they knelt down and paid him homage. Then, opening their treasure chests, they offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod , they left for their own country by another path".

Christian iconography considerably expanded the bare account of the Biblical Magi described in the Gospel of Matthew ( 2:1 – 22 ).  By the later Middle Ages this drew from non-canonical sources like the Golden Legend by Jacobus de Voragine .  Artists used the expanded Christian iconography to reinforce the idea that Jesus was recognized, from his earliest infancy, as king of the earth.  The adoration scene was often used to represent the Nativity, one of the most indispensable episodes in cycles of the Life of the Virgin as well as the Life of Christ .

Stories throughout the Middle Ages started circulating, which speculated who exactly were the three kings who were famous for visiting the Christ child. Many people assumed that they came from somewhere in the east.

[ 1 ] Eventually it was decided that the three kings would represent the three main continents at the time; Europe, Asia, and Africa.

[ 1 ] The three names that prevailed over the centuries for the three kings were Gaspar (or Caspar) , Melchior , and Balthasar .

[ 1 ] The prominence of this story, as well as the three kings or magi, is due to the great theological significance that the Biblical story holds, their exotic clothes and looks, as well as their great and expensive gifts.

[ 1 ] In the church calendar , the event is commemorated in Western Christianity as the Feast of the Epiphany (January 6). The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates the Adoration of the Magi on the Feast of the Nativity (December 25).  The term is anglicized from the Vulgate Latin section title for this passage: A Magis adoratur .

History of the depiction [ edit ] Adoration of the Child Jesus by the three wise men or Magi; Sarcophagus relief (4th century), Vatican Fra Angelico and Filippo Lippi , mid-15th century In the earliest depictions, the Magi are shown wearing Persian dress of trousers and Phrygian caps , usually in profile, advancing in step with their gifts held out before them.  These images adapt Late Antique poses for barbarians submitting to an Emperor, and presenting golden wreaths, and indeed relate to images of tribute -bearers from various Mediterranean and ancient Near Eastern cultures going back many centuries.  The earliest are from catacomb paintings and sarcophagus reliefs of the 4th century.  Crowns are first seen in the 10th century, mostly in the West, where their dress had by that time lost any Oriental flavour in most cases.

[ 2 ] The standard Byzantine depiction of the Nativity included the journey or arrival of the mounted Magi in the background, but not them presenting their gifts, until the post-Byzantine period, when the western depiction was often adapted to an icon style.  Later Byzantine images often show small pill-box like hats, whose significance is disputed.

The Magi are usually shown as the same age until about this period, but then the idea of depicting the three ages of man is introduced: a particularly beautiful example is seen on the façade of the cathedral of Orvieto .  Occasionally from the 12th century, and very often in Northern Europe from the 15th, the Magi are also made to represent the three known parts of the world: Balthasar is very commonly cast as a young African or Moor, and old Caspar is given Oriental features or, more often, dress.  Melchior represents Europe and middle age . Early Renaissance paintings of this theme, such as by Fra Angelico and Fra Lippi, emphasize the pomp and pageantry of the scene.

[ 3 ] From the 14th century onward, large retinues are often shown, the gifts are contained in spectacular pieces of goldsmith work, and the Magi's clothes are given increasing attention.

[ 2 ] By the 15th century, the Adoration of the Magi is often a bravura piece in which the artist can display their handling of complex, crowded scenes involving horses and camels, but also their rendering of varied textures: the silk, fur, jewels and gold of the Kings set against the wood of the stable, the straw of Jesus's manger and the rough clothing of Joseph and the shepherds.

Adoration of the Kings by Michael Damaskinos circa 1591 The subject was especially popular with the artists of Antwerp Mannerism from about 1500 to 1530.  These mostly anonymous artists lived in the Golden Age of Antwerp , as it took over from Bruges as the leading business city of the Low Countries , capturing a huge proportion of the explosion in international trade that followed the development by the Portuguese of the sea route from Asia.  The Magis were regarded as the patron saints of travelling merchants, and so international trade in general, and large numbers of their patrons no doubt came from the various international business communities from different countries resident in Antwerp.

[ 4 ] In the Greek world, Cretan painter Michael Damaskinos revitalized the Greek Italian Byzantine style by mixing it with Venetian painting in his rendition of the Adoration of the Magi around 1590.  The island of Crete was held by the Venetian Empire and the painting style was known as the Cretan School [ 5 ] Hugo van der Goes , Monforte Altarpiece , c.

1470 Adoration by Jan Gossaert , 1510–15 Adoration of the Magi after Hieronymus Bosch The scene often includes a fair diversity of animals as well: the ox and ass from the Nativity scene are usually there, but also the horses, camels, dogs, and falcons of the kings and their retinue, and sometimes other animals, such as birds in the rafters of the stable.  From the 15th century onwards, the Adoration of the Magi is quite often conflated with the Adoration of the Shepherds from the account in the Gospel of Luke (2:8–20), an opportunity to bring in yet more human and animal diversity; in some compositions ( triptychs for example), the two scenes are contrasted or set as pendants to the central scene, usually a Nativity .

The "adoration" of the Magi at the crib is the usual subject, but their arrival, called the "Procession of the Magi", is often shown in the distant background of a Nativity scene (usual in Byzantine icons), or as a separate subject, for example in the Magi Chapel frescos by Benozzo Gozzoli in the Palazzo Medici Riccardi , Florence .  Other subjects include the Journey of the Magi, where they and perhaps their retinue are the only figures, usually shown following the Star of Bethlehem , and there are relatively uncommon scenes of their meeting with Herod and the Dream of the Magi .

The usefulness of the subject to the Church and the technical challenges involved in representing it have made the Adoration of the Magi a favorite subject of Christian art: chiefly painting, but also sculpture and even music (as in Gian-Carlo Menotti 's opera Amahl and the Night Visitors ).  The subject matter is also found in stained glass .  The first figural stained glass window made in the United States is the "Adoration of the Magi" window located at Christ Church, Pelham, New York and designed in 1843 by the founder and first rector's son, William Jay Bolton .

Treatments by individual artists [ edit ] See also: Category:Adoration of the Magi in art Many hundreds of artists have treated the subject. A partial list of those with articles follows.

Adoration of the Magi , Fra Angelico and Filippo Lippi , National Gallery of Art , Washington, D.C.

Adoration of the Magi , Bartolomeo Biscaino , Musée des Beaux-Arts , Strasbourg Adoration of the Magi , Hieronymus Bosch , Museo del Prado , Madrid Adoration of the Magi , Botticelli : National Gallery of Art , Washington, D.C.

Triptych of the Virgin's Life, Dirk Bouts The Adoration of the Kings (Bruegel) , National Gallery, London The Star of Bethlehem , Edward Burne-Jones , Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery Adoration of the Magi , Valerio Castello , Musée des Beaux-Arts, Strasbourg Adoration of the Magi (Andrea della Robbia) , Victoria and Albert Museum Saint Columba Altarpiece , Rogier van der Weyden , Alte Pinakothek , Munich Adoration of the Kings (Gerard David, London) , National Gallery, London Adoration of the Kings (Damaskinos) , Heraklion , Crete Adoration of the Magi (Dürer) , Uffizi , Florence Adoration of the Magi (Gentile da Fabriano) , Uffizi, Florence The Adoration of the Magi (Geertgen tot Sint Jans) , Rijksmuseum Adoration of the Magi , Domenico Ghirlandaio, Ospedale degli Innocenti, Florence Adoration of the Kings (van der Goes) , Gemäldegalerie , Berlin The Adoration of the Kings (Gossaert) , National Gallery, London Adoration of the Magi (Leonardo da Vinci) , Uffizi , Florence Adoration of the Magi (Filippino Lippi) , Uffizi , Florence Adoration of the Magi (Fra Angelico and Filippo Lippi) , National Gallery of Art , Washington D.C.

Adoration of the Magi (Lorenzo Monaco) , Uffizi Adoration of the Magi (Mantegna) , Uffizi Madonna and Child (Masaccio) , Gemäldegalerie , Berlin Adoration of the Magi (Mostaert) , Rijksmuseum Adoration of the Magi (Perugino, Perugia) , Galleria Nazionale dell'Umbria , Perugia Adoration of the Magi (Rubens, Lyon) , Museum of Fine Arts of Lyon Adoration of the Magi (Rubens, Cambridge) , King's College Chapel, Cambridge Adoration of the Magi (Rubens, Antwerp) , Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp Adoration of the Magi with Saint Helena , Palma Vecchio , Pinacoteca di Brera , Milan Adoration of the Magi (Velázquez) , Museo del Prado , Madrid Adoration of the Magi (Veronese) , National Gallery, London Adoration of the Magi (Sequeira) , National Museum of Ancient Art , Lisbon Adoration of the Magi (tapestry) by Morris and Co with Edward Burne-Jones Gallery [ edit ] Mosaic, Santa Maria in Trastevere , Rome, by Pietro Cavallini , 13th century Giotto di Bondone , 1320–1325 Giotto , Scrovegni Chapel A medieval Book of Hours written for the Grey family of Ruthin, c. 1390 Saint-Thiébaut Church, Thann , around 1400 Nikolaus Obilman (1435–1488), c. 1466 Hans Memling , 1470 Jean Fouquet ; one of the magi is King Charles VII of France Botticelli, 1475 Domenico Ghirlandaio, 1485-88 Adoration of the Magi by Filippino Lippi (1496) Giorgione , c. 1505 Adoration , Jan Mostaert , 1520s Illumination by Antoine Olivier, Toulouse , 1533-1535 Jacopo Bassano , 1563–1564 Icon , Cretan School , early 17th century Diego Velázquez , 1619 Rubens, Lyon , c. 1617–1618 Abraham Bloemaert , 1624 Pieter van Lint , 1630 Rubens, Cambridge , 1634 Rubens, 1624 , in Royal Museum of Fine Arts Antwerp Rembrandt , 1632 Bartolomé Esteban Murillo , 1655–1660 Domingos Sequeira, 1828 Tapestry , Edward Burne-Jones , Musée d'Orsay , 1887 Fragment from medieval fresco, Kremikovtsi Monastery Stained glass, St. Michael's Cathedral (Toronto) See also [ edit ] Saint Joseph's dreams Star of Bethlehem Christmas Adoration of the Shepherds Salome (disciple) Cavalcade of Magi Eucharistic adoration Gospel harmony Further reading [ edit ] Drum, Walter (1910).

"Magi" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Friedrich Justus Knecht (1910).

"Adoration of the Magi" .

A Practical Commentary on Holy Scripture . B. Herder.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Zambrano, Patrizia (2019).

Sandro Botticelli and the birth of modern portraiture . UCL Press.

ISBN 978-1-78735-461-6 .

^ a b Schiller, Gertrud ; Seligman, Janet (1971).

Iconography of Christian Art, Vol. I: Christ's incarnation, childhood, baptism, temptation, transfiguration, works and miracles, (English translation from German), pp. 100–114 and figs. 245–298. London: Lund Humphries.

OCLC 59999963 ^ "The Adoration of the Magi", National Gallery of Art ^ Ainsworth, Maryan Wynn et al., From Van Eyck to Bruegel: Early Netherlandish Paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , pp. 35–37, 2009, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2009.

ISBN 0-8709-9870-6 , google books ^ Hatzidakis, Manolis (1987).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830). Τόμος 1: Αβέρκιος – Ιωσήφ [ Greek Painters after the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 1: Averkios – Iosif ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation. pp.

241– 251.

hdl : 10442/14844 .

ISBN 960-7916-01-8 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Adoration of the Magi .

"The Three Wise Men in Paintings" (more than 300) The Magi in Mosaics, Paintings and Sculpture (archived 4 July 2008) Adoration of the Wise Men Life of Jesus : The Nativity Preceded by Star of Bethlehem New Testament Events Followed by Flight into Egypt v t e Life of Jesus in art Topics Annunciation Nativity Adoration of the Shepherds Adoration of the Magi Circumcision Flight into Egypt Rest on the Flight into Egypt Massacre of the Innocents Presentation in the Temple Christ Among the Doctors Baptism of Christ Miraculous Draught of Fishes Marriage at Cana Christ and the Woman of Samaria Transfiguration Raising of Lazarus Christ in the House of Martha and Mary Christ Taking Leave of His Mother Purification of the Temple Last Supper Agony in the Garden Kiss of Judas Taking of Christ Flagellation Mocking of Christ Ecce homo Christ Carrying the Cross Crucifixion Stabat Mater Descent from the Cross Lamentation Pietà Harrowing of Hell Resurrection Noli me tangere Supper at Emmaus Incredulity of Saint Thomas Ascension Related Jesus Depiction of Jesus Christ Child Holy Family Stations of the Cross Life of Christ Museum List of statues of Jesus Visual arts Christianity v t e Nativity of Jesus People Holy Family Christ Child ( Jesus ) Mary Joseph Magi Melchior Caspar Balthazar Others Shepherds Herod the Great Place Bethlehem Gifts of the Magi Gold Frankincense Myrrh Narratives Gospel of Matthew Matthew 1 Matthew 1:18 Matthew 1:19 Matthew 1:20 Matthew 1:21 Matthew 1:22 Matthew 1:23 Matthew 1:24 Matthew 1:25 Matthew 2:11 Adoration of the Magi ( In art ) Gospel of Luke Luke 2 Annunciation to the shepherds Related Date Manger Star of Bethlehem Virgin birth of Jesus Saint Joseph's dreams Flight into Egypt In culture In art In film Batlejka Chalking the door Christmas village Szopka Nativity displays theft Nativity play Vertep Serbian Others Remembrances Advent Christmas Church of the Nativity Nativity Fast v t e Christmas Blue Christmas Boxing Day Children's Day Christmas Eve Saint Nicholas Day Saint Stephen's Day Sol Invictus Yule In Christianity Holy Family Jesus Christ Child Mary Joseph Biblical Magi Adoration of the Magi Adoration of the Shepherds Advent Angel Gabriel Annunciation Annunciation to the shepherds Bethlehem Christmastide Epiphany Herod the Great Massacre of the Innocents flight into Egypt Nativity Fast Nativity of Jesus in art in later culture Nativity scene Neapolitan Star of Bethlehem Twelfth Night In folklore Badalisc Caganer Christkind Grýla Jack Frost Korvatunturi Kallikantzaros Legend of the Christmas Spider Mari Lwyd Miner's figure Nisse North Pole Old Man Winter Perchta Santa's workshop Tió de Nadal Turoń Vertep Wenceslaus Yule cat Gift-bringers Saint Nicholas folklore Santa Claus Befana Ded Moroz Father Christmas Grandpa Indian Joulupukki Julemanden Noel Baba Olentzero Père Noël Sinterklaas Others Companions of Saint Nicholas Belsnickel Elves Knecht Ruprecht Krampus Mrs. Claus Père Fouettard Sack Man Santa Claus' daughter Santa's reindeer Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer Snegurochka Zwarte Piet Traditions Advent calendar Advent candle Advent wreath Boar's Head Feast Candle arches Chalking the door Cards Carols by Candlelight Cavalcade of Magi Christingle Christmas jumper Christmas Peace Crackers Decorations Didukh The Elf on the Shelf Feast of the Seven Fishes Flying Santa Gifts Google Santa Tracker Hampers Las Posadas Letters Lights Lord of Misrule Markets Midnight Mass Moravian star Mummers' play Nine Lessons and Carols NORAD Tracks Santa Nutcrackers dolls Ornaments Parades list Piñatas Poinsettia Pyramids Räuchermann Christmas seals Secret Santa Spanbaum Szopka Stamps Stockings Tree Twelve Days Wassailing Windows Yule goat Yule log By country Australia Bangladesh Colombia Denmark Ethiopia Finland France Germany Nazi Germany Hungary Iceland folklore Indonesia Ireland Italy Mexico New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Romania Russia Scotland Serbia Sweden Ukraine United States American Civil War Hawaii New Mexico Music Carols list Operas Hit singles in the UK Hit singles in the US Music charts ( Billboard ) Music books Carols for Choirs The Oxford Book of Carols The New Oxford Book of Carols Piae Cantiones Other media In literature A Christmas Carol Films Santa Claus in film Christmas horror Poetry " Old Santeclaus with Much Delight " " A Visit from St. Nicholas " " Christmas Day in the Workhouse " " Journey of the Magi " " Tomten " Christmas television specials United States Yule Log Apollo 8 Genesis reading In modern society Advent Conspiracy Black Friday (partying) Black Friday (shopping) Bronner's Christmas Wonderland Christmas and holiday season Christmas club Christmas creep Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004 Christmas jumpers Christmas Lectures Christmasland in New Taipei City Christmas Mountains Christmas seals Christmas truce Controversies Cyber Monday Economics GivingTuesday Grinch El Gordo Jews and Christmas In July In August NBA games NFL games Pikkujoulu SantaCon Santa's Candy Castle Santa Claus Village Scrooge Small Business Saturday Super Saturday Virginia O'Hanlon (" Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus ") White Christmas Xmas Food and drink Dinner Joulupöytä Julbord Julebord Kūčios Réveillon Thirteen desserts Twelve-dish supper Wigilia Sweets Baked Alaska Candy cane Cake Cookie Cozonac Fruitcake Gingerbread Kutia Makówki Melomakarono Mince pie Pampushka Panettone Pavlova Pecan pie Poppy seed roll Pudding Pumpkin pie Qurabiya Red velvet cake Sugar plum Stollen Szaloncukor Turrón Yule log Soup Menudo Borscht Sauces Bread sauce Cranberry sauce Redcurrant sauce Beverages Apple cider Champurrado Eggnog Hot chocolate Kissel Mulled wine Smoking bishop Ponche crema Snowball Dumplings Hallaca Pierogi Tamale Meat and fish Carp Gefilte fish Ham Pickled herring Roast goose Romeritos Stuffing Tourtière Turkey Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zmbms
Cached time: 20250812024248
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.455 seconds
Real time usage: 0.620 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1630/1000000
Revision size: 18933/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 98544/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1404/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.252/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6889280/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  472.330      1 -total
 19.39%   91.562      1 Template:Cite_Catholic_Encyclopedia
 17.51%   82.698      6 Template:Navbox
 12.63%   59.654      1 Template:Life_of_Jesus_in_Christian_art
 11.94%   56.404      1 Template:Short_description
 11.75%   55.519      1 Template:Commons_category
 11.46%   54.117      1 Template:Sister_project
 11.23%   53.025      1 Template:Side_box
 10.97%   51.804      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.15%   47.958      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:473664:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024248 and revision id 1282978297. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adoration_of_the_Magi&oldid=1282978297 " Categories : Adoration of the Magi in art New Testament people in art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adoration of the Magi 33 languages Add topic

