Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents of 1541 edition 2 Contents of 1550 edition 3 References 4 External links 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents De Alchemia 2 languages Deutsch Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alchemical writing by Johannes Petreius De Alchemia is an early collection of alchemical writings first published by Johannes Petreius in Nuremberg in 1541. A second edition was published in Frankfurt in 1550 by the printer Cyriacus Jacobus.

The full title reads: De Alchemia. Opuscula complura veterum philosophorum . Among the texts are the important alchemical works the Rosarium Philosophorum , [ 1 ] presented with illustrations in the second edition (1550); the Summa Perfectionis of Pseudo-Geber ; and the Tabula Smaragdina of Hermes Trismegistus .

The Rosarium Philosophorum is itself an alchemical collection, taking the form of a ( florilegium ), or a collection of citations of earlier alchemical authorities, among them Khalid ibn Yazid , Pseudo- Arnaldus of Villa Nova , Alphidius , and Pseudo- Lull ) and which includes verses explaining the preparation of the Philosopher's stone accompanied by allegorical illustrations, which depict, for example, the union of the male and female principles. The collection is preserved in many manuscript copies and comes perhaps from the end of the fourteenth or the beginning of the fifteenth century (some even date it to the sixteenth century).

[ 2 ] In the 1541 edition, Petraeus called for the printing of further alchemical texts. This started a period of publishing alchemical collections in large numbers, among them the Artis Auriferae , Verae alchemiae artisque metallicae, citra aenigmata, doctrina and culminating in the Theatrum Chemicum .

Contents of 1541 edition [ edit ] Geber ( Pseudo-Geber ).

De investigatione perfectionis metallorum, Liber I.

Geber.

Summæ perfectionis metallorum, sive perfecti magisterij, Libri II.

Geber.

De inventione veritatis seu perfectionis metallorum. Liber I.

Geber.

De fornacibus construendis. Liber I.

( Roger Bacon ).

Speculum alchemi, Rogerij Bachonis.

( Richardus Anglicus ).

Correctorium alchemiæ Richardi Anglici.

Rosarius minor, de alchemia, incerti authoris [ 3 ] ( Khalid ibn Yazid ).

Liber secretorum alchemiæ Calidis filij Iazichi Iudæi.

(Hermes Trimegistus).

Tabula smaragdina de alchemia ( Ortulanus ).

Hortulani philosophi, super Tabulam smaragdinam Hermetis commentarius.

Contents of 1550 edition [ edit ] Part 1: Correctio Fatuorum.

Clangor Buccinæ.

Semita Semitæ.

[ 4 ] (Pseudo- Avicenna ).

De tinctura metallorum.

(Pseudo- Lull ).

Compendium animæ transmutationis.

Scala Philosophorum.

Opus mulierum, Tractatulus, sive ludus puerorum.

(Pseudo-Lull).

De Tincturis compendium, seu Vade Mecum.

(Pseudo- Aristotle ).

Tractatulus de Practica lapidis Philosophici.

Part 2: Rosarium Philosophorum References [ edit ] ^ Joachim Telle : Rosarium philosophorum , Verfasserlexikon , Band 8, 1992, Sp. 172-176 ^ Alchemy Website, Woodcut from the Rosarium ; Universitätsbibliothek Glasgow, Illustrationen aus einer Handschrift der Bibliothek von Ferguson ; Joachim Telle , ed.

Rosarium philosophorum: ein alchemisches Florilegium des Spätmittelalters, translated by Lutz Claren and Joachim Huber, 2 vols. (Weinheim: VCH, 1992). A facsimile of the 1550 edition ^ Nicht mit dem Rosarium Philosophorum identisch. Als von einem unbekannten Autor bezeichnet.

^ Sometimes ascribed to Arnaldus de Villa Nova External links [ edit ] De Alchimia Opuscula Complura Veterum Philosophorum vol 1 digitized 2014 from the Bavarian State Library De Alchimia Opuscula Complura Veterum Philosophorum vol 1 digitized 2007 from the Complutense University of Madrid De Alchimia Opuscula Complura Veterum Philosophorum vol 1 digitized 2014 from the Lyon Public Library Bibliography [ edit ] Ferguson, John.

Bibliotheca Chemica, vol. 1. Glasgow, 1906.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=De_Alchemia&oldid=1100227459 " Category : Alchemical documents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 24 July 2022, at 20:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents De Alchemia 2 languages Add topic

