Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differential equations 2 Riemannian geometry 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Comparison theorem 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In mathematics , comparison theorems are theorems whose statement involves comparisons between various mathematical objects of the same type, and often occur in fields such as calculus , differential equations and Riemannian geometry .

Differential equations [ edit ] In the theory of differential equations , comparison theorems assert particular properties of solutions of a differential equation (or of a system thereof), provided that an auxiliary equation/inequality (or a system thereof) possesses a certain property. Differential (or integral) inequalities, derived from differential (respectively, integral) equations by replacing the equality sign with an inequality sign, form a broad class of such auxiliary relations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] One instance of such theorem was used by Aronson and Weinberger to characterize solutions of Fisher's equation , a reaction-diffusion equation.

[ 3 ] Other examples of comparison theorems include: Chaplygin's theorem Grönwall's inequality , and its various generalizations, provides a comparison principle for the solutions of first-order ordinary differential equations Lyapunov comparison theorem Sturm comparison theorem Hille-Wintner comparison theorem Riemannian geometry [ edit ] In Riemannian geometry , it is a traditional name for a number of theorems that compare various metrics and provide various estimates in Riemannian geometry.

[ 4 ] Rauch comparison theorem relates the sectional curvature of a Riemannian manifold to the rate at which its geodesics spread apart Toponogov's theorem Myers's theorem Hessian comparison theorem Laplacian comparison theorem Morse–Schoenberg comparison theorem Berger comparison theorem , Rauch–Berger comparison theorem [ 5 ] Berger–Kazdan comparison theorem [ 6 ] Warner comparison theorem for lengths of N-Jacobi fields ( N being a submanifold of a complete Riemannian manifold) [ 7 ] Bishop–Gromov inequality , conditional on a lower bound for the Ricci curvatures [ 8 ] Lichnerowicz comparison theorem Eigenvalue comparison theorem Cheng's eigenvalue comparison theorem Comparison triangle See also [ edit ] Limit comparison theorem , about convergence of series Comparison theorem for integrals , about convergence of integrals Zeeman's comparison theorem , a technical tool from the theory of spectral sequences References [ edit ] ^ Walter, Wolfgang (1970).

Differential and Integral Inequalities . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-86405-6 .

ISBN 978-3-642-86407-0 .

^ Lakshmikantham, Vangipuram (1969).

Differential and integral inequalities: theory and applications . Mathematics in science and engineering. Srinivasa Leela. New York: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-095563-6 .

^ Aronson, D. G.; Weinberger, H. F. (1975). Goldstein, Jerome A. (ed.).

"Nonlinear diffusion in population genetics, combustion, and nerve pulse propagation" .

Partial Differential Equations and Related Topics . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer: 5– 49.

doi : 10.1007/BFb0070595 .

ISBN 978-3-540-37440-4 .

^ Jeff Cheeger and David Gregory Ebin : Comparison theorems in Riemannian Geometry, North Holland 1975.

^ M. Berger,  "An Extension of Rauch's Metric Comparison Theorem and some Applications", Illinois J. Math., vol. 6 (1962) 700–712 ^ Weisstein, Eric W.

"Berger-Kazdan Comparison Theorem" .

MathWorld .

^ F.W. Warner,  "Extensions of the Rauch Comparison Theorem to Submanifolds" (Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 122, 1966, pp. 341–356 ^ R.L. Bishop & R. Crittenden, Geometry of manifolds External links [ edit ] "Comparison theorem" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] "Differential inequality" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] Index of articles associated with the same name This set index article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).

If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Comparison_theorem&oldid=1296422457 " Categories : Set index articles on mathematics Mathematical theorems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All set index articles This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Comparison theorem 1 language Add topic

