Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main features Toggle Main features subsection 1.1 Participating countries 1.2 Farmers' rights 1.3 Multilateral system 1.4 Governing Body 1.5 List of crops covered in Annex 1 2 History, negotiations, and entry into force 3 Discussions and criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 10 languages العربية Dansk Español فارسی Français Hausa Igbo Italiano Kiswahili اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2001 treaty on plant genetic resources Plant Treaty International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Signed 2001 Location Rome [ 1 ] Effective 29 June 2004 Parties 151 contracting parties (150 states, 1 organization) as of 1 February 2024 Depositary Secretary-General of the United Nations Languages Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Intellectual property Authors' rights Copyleft Copyright Database right Farmers' rights Geographical indication Indigenous intellectual property Industrial design right Integrated circuit layout design protection Intellectual property infringement Literary property Moral rights Patent Peasants' rights Plant breeders' rights Plant genetic resources Proprietary software Related rights Supplementary protection certificate Trade dress Trade secret Trademark Utility model Patent infringement Related topics Abandonware Artificial intelligence and copyright Brand protection Copyright abolition Copyright troll Criticism of copyright Bioprospecting Biopiracy Idea–expression distinction Limitations and exceptions to copyright Fair dealing Fair use Paraphrasing Right to quote Orphan work Patent troll Pirate Party Public domain Outline of intellectual property Outline of patents Higher categories: Property and Property law v t e The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture [ 2 ] (also known as ITPGRFA , International Seed Treaty or Plant Treaty [ 3 ] ) is a comprehensive international agreement in harmony with the Convention on Biological Diversity , which aims at guaranteeing food security through the conservation , exchange and sustainable use of the world's plant genetic resources for food and agriculture (PGRFA), the fair and equitable benefit sharing arising from its use, as well as the recognition of farmers' rights . It was signed in 2001 in Madrid, and entered into force on 29 June 2004.

Main features [ edit ] Participating countries [ edit ] There are 153 contracting parties to the Plant Treaty (152 Member States and 1 intergovernmental organization , the European Union ) as of July 2024.

[ 4 ] Farmers' rights [ edit ] The treaty recognises farmers' rights , subject to national laws to: a) the protection of traditional knowledge relevant to plant genetic resources for food and agriculture; b) the right to equitably participate in sharing benefits arising from the utilisation of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture; and c) the right to participate in making decisions , at the national level, on matters related to the conservation and sustainable use of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. The Treaty establishes the Multilateral System of Access and Benefit-sharing to facilitate plant germplasm exchanges and benefit sharing through Standard Material Transfer Agreement (SMTA).

[ citation needed ] However, as Regine Andersen of the farmers' rights project, [ 5 ] among others, including Olivier De Schutter , the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food , [ 6 ] argue, the interpretation and realisation of farmers' rights is weak and is not the same across all countries. Without a consistent, strong international focus on realising the rights of farmers who conserve and sustainably use PGRFA to save, use, exchange and sell seeds saved on-farm, genetic variety of crops and related agricultural biodiversity will suffer.

[ 7 ] India, for example, includes an interpretation of farmers' rights in its Plant Variety Protection and Farmers' Rights (PPV&FR) Act, 2001, allowing farmers a restricted right to save and sell seed they have produced on-farm as they always have, even if it contains genes from a protected variety.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In 2019, the adoption of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants and other people working in rural areas reaffirmed the farmers' rights contained in the Plant Treaty.

[ citation needed ] Multilateral system [ edit ] The treaty has implemented a Multilateral System (MLS) of access and benefit sharing, among those countries that ratify the treaty, for a list of 64 of some of the most important food and forage crops essential for food security and interdependence. The genera and species are listed in Annex 1 to the treaty.

[ citation needed ] The treaty was negotiated by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (CGRFA) and since 2006 has its own Governing Body under the aegis of the FAO.  The Governing Body is the highest organ of the Treaty as established in Article 19. Composed of representatives of all Contracting Parties, its basic function is to promote the full implementation of the Treaty, including the provision of policy guidance on the implementation of the Treaty. The Governing Body elects its Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons, in conformity with its Rules of Procedure. They are collectively referred to as "the Bureau".

[ citation needed ] Some believe the treaty could be an example of responsible global governance for ensuring that plant genetic resources essential for present and future food security can be kept accessible to all farmers and in the public domain. Chapter 7 of the Second Report on the State of the World's Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (SoWPGR-2) [ 10 ] entitled "Access to Plant Genetic Resources, the sharing of benefits arising out of their utilization and the realization of Farmers' Rights" is mainly dedicated to the International Treaty.

[ citation needed ] Governing Body [ edit ] The Governing Body met for the first time in Madrid in June 2006.

[ 11 ] It had a ministerial segment and a ministerial declaration was adopted and included in the Report.

[ 12 ] The Second Session of the Governing Body was held in Rome in October/November 2007.

[ 13 ] This meeting discussed the implementation of Farmers' Rights, financial rules; the funding strategy, relationship with the Global Crop Diversity Trust; implementation of the Multilateral System (MLS) for access and benefit-sharing, among other issues.

[ 14 ] The Third Session of the Governing Body was held in Tunis in June 2009.

[ 15 ] This meeting continued the unfinished business of the previous meeting and discussed, among other issues, funding strategy, compliance, sustainable use, the implementation of Farmers' Rights, relationship with the Global Crop Diversity Trust and the CGRFA, implementation of the Multilateral System (MLS) for access and benefit-sharing.

[ 16 ] The Fourth Session of the Governing Body was held in Bali, Indonesia in March 2011.

[ 17 ] Prior to the Governing Body meeting, Ministers adopted the Bali Declaration on the Treaty [ 18 ] that commits them to engage in further enhancing Treaty implementation to help meet the challenges of agricultural biodiversity erosion, food insecurity, extreme poverty and the effects of climate change ; and calls upon parties and relevant stakeholders to prioritize activities relevant to the MLS, sustainable use of PGRFA, and Farmers' Rights, and to mobilize more funds. With the addition of 'compliance' mechanisms and financial rules, these issues took up most negotiating time in the Governing Body meeting. The relationship of the Treaty with the CGRFA, the CBD's Nagoya Protocol , the Global Crop Diversity Trust and Bioversity International were also included in resolutions.

The Fifth Session of the Governing Body was held in Muscat, Oman in September 2013.

[ 19 ] The session was preceded by two days of regional consultations. The Fifth Session achieved: a resolution on Farmers' Rights (FRs), which renewed the commitment of governments to implement Farmers' Rights; a coded call to UPOV and WIPO to report on their impacts on Farmers' Rights; warm acceptance of the offer by Farmers' Organisations to produce a report for GB6 on the state of implementation of Farmers' Rights; actions designed to improve the sustainable use of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture, linked to commitments to realise Farmers' Rights; commitments to review and change the multi-lateral Access and Benefit Sharing mechanism (MLS), to prevent pillaging of the System by patents on native traits, for example; significant new voluntary financial contributions from Norway for the Global Crop Diversity Trust and for the benefit sharing fund to support on-farm conservation; acceptance of the distinction between NGOs and Farmers' Organisations and the need to include representatives of farmers' social movements in negotiations; a request to the Secretary to report on relevant discussions that relate to Farmers' Rights within other UN fora including the Committee on World Food Security. Civil Society including NGOs (e.g.

CENESTA ) and the International Farmers' Movement, La Via Campesina , were active throughout the Session.

[ 20 ] List of crops covered in Annex 1 [ edit ] Even foods that have been part of a culture for centuries often are indigenous to a region on the other side of the world. This global dispersal shows the generosity with which farmers and farming communities have always shared seeds and genetic materials with neighbors or through trade. As people ventured forth, looking for new lands, their seeds were part of their diasporas. As a result, we now live in a world in which not one country can be considered self-sufficient in terms of being able to survive solely on crops indigenous within its borders. The Treaty facilitates the continued open exchange of food crops and their genetic materials.

[ 21 ] The list of plant genetic material included in the Multilateral System of the Treaty is made of major food crops and forages.  The Forages are also divided in legume forages and grass forages. They were selected taking into account the criteria of food security and country interdependence.

[ 22 ] History, negotiations, and entry into force [ edit ] The treaty was under negotiation for 7 years. A previous voluntary agreement, the International Undertaking on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture (IU), was adopted in 1983. However, the IU was reliant on the principle of genetic resources being the common heritage of humanity.

[ 23 ] The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (1993) brought genetic resources under the jurisdiction and sovereignty of national governments. However, the CBD recognised the special and distinctive nature of agricultural genetic resources: they were international – crossing countries and continents – their conservation and sustainable use requires distinctive solutions and they were important internationally for food security. Subsequently, the IU was renegotiated, to bring it in harmony with the CBD, and was renamed as a treaty. An account of the long process to achieve the treaty called Negotiating the Seed Treaty can be found at Wayback Machine .

The treaty was approved during the FAO Conference (31st Session resolution 3/2001 [ 24 ] ) on 3 November 2001, with 116 votes and 2 abstentions (US and Japan). In accordance with its Article 25, it was opened for signatures until 4 November 2002 by all members of FAO or any state member of the United Nations or of the International Atomic Energy Agency . It was subject to ratification, acceptance or approval (Article 26), by all members.

The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture was open to accession a year after adoption and once closed to signatures (Article 27), i.e., on 4 November 2002. 77 countries and the European Union had signed the treaty by that date.

In accordance with Article 28, the treaty entered into force on the ninetieth day after the deposit of the fortieth instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, provided that at least twenty instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession have been deposited by Members of FAO. Having reached the required number of instruments in order for the treaty to enter into force (40) on 31 March 2004, on which date 13 instruments (including the European Union) were deposited with the Director-General of FAO, the date of entry into force was on 29 June 2004.

Discussions and criticism [ edit ] Plant genetic resources are essential to a sustainable agriculture and food security . FAO estimates humans have used some 10,000 species for food throughout history. However, only about 120 cultivated species provide around 90% of food requirements and four species (maize, wheat, rice and potatoes) provide about 60% of human dietary energy for the world's population. Of the myriad of varieties of these crops developed by farmers over millennia, which form an important part of agricultural biodiversity , more than 75% have been lost in the past 100 years.

[ citation needed ] Some fear that corporate financial interests might prevent safeguarding of livelihoods, promotion of food security, biodiversity-rich farming under control of local communities, and implementation of Farmers' Rights.

[ citation needed ] Critics say many of the central issues are unresolved or open to interpretation. Some of the points raised are: to what extent will intellectual property rights be allowed on genetic resources in the MLS, within treaty rules: some argue an agreement aiming at open access to genetic resources for food and agriculture should not allow restrictive property rights, and the treaty says in Article 12.3.d that "Recipients shall not claim any intellectual property or other rights that limit the facilitated access to the plant genetic resources for food and agriculture, or their genetic parts or components, in the form received from the Multilateral System"; to what extent will farmers and communities be allowed to freely use, exchange, sell and breed the seeds , and what enforcement procedures will be used by national governments to ensure principles of Farmers' Rights will be respected; The mechanism for dispute settlement under the Third Party Beneficiary and the role of FAO.

The first group of 11 projects funded by the treaty was announced during the Third Session of the Governing Body in Tunis in June 2009. The projects were funded according to criteria established by the Governing Body including regional balance: 5 from Latin America, 5 from Africa and 1 from Asia.  The ranking of the projects was done by a Group of Experts nominated by the 7 regional representatives of the Bureau and the final approval was done by the Bureau on behalf of the Governing Body.

While the whole Brassica family (Cruciferae) including all its sub-species and varieties is in the MLS, the total number of food crops and forages and their relatives included in the treaty is very limited. Soya, sugar cane, oil palm and groundnut are among important crops missing from the list in Annex 1.

The treaty came into force on 29 June 2004, at which time there were more than 54 ratifications by countries. An article prepared on the occasion of the treaty becoming law is posted at International Seed Treaty becomes Law - 29 June 2004 . From the entry into force, countries that previously signed are allowed to ratify the treaty, while countries that did not sign the treaty before it came into force can also accede to it. The instrument of ratification has to be deposited with the Director-General of FAO.

See also [ edit ] Biopiracy Seedbank Plant genetic resources Germplasm Genesys Convention on Biological Diversity Nagoya Protocol to the Convention on Biological Diversity UPOV Convention on New Varieties of Plants United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Peasants References [ edit ] ^ "UN treaties repository" .

^ "International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture" .

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ "Golay C. (2017), Research Brief: The Right to Seeds and Intellectual Property Rights" (PDF) .

^ "Contracting Parties | International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture" .

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . Retrieved 10 September 2024 .

^ "Farmers' Rights website" .

^ "Seed policy and the right to food" (PDF) .

www.srfood.org . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ Andersen, Regine (24 March 2010).

"An issue of survival: Landraces' plant genetic resources are crucial to human survival" .

D+C . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ Suhai, Suman (29 March 2020).

"The way it always was: India's law on plant variety protection and farmers' rights" .

D+C . Retrieved 2 April 2022 .

^ "Women at the Centre of Biodiversity" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 23 March 2011 .

^ "The Second Report on the State of the World's Plant and Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture" (PDF) .

www.fao.org . 2010 . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ "International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" .

www.fao.org .

^ GB-1/06/REPORT, Report of the First Session of the Governing Body of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture.

ftp://ftp.fao.org/ag/agp/planttreaty/gb1/gb1repe.pdf [ permanent dead link ] ^ "International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" . Archived from the original on 3 October 2011 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ "Second Session of the Governing Body of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2017.

^ "International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" . Archived from the original on 3 October 2011 . Retrieved 3 November 2010 .

^ "Third Session of the Governing Body of the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2017.

^ "Fourth Session of the Governing Body | the International Treaty" . Archived from the original on 22 February 2011 . Retrieved 22 March 2011 .

^ Unknown [ permanent dead link ] ^ "International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture | Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations" . Archived from the original on 2 May 2014 . Retrieved 30 April 2014 .

^ CSO summary of results of GB5 ^ "Safeguarding biodiversity, sharing benefits, feeding the world" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2017.

^ Ximena Flores Palacios (1998).

"Contribution to the Estimation of Countries' Inter-dependence in the Area of Plant Genetic Resources" (PDF) . Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2017.

^ Shawn N. Sullivan (2004).

"Plant Genetic Resources and the Law: Past, Present, and Future" .

Plant Physiology May 2004 .

135 (1): 10– 15. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017.

^ "Fao – C 2001/report" .

Further reading [ edit ] Moore, G.; Witold, T. (2003).

The Explanatory Guide to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. The World Conservation Union (IUCN). IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper Number 57. 2005 (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2021 .

213 p.

Fowler, C., Moore, G. and Hawtin, G. (2003).

The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture: A Primer for the Future of CGIAR . SGRP (System-Wide Genetic Resources Programme), IPGRI (now Bioversity International). Rome, Italy. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) 36 p.

Coupe, S.; Lewins, R. (2008).

Negotiating the Seed Treaty (PDF) . Practical Action Publishing, Rugby, UK. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2007 .

59 p.

IT PGRFA Secretariat (2011).

Introduction to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture: Module 1 (PDF) . IT PGRFA Secretariat, FAO, Rome, Italy.

155 p.

External links [ edit ] Official text of the Plant Treaty www.planttreaty.com Archived 6 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine FAO's official website of the Plant Treaty Genetic Imperialism?

from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives Official website of the Treaty (archived) FAO: Leipzig Global Plan of Action (GPA) Portal for PGRFA issues FAO: Second Report on the State of the World's PGRFA Global Crop Diversity Trust UK Agricultural Biodiversity Copendium: Civil Society pages on the International Treaty and its negotiation CGIAR's agricultural biodiversity research centre's pages on the Treaty Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Treaty_on_Plant_Genetic_Resources_for_Food_and_Agriculture&oldid=1292513655 " Categories : Agricultural treaties Food treaties Biodiversity Food and Agriculture Organization treaties Food security Intellectual property treaties Plant conservation Plant breeding Seeds Sustainable agriculture Treaties concluded in 2001 Treaties entered into force in 2004 Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations Treaties of Afghanistan Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Armenia Treaties of Australia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Benin Treaties of Bhutan Treaties of Brazil Treaties of Brunei Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Burundi Treaties of Cambodia Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Canada Treaties of the Central African Republic Treaties of Chad Treaties of Chile Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of the Cook Islands Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of North Korea Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of El Salvador Treaties of Eritrea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of Ethiopia Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of Germany Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Guyana Treaties of Honduras Treaties of Hungary Treaties of Iceland Treaties of India Treaties of Indonesia Treaties of Iran Treaties of Iraq Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Italy 2001 in Italy Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kiribati Treaties of Kuwait Treaties of Kyrgyzstan Treaties of Laos Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of Lesotho Treaties of Liberia Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of Liechtenstein Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Malawi Treaties of Malaysia Treaties of the Maldives Treaties of Mali Treaties of the Marshall Islands Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Myanmar Treaties of Namibia Treaties of Nepal Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of Nicaragua Treaties of Niger Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of Poland Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Qatar Treaties of South Korea Treaties of Romania Treaties of Rwanda Treaties of Samoa Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Sierra Leone Treaties of Singapore Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of the Republic of the Sudan (1985–2011) Treaties of Eswatini Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Turkey Treaties of Uganda Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Tuvalu Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Venezuela Treaties of Yemen Treaties of Zambia Treaties of Zimbabwe Treaties entered into by the European Union Treaties extended to Aruba Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands Treaties extended to Greenland Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Malta Treaties of the United States Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of South Africa Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 10:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 10 languages Add topic

