Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Science objectives 3 Ocean altimetry 4 Atomic clock synchronization 5 Joint effort 6 Prior similar missions 7 Data use and benefits 8 End of mission 9 Future 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents OSTM/Jason-2 10 languages Български Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Português Русский Suomi Svenska 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International Earth observation satellite mission Ocean Surface Topography Mission / Jason-2 Artist's interpretation of the OSTM/Jason-2 satellite Names Jason-2 Ocean Surface Topography Mission OSTM Mission type Oceanography mission Operator NASA , NOAA , CNES , EUMETSAT COSPAR ID 2008-032A SATCAT no.

33105 Website Ocean Surface Topography from Space Mission duration 3 years (planned) 11 years, 3 months, 18 days (achieved) Spacecraft properties Bus Proteus Manufacturer Thales Alenia Space Launch mass 510 kg (1,120 lb) Power 500 watts Start of mission Launch date 20 June 2008, 07:46:25 UTC Rocket Delta II 7320-10C (Delta D334) Launch site Vandenberg , SLC-2W Contractor United Launch Alliance End of mission Deactivated 9 October 2019 Orbital parameters Reference system Geocentric orbit Regime Low Earth orbit Altitude 1,336 km (830 mi) Inclination 66.00° Period 112.00 minutes OSTM/Jason-2 , or Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason-2 satellite, [ 1 ] was an international Earth observation satellite altimeter joint mission for sea surface height measurements between NASA and CNES . It was the third satellite in a series started in 1992 by the NASA/CNES TOPEX/Poseidon mission [ 2 ] and continued by the NASA/CNES Jason-1 mission launched in 2001.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Like its two predecessors, OSTM/Jason-2 used high-precision ocean altimetry to measure the distance between the satellite and the ocean surface to within a few centimeters. These very accurate observations of variations in sea surface height — also known as ocean topography — provide information about global sea level , the speed and direction of ocean currents , and heat stored in the ocean.

Jason-2 was built by Thales Alenia Space using a Proteus platform, under a contract from CNES, as well as the main Jason-2 instrument, the Poseidon-3 altimeter (successor to the Poseidon and Poseidon 2 altimeter on-board TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 ). Scientists consider the 15-plus-year climate data record that this mission extended to be critical to understanding how ocean circulation is linked to global climate change .

Team Vandenberg successfully launches a Delta II rocket from Space Launch Complex-2 at 12:46 a.m. Friday. The rocket carried the OSTM/Jason-2 Satellite into an 830-mile near-circular orbit.

OSTM/Jason-2 was launched on 20 June 2008, at 07:46 UTC , from Space Launch Complex 2W at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California , by a Delta II 7320 rocket.

[ 4 ] The spacecraft separated from the rocket 55 minutes later.

[ 5 ] Jason-2 after separation from its launch vehicle It was placed in a 1,336 km (830 mi) circular, non-Sun-synchronous orbit at an inclination of 66.0° to Earth's equator , allowing it to monitor 95% of Earth's ice-free ocean every 10 days. Jason-1 was moved to the opposite side of Earth from Jason-2 and now flies over the same region of the ocean that Jason-2 flew over five days earlier.

[ 6 ] Jason-1's ground tracks fall midway between those of Jason-2, which are about 315 km (196 mi) apart at the equator. This interleaved tandem mission provided twice the number of measurements of the ocean's surface, bringing smaller features such as ocean eddies into view. The tandem mission also helped pave the way for a future ocean altimeter mission that would collect much more detailed data with its single instrument than the two Jason satellites did together.

With OSTM/Jason-2, ocean altimetry made the transition from research into operational mode. Responsibility for collecting these measurements moved from the space agencies to the world's weather and climate forecasting agencies, which use them for short-range, seasonal, and long-range weather and climate forecasting.

[ 7 ] Science objectives [ edit ] Extend the time series of ocean surface topography measurements beyond TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 to accomplish two decades of observations Provide a minimum of three years of global ocean surface topography measurement Determine the variability of ocean circulation at decadal time scales from combined data record of TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 Improve the measure of the time-averaged ocean circulation Improve the measure of global sea-level change Improve open ocean tide models Ocean altimetry [ edit ] "Spaceborne radar altimeters have proven to be superb tools for mapping ocean-surface topography, the hills and valleys of the sea surface. These instruments send a microwave pulse to the ocean's surface and time how long it takes to return. A microwave radiometer corrects any delay that may be caused by water vapor in the atmosphere . Other corrections are also required to account for the influence of electrons in the ionosphere and the dry air mass of the atmosphere. Combining these data with the precise location of the spacecraft makes it possible to determine sea-surface height to within a few centimetres (about one inch). The strength and shape of the returning signal also provides information on wind speed and the height of ocean waves. These data are used in ocean models to calculate the speed and direction of ocean currents and the amount and location of heat stored in the ocean, which, in turn, reveals global climate variations ".

[ 8 ] Atomic clock synchronization [ edit ] Another payload aboard Jason-2 is the T2L2 (Time Transfer by Laser Link) instrument. T2L2 is used to synchronize atomic clocks at ground stations, and to calibrate the on-board clock of the Jason-2 DORIS instrument. On 6 November 2008, CNES reported the T2L2 instrument was working well.

[ 9 ] Joint effort [ edit ] Jason 2 just before launch OSTM/Jason-2 was a joint effort by four organizations.

[ 10 ] The mission participants were: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) France's Centre national d'études spatiales ( CNES ) European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) CNES provided the spacecraft, NASA and CNES jointly provided the payload instruments, and NASA's Launch Services Program at the Kennedy Space Center was responsible for the launch management and countdown operations. After completing the on-orbit commissioning of the spacecraft, CNES handed over operation and control of the spacecraft to NOAA in October 2008.

[ 11 ] CNES processed, distributed, and archived the research-quality data products that became available in 2009. EUMETSAT processed and distributed operational data received by its ground station to users in Europe and archived that data. NOAA processed and distributed operational data received by its ground stations to non-European users and archived that data along with the CNES data products. NOAA and EUMETSAT both generated near-real-time data products and distributed them to users.

NASA evaluated the performance of the following instruments: the Advanced Microwave Radiometer (AMR), the Global Positioning System payload, and the Laser Retroreflector Assembly (LRA). NASA and CNES also validated scientific data products together. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California , managed the mission for NASA's Science Mission Directorate in Washington, D.C.

Prior similar missions [ edit ] OSTM/Jason-2's predecessor TOPEX/Poseidon caught the largest El Niño in a century seen in this image from 1 December 1997.

The two previous altimetry missions, TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 , led to major advances in the science of physical oceanography and in climate studies.

[ 12 ] Their 15-year data record of ocean surface topography provided the first opportunity to observe and understand the global change of ocean circulation and sea level. Their results improved scientific understanding of the role of the ocean in climate change and improved weather and climate predictions. Data from these missions were used to improve ocean models, forecast hurricane intensity, and identify and track large ocean/atmosphere phenomena such as El Niño and La Niña . The data was also used in daily applications as diverse as routing ships, improving the safety and efficiency of offshore industry operations, managing fisheries and tracking marine mammals.

Some of the areas in which TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 have made major contributions, [ 13 ] and to which OSTM/Jason-2 continued to add, are: Ocean variability The missions revealed the surprising variability of the ocean, how much it changes from season to season, year to year, decade to decade and on even longer time scales. They ended the traditional notion of a quasi-steady, large-scale pattern of global ocean circulation by proving that the ocean is changing rapidly on all scales, from huge features such as El Nino and La Nina, which can cover the entire equatorial Pacific, to tiny eddies swirling off the large Gulf Stream in the Atlantic Ocean .

Sea level change Measurements by TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 show that mean sea level has been rising by about 3 mm (0.12 inches) a year since 1993. This is about twice the estimates from tide gauges for the previous century, indicating a possible recent acceleration in the rate of sea level rise. The data record from these altimetry missions has given scientists important insights into how global sea level is affected by natural climate variability, as well as by human activities.

Planetary waves TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 made clear the importance of planetary-scale waves , such as Rossby and Kelvin waves . Thousands of kilometres wide, these waves are driven by wind under the influence of Earth's rotation and are important mechanisms for transmitting climate signals across the large ocean basins. At high latitudes, they travel twice as fast as scientists believed previously, showing the ocean responds much more quickly to climate changes than was known before these missions.

Ocean tides The precise measurements of TOPEX/Poseidon's and Jason-1 have brought knowledge of ocean tides to an unprecedented level. The change of water level due to tidal motion in the deep ocean is known everywhere on the globe to within 2.5 centimetres (one inch). This new knowledge has revised notions about how tides dissipate. Instead of losing all their energy over shallow seas near the coasts, as previously believed, about one third of tidal energy is actually lost to the deep ocean . There, the energy is consumed by mixing water of different properties , a fundamental mechanism in the physics governing the general circulation of the ocean.

Ocean models TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason-1 observations provided the first global data for improving the performance of the numerical ocean models that are a key component of climate prediction models.

Data use and benefits [ edit ] Validated data products in support of improved weather, climate and ocean forecasts were distributed to the public within a few hours of observation. Beginning in 2009, other data products for climate research were made available a few days to a few weeks after observations were taken by the satellite. Altimetry data have a wide variety of uses from basic scientific research on climate to ship routing. Applications include: Climate research : altimetry data are incorporated into computer models to understand and predict changes in the distribution of heat in ocean, a key element of climate.

El Niño and La Niña forecasting: understanding the pattern and effects of climate cycles such as El Niño helps predict and mitigate the disastrous effects of floods and drought.

Tropical cyclone forecasting: altimeter data and satellite ocean wind data are incorporated into atmospheric models for hurricane season forecasting and individual storm severity.

Ship routing : maps of currents, eddies, and vector winds are used in commercial shipping and recreational yachting to optimize routes.

Offshore industries : cable-laying vessels and offshore oil operations require accurate knowledge of ocean circulation patterns, to minimize impacts from strong currents.

Marine mammal research: sperm whales , fur seals , and other marine mammals can be tracked, and therefore studied, around ocean eddies where nutrients and plankton are abundant.

Fisheries management : satellite data identify ocean eddies which bring an increase in organisms that comprise the marine food web , attracting fish and fishermen.

Coral reef research: remotely sensed data are used to monitor and assess coral reef ecosystems, which are sensitive to changes in ocean temperature.

Marine debris tracking: altimetry can help locate hazardous materials such as floating and partially submerged fishing nets , timber, and ship debris.

End of mission [ edit ] The OSTM/Jason-2 mission concluded on 1 October 2019, after NASA and its mission partners made the decision to decommission the spacecraft upon discovering significant recent deterioration of the spacecraft's power systems.

[ 14 ] The decommissioning of the satellite took some days; the final decommissioning activities on the satellite ended 9 October 2019, with the satellite rendered fully inactive.

[ 15 ] Because Jason-2 is orbiting at an altitude of over 1,300 km (810 mi), NASA estimates that it will remain in orbit for at least 500 to 1,000 years after decommissioning.

[ 15 ] Future [ edit ] The fourth spacecraft to be part of the Ocean Surface Topography Mission is Jason-3 . Like its predecessors, the primary instrument aboard Jason-3 is a radar altimeter . Additional instruments include: [ 16 ] A microwave radiometer DORIS (Doppler Orbitography and Radiopositioning Integrated by Satellite) A Laser Retroreflector Array (LRA) A Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver Jason-3 launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on board a SpaceX Falcon 9 v1.1 launch vehicle in 2016.

[ 17 ] The satellite was shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base on 18 June 2015, [ 18 ] and after delays due to a June 2015 Falcon 9 launch failure, the mission was launched 17 January 2016 at 18:42:18 UTC.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The technologies and data-sets pioneered by Jason-1, OSTM/Jason-2, and Jason-3, will be continued through the Sentinel-6 /Jason-CS satellites, planned for launch in 2020 and 2025.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal Jason-3 Remote sensing French space program References [ edit ] ^ "Ocean Surface Topography from Space" . NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Ocean Surface Topography from Space" . NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 31 May 2008.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Ocean Surface Topography from Space" . NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "NASA Launches Ocean Satellite to Keep a Weather, Climate Eye Open" . NASA. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 June 2008 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Jason-2 successfully launched" . EUMETSAT. Archived from the original on 16 November 2008.

^ "Tandem Mission Brings Ocean Currents into Sharper Focus" . NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "NOAA takes over Jason-2 satellite operations" . EUMETSAT. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011.

^ NASA, Press Kit (2008).

"Ocean Surface Topography Mission/ Jason 2 Launch, pg. 9" (PDF) .

nasa.gov . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 9 April 2020 .

^ "T2L2 ready to put Einstein's theory to the test" . CNES. 6 November 2008.

^ "(OSTM) - Jason 2 Overview" . NOAA. Archived from the original on 14 June 2007.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "New Oceanography Mission Data Now Available" . NASA/JPL. Archived from the original on 15 June 2021 . Retrieved 17 December 2008 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "OSTM/JASON-2 SCIENCE AND OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS" . EUMETSAT. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007.

^ "The Legacy of Topex/Poseidon and Jason 1, page 30. Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason 2 Launch Press Kit" (PDF) . NASA/JPL. June 2008.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b "Ocean-Monitoring Satellite Mission Ends After 11 Successful Years" (Press release). NASA. 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 October 2019 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ a b Foust, Jeff (10 October 2019).

"Decommissioned Earth science satellite to remain in orbit for centuries" .

SpaceNews . Retrieved 11 October 2019 .

^ "Jason-3 Missions Summary" Jet Propulsion Laboratory Retrieved 25 May 2014 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Jason-3 Quick Facts" National Environmental Satellite Data and Information Service Retrieved 11 June 2015 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Clark, Stephen (18 June 2015).

"Jason 3 satellite shipped to Vandenberg for SpaceX launch" .

spaceflightnow.com . Spaceflight Now . Retrieved 22 June 2015 .

^ @NOAASatellites (11 December 2015).

"Launch date for Jason-3 announced! Launch scheduled for January 17, 2016 at 10:42:18 PST" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ "Jason-3 January 17, 2016 Launch Date Announced" .

NOAA Satellite and Information Service . 8 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 January 2016 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

External links [ edit ] Wikinews has related news: Jason-2 satellite launched to measure sea levels Media related to Ocean Surface Topography Mission at Wikimedia Commons NASA/JPL: OSTM/Jason-2 Aviso: OSTM/Jason-2 Archived 22 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine Eumetsat: OSTM/Jason-2 NOAA: OSTM/Jason-2 University of Colorado Sea Level Change v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e ← 2007 Orbital launches in 2008 2009 → January Thuraya 3 TecSAR Ekspress AM-33 February Progress M-63 STS-122 ( Columbus ) Thor 5 Kizuna March Jules Verne ATV STS-123 ( Kibō ELM-PS , Dextre , Spacelab MD002 ) USA-200 AMC-14 USA-201 DirecTV-11 SAR-Lupe 4 April Soyuz TMA-12 ICO G1 C/NOFS Vinasat-1 , Star One C2 Tianlian I-01 GIOVE-B Cartosat-2A , Rubin-8 , AAUSat-2 , CanX-2 , CanX-6 , Compass-1 , CUTE-1.7 + APD II , Delfi-C3 , SEEDS-2 Amos-3 May Progress M-64 Galaxy 18 Kosmos 2437 , Kosmos 2438 , Kosmos 2439 , Yubileiny Fengyun 3A STS-124 ( Kibō PM ) June ChinaSat 9 Fermi Skynet 5C , Türksat 3A Orbcomm FM29 , Orbcomm FM37 , Orbcomm FM38 , Orbcomm FM39 , Orbcomm FM40 , Orbcomm FM41 OSTM/Jason-2 Kosmos 2440 July Badr-6 , ProtoStar 1 EchoStar XI SAR-Lupe 5 Kosmos 2441 August Trailblazer , NanoSail-D , PRESat , Explorers Superbird-C2 , AMC-21 Omid Inmarsat-4 F3 Tachys , Mati , Choma , Choros , Trochia September Huan Jing 1A , Huan Jing 1B GeoEye-1 Progress M-65 Nimiq-4 Galaxy 19 Kosmos 2442 , Kosmos 2243 , Kosmos 2444 Shenzhou 7 ( Banxing-1 ) Ratsat October THEOS Soyuz TMA-13 IBEX Chandrayaan-1 ( MIP ) Shijian 6E , Shijian 6F COSMO-3 Venesat-1 November Chuang Xin 1B , Shiyan Weixing 3 Astra 1M Kosmos 2445 STS-126 ( Leonardo MPLM , PSSC-1 ) Progress M-01M December Yaogan 4 Kosmos 2446 Yaogan 5 Hot Bird 9 , Eutelsat W2M Fengyun 2E Kosmos 2447 , Kosmos 2448 , Kosmos 2449 Launches are separated by dots ( • ), payloads by commas ( , ), multiple names for the same satellite by slashes ( / ).

Crewed flights are underlined. Launch failures are marked with the † sign. Payloads deployed from other spacecraft are (enclosed in parentheses).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=OSTM/Jason-2&oldid=1260730074 " Categories : NASA satellites orbiting Earth Spacecraft launched in 2008 Spacecraft launched by Delta II rockets Physical oceanography Earth satellite radar altimeters Spacecraft decommissioned in 2019 Jason satellite series Earth observation satellites of France CNES Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from November 2010 Use dmy dates from November 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 December 2024, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents OSTM/Jason-2 10 languages Add topic

