Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Boston Architectural Club (1889–1944) 1.2 Boston Architectural Center (1944–2006) 1.3 Boston Architectural College (2006–present) 2 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 2.1 Sustainable Design Institute 2.2 Landscape Institute 2.3 Continuing Education Program 2.4 Accreditation 3 Campus Toggle Campus subsection 3.1 320 and 322 Newbury Street 3.2 McCormick Gallery 4 Traditions 5 Notable people 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Boston Architectural College 4 languages Español Norsk bokmål اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′53″N 71°05′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.34792°N 71.08585°W ﻿ / 42.34792; -71.08585 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia College in Boston, Massachusetts Boston Architectural College Former names Boston Architectural Club (1889–1944) Boston Architectural Center (1944–2006) Type Private college Established December 11, 1889 ; 135 years ago ( 1889-12-11 ) (as the Boston Architectural Club) Accreditation NECHE Endowment $11.8 million (2019) [ 1 ] President Mahesh Daas Academic staff 300 educators and professional practitioners Students 700 degree students 300 continuing education students Location Boston ( Back Bay ) , Massachusetts , United States 42°20′53″N 71°05′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.34792°N 71.08585°W ﻿ / 42.34792; -71.08585 Campus Urban, non-residential, 175 acres (71 ha) Affiliations Professional Arts Consortium Website the-bac .edu The Boston Architectural College ( BAC ) is a private college in Boston . It is New England 's largest private college of spatial design . The college's main building is at 320 Newbury Street in Boston's Back Bay neighborhood.

History [ edit ] Boston Architectural Club (1889–1944) [ edit ] Boston Architectural Club was established on December 11, 1889. The certificate of incorporation explains that the club was formed "for the purpose of associating those interested in the profession of architecture with a view to mutual encouragement and help in studies, and acquiring and maintaining suitable premises, property, etc., necessary to a social club... and...for public lectures, exhibitions, classes, and entertainment." Members of the Club provided evening instruction for drafters employed in their offices. From this interchange, an informal atelier developed in the tradition of France's École des Beaux-Arts . The Club held annual public exhibitions and  published illustrated catalogs.

Bertrand E. Taylor was a charter member.

The BAC began its formal educational program under the joint leadership of Herbert Langford Warren and Clarence Blackall . The school was organized to offer an evening education in drawing, design, history, and structures. Like its informal predecessor, the BAC soon developed into an atelier affiliated with the Society of the École des Beaux-Arts in New York. The BAC's design curriculum, teaching methods, and philosophy closely resembled those of the École des Beaux-Arts .

In 1911, the club acquired a building at 16 Somerset Street on Beacon Hill . The BAC building contained a two-story Great Hall – designed by Ralph Adams Cram – as well as other spaces used for lectures, meetings and exhibitions, a library, and several studios. The newer facilities attracted more students, and the course of instruction became increasingly defined and formal.

In the 1930s most American schools of architecture broke away from the Beaux-Arts tradition and began to establish their own curricula and teaching methods. Without the support of a university structure, The Club struggled with the pains of growth and adjustment. The BAC appointed Arcangelo Cascieri to serve as dean. Cascieri brought the BAC through its philosophical transition without sacrificing the atelier teaching method. The BAC began to draw its faculty from nearby architectural schools and the extended local community of related professionals.

Boston Architectural Center (1944–2006) [ edit ] Main building, at 320 Newbury Street The Club reorganized in 1944 as the Boston Architectural Center , with the mission "to provide instruction in architecture and related fields for draftsmen and others interested in the practice of architecture or the allied arts, especially those whose employment might interfere with such education in day schools and universities." By 1965, the BAC had developed a continuing education program to serve the broader community. By the mid-1960s, the Somerset Street building no longer sufficed to serve the needs of the growing school, and the BAC purchased a brick building at 320 Newbury Street . A national design competition was held in 1964, and the winning entry, a Brutalist structure designed by Ashley, Myer & Associates, houses the BAC to this day.

Boston Architectural College (2006–present) [ edit ] On July 1, 2006, The Boston Architectural Center formally adopted the new name Boston Architectural College (BAC) to more readily identify as a college awarding accredited professional degrees in architecture and design.

In 2007, BAC acquired 951/955 Boylston Street , the former home of the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston , for $7.22 million.

[ 2 ] The 25,423-square-foot (2,361.9 m 2 ) complex houses studios on the second and third floors and a lecture hall on the ground level. The first floor contains flexible gallery and lecture space.

The former Back Bay Police Station Division 16 was built in 1887 and subsequently served as home to Boston's Institute of Contemporary Art. The building now includes student meeting spaces, studios, a lecture hall and a gallery. It also features, for the first time, a universally accessible entrance through the front doors of the building." [ 3 ] Academics [ edit ] The Boston Architectural College consists of four schools: School of Architecture, School of Interior Architecture, School of Landscape Architecture, and School of Design Studies. The college also offers classes through the Sustainable Design Institute (SDI) and the Continuing Education program.

Sustainable Design Institute [ edit ] The Sustainable Design Institute (SDI) offers a completely online program of graduate-level courses, developed with Building Green, conferring certificates in sustainable design . Many courses are accepted for AIA Sustainable Design/Health, Safety, Welfare Learning Continuing Education Units; many have been approved as part of the US Green Building Council 's Education Providers Program, and offer continuing education credits for LEED APs, and most are accepted by the Royal Institute of British Architects for Continuing Professional Development.

[ 4 ] Landscape Institute [ edit ] The Landscape Institute offers continuing education courses in landscape design , landscape design history, landscape preservation, and planting design and is the longest running program of its kind.

The Landscape Design Program was established through the Radcliffe Seminars in 1970. It was the result of positive feedback from a 1968 lecture at Radcliffe, The Intellectual History of Garden Art . The institute moved to Harvard University's Arnold Arboretum in 2002 and would later become a part of the BAC in 2009. Though now an institute of the BAC, the Landscape Institute curriculum still involves partnerships with the Arnold Arboretum in addition to partnerships with The Olmsted Center for Landscape Preservation, Historic New England , and the Wakefield Trust.

[ 5 ] Continuing Education Program [ edit ] The BAC offers a Continuing Education program. The college is also a registered AIA provider for Continuing Education.

Accreditation [ edit ] BAC is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education and the college's first-professional degrees are professionally accredited by the National Architectural Accrediting Board (NAAB), Council for Interior Design Accreditation (CIDA, formerly FIDER), and the Landscape Architectural Accreditation Board (LAAB). It is also a member of the ProArts Consortium.

Campus [ edit ] 951/955 Boylston Street ; the rightmost large doors house a Boston Fire Department station Facilities at the BAC are referred to by their addresses. The college purchased 951/955 Boylston Street , which was vacated by the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston , when it moved to the Boston waterfront in 2006. The college is planning major work on the 320/322 Newbury and 951/955 Boylston properties towards the goal of making both properties and the surrounding cityscape more sustainable by reducing rainwater runoff and powering the campus facilities with a geothermal well. The current plan also calls for improvements on the public alley between 320/322 Newbury and 951/955 Boylston.

320 and 322 Newbury Street [ edit ] 320 Newbury Street is a Brutalist building designed by the firm of Ashley, Myer & Associates in 1966 and renovated in 2000 by Silverman Trykowski Associates.

[ 6 ] The design intended for the building "... not to depend on a sense of weight to achieve importance but rather, through the energy of form, to evoke a sense of aliveness and contending." The design uses cantilevered, suspended masonry masses and accentuated vertical "slits" in the exterior by which some of the building's core functions can be seen from the outside. Open studio floors allow students to look in on one another's classes and studios, and the ground floor, open to Newbury Street , invites the general public into the McCormick Gallery.

The program for the new building originally had specified capacity for 200 students with 30 to 50 square feet (4.6 m 2 ) of space allocated to each student. Several floors were designed to be rented until the school required them. Growth of the student body, however, proceeded more rapidly than anticipated, and the number of students gradually increased to as many as 650 in 1974. The "extra floors" were never rented, and the expanding student body and staff needed to support them quickly placed demands on all existing space.

In 1987, to accommodate its growth, the BAC purchased the adjoining building at 322 Newbury Street, a former carriage house built in 1899. The interior of the carriage house was renovated into administrative office space.

The west elevation of the building is articulated with a mural by the artist Richard Haas , which was completed in 1975. The trompe-l'œil mural of a Classical-style building and dome provides a contrast to the Brutalist style of the building.

McCormick Gallery [ edit ] The BAC operates a gallery on the main level of its 320 Newbury Street building. The McCormick Gallery features student work as well as themed spatial design exhibits. The gallery is free and open to the public, and is prominently located at the corner of Newbury Street and Hereford.

[ 7 ] Traditions [ edit ] The Bee: The bee is somewhat of an informal mascot of the BAC, the roots of which can be traced to the "Cascieri Beehive", a nickname for a sculpture by Dean Arcangelo Cascieri titled Selfless Labor depicting bees working together in a beehive. It is featured on the BAC class ring, the medal awarded to Cascieri Lecturers, and has become the name of the BAC's weekly running club, the BAC Bees.

Notable people [ edit ] Walter Atherton , architect Maya Bird-Murphy , architectural designer and educator Arcangelo Cascieri , sculptor Charles L. Fletcher , architect and interior designer; owner of Charles Fletcher Design Glenn Gissler , interior designer and president of Glenn Gissler Design, Inc Wallace Harrison , architect William Sutherland Maxwell , architect, Hands of the Cause in the Baháʼí Faith Louis Skidmore , co-founder of SOM Edward Durell Stone , architect Stewart Wurtz , studio furniture maker References [ edit ] ^ As of June 30, 2019.

"U.S. and Canadian 2019 NTSE Participating Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2019 Endowment Market Value, and Percentage Change in Market Value from FY18 to FY19 (Revised)" . National Association of College and University Business Officers and TIAA.

Archived from the original on June 7, 2020 . Retrieved September 13, 2020 .

^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ "BAC Opens 951 Boylston Street" . The-bac.edu.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2014 .

^ [2] Archived April 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ [3] Archived August 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ [4] [ dead link ] ^ "McCormick Gallery" . Boston Architectural College.

Archived from the original on July 9, 2024.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School v t e ProArts Consortium Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Arts Academy Boston Conservatory Emerson College Massachusetts College of Art and Design School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boston_Architectural_College&oldid=1297967198 " Categories : Boston Architectural College Architecture of Boston Architecture schools in Massachusetts Back Bay, Boston Cultural history of Boston Design schools in the United States Landscape architecture schools Modernist architecture in Massachusetts Universities and colleges in Boston Private universities and colleges in Massachusetts 1889 establishments in Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1889 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2013 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Pages using infobox university with the affiliations parameter Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 17:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boston Architectural College 4 languages Add topic

