Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Phylogeny 2 Lines of evidence Toggle Lines of evidence subsection 2.1 Fossils 2.2 Host plants 3 Date of origin 4 Drivers of speciation 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Evolution of butterflies 5 languages العربية فارسی Français Português کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Origin and diversification of butterflies through geologic time This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Butterfly evolution is the origin and diversification of butterflies through geologic time and over a large portion of the Earth's surface. The earliest known butterfly fossils are from the mid Eocene epoch, between 40-50 million years ago.

[ 1 ] [ dubious – discuss ] Their development is closely linked to the evolution of flowering plants, since both adult butterflies and caterpillars feed on flowering plants. Of the 220,000 species of Lepidoptera , about 45,000 species are butterflies, which probably evolved from moths. Butterflies are found throughout the world, except in Antarctica, and are especially numerous in the tropics; they fall into eight different families.

Phylogeny [ edit ] The butterflies form the clade Rhopalocera , which is composed of three superfamilies: Hedyloidea (the moth butterfly family Hedylidae ), the Hesperioidea (the skipper family Hesperiidae ), and the Papilionoidea (the true butterfly families Papilionidae , Pieridae , Nymphalidae , Lycaenidae , and Riodinidae ). All of these families are monophyletic . The Hedyloidea is the sister group to the other two superfamilies. Within the Papilionoidea, Papilionidae is the sister group to the other families, and Pieridae is the sister group to (Nymphalidae+(Lycaenidae+Riodinidae)). Phylogenetic hypotheses within the Nymphalidae are still under discussion. Current research is concentrated on subfamilial and tribal relationships, especially in the Nymphalidae.

Rhopalocera Hedylidae (position uncertain) Hesperioidea Hesperiidae Papilionoidea Papilionidae Pieridae Nymphalidae Lycaenidae Riodinidae Phylogenetic relationships of butterfly families [ 2 ] Lines of evidence [ edit ] The modern study of butterflies' higher classification began with Ehrlich's phenetic use of hundreds of previously overlooked morphological characters in tabular form, across families and major groups.

[ 3 ] Scoble (1995) [ 4 ] and others continued the search for new characters, but with their application to cladism . Larval characters are now commonly integrated with those from adult butterflies. The addition of molecular data has allowed researchers to resolve clades in many lineages.

Evidence is gleaned from paleontology where some 50 butterfly fossils have been identified, from morphology and the study of homologies , from molecular genetics and comparative biochemistry , from comparative ethology , and from present-day geographical distributions and ecology.

Even though butterflies are among the most studied insects, new findings are coming to light almost every month, and the prospect of a stable butterfly classification based on strongly supported clades is seemingly within reach.

[ citation needed ] Fossils [ edit ] Butterfly fossils have been well covered by Grimaldi & Engel (2005), [ 5 ] who point out their weakness in resolving the sister group of the Rhopalocera: butterflies of 45 Mya are much like their living counterparts. The first fossil was formed around 40-50 million years ago.

Host plants [ edit ] Some species in the Satyrinae use ferns as larval host plants, and it is not impossible that the butterflies could have originated before their present-day angiosperm plant hosts. Evidence from the historical diversification of fifteen butterfly groups that show an increase in the diversification rates that follow major host shifts.

[ 6 ] Date of origin [ edit ] Some researchers theorize that butterflies most likely originated in the Cretaceous period when the continents were arrayed differently from their present positions and with climates unlike those of today. That is when the major angiosperm radiation took place. Thus, butterfly evolution must be studied throughout the elaboration and testing of phylogenetic hypotheses and through historical zoogeography . Researchers who accept a Cretaceous origin for the butterflies generally favor vicariant zoogeographic hypothesis for how the major lineages of butterflies came to be distributed over the world, whereas those who favor a Tertiary age rely on dispersalist hypotheses (Lamas, 2008).

Drivers of speciation [ edit ] Mimicry , hybridization , and co-evolution with host plants have probably contributed to speciation in the butterflies (Lamas, 2008).

References [ edit ] ^ Hall, J.P.W., Robbins, R.K. and Harvey, D.J. (2004). "Extinction and biogeography in the Caribbean: new evidence from a fossil riodinid butterfly in Dominican amber." Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B , 271 : 797–801.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2004.2691 PMID 15255097 ^ Lamas, Gerardo. 2008.

^ Ehrlich, P.R. (1958). "The comparative morphology, phylogeny and higher classification of the butterflies (Lepidoptera: Papilionidea)".

Kansas University Science Bull.

: 305– 370.

^ Scoble, Malcom J. (1995).

The Lepidoptera, form, function and diversity . London: Natural History Museum.

ISBN 9780198549529 .

^ Grimaldi, David; Engel, Michael S. (2005).

Evolution of the insects .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521821490 .

^ Fordyce, James A. (2010-07-07).

"Host shifts and evolutionary radiations of butterflies" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

277 (1701): 3735– 3743.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2010.0211 .

PMC 2992698 .

PMID 20610430 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lamas, G. (2008) Systematics of butterflies (Lepidoptera: Hesperioidea and Papilionoidea) in the world: current state and future perspectives (in Spanish). In: Jorge Llorente-Bousquets and Analía Lanteri (eds.) Contribuciones taxonómicas en ordens de insectos hiperdiversos . Mexico City: UNAM. pp. 57–70.

Col, Jeananda. (1999) Enchanted Learning - All About Butterflies http://www.enchantedlearning.com/subjects/butterfly/allabout/ v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolution_of_butterflies&oldid=1299339317 " Categories : Butterflies Evolution of insects Lepidoptera biology Evolutionary biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from February 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 20:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolution of butterflies 5 languages Add topic

