Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and goals Toggle Definition and goals subsection 1.1 Controversy and revisionism 2 Sentences Toggle Sentences subsection 2.1 Statistics 3 Origin 4 Medieval Inquisitions Toggle Medieval Inquisitions subsection 4.1 Inquisitions in Medieval Italy 4.2 Inquisitions in Medieval France 4.3 Inquisitions in Medieval Germany 4.4 Inquisition in Hungary and the Balkans 4.5 Inquisitions in the Czech lands and Poland 4.6 Inquisition in Medieval Spain 5 Early modern European history Toggle Early modern European history subsection 5.1 Spanish Inquisition 5.1.1 Inquisition in the Spanish overseas empire 5.2 Portuguese Inquisition 5.2.1 Inquisition in the Portuguese overseas empire 5.2.1.1 Goa Inquisition 5.2.1.2 Brazilian Inquisition 5.3 Roman Inquisition 5.4 In France 5.5 Witch-hunts 6 Manuals for Inquisitors Toggle Manuals for Inquisitors subsection 6.1 Malleus Maleficarum 7 Inquisition Proceedings Toggle Inquisition Proceedings subsection 7.1 Denunciations 7.2 Methods of torture used 7.2.1 Fake instruments of torture 7.3 Trials 7.4 Punishments 8 Legitimation by the texts 9 Opposition and resistance Toggle Opposition and resistance subsection 9.1 Assassinations 9.2 Clergy opposition 10 Ending of the Inquisition in the 19th and 20th centuries 11 Current position of the Catholic Church 12 See also Toggle See also subsection 12.1 Documents and works 12.2 Notable inquisitors 12.3 Notable cases 12.4 Repentance 13 References 14 Bibliography 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Inquisition 90 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia System of tribunals enforcing Catholic orthodoxy This article is about the Inquisition within the Catholic Church. For other uses, see Inquisition (disambiguation) .

A 19th-century depiction of Galileo Galilei before the Holy Office, by Joseph-Nicolas Robert-Fleury The Inquisition was a Catholic judicial procedure where the ecclesiastical judges could initiate, investigate and try cases in their jurisdiction. Popularly it became the name for various medieval and reformation -era state-organized tribunals whose aim was to combat heresy , apostasy , blasphemy , witchcraft , and customs considered to be deviant , using this procedure.

Violence , isolation, torture or the threat of its application, have been used by the Inquisition to extract confessions and denunciations. 
Inquisitions with the aim of combatting religious sedition (e.g.

apostasy or heresy ) had their start in the 12th-century Kingdom of France , particularly among the Cathars and the Waldensians . The inquisitorial courts from this time until the mid-15th century are together known as the Medieval Inquisition . Other banned groups investigated by medieval inquisitions, which primarily took place in France and Italy , include the Spiritual Franciscans , the Hussites , and the Beguines . Beginning in the 1250s, inquisitors were generally chosen from members of the Dominican Order , replacing the earlier practice of using local clergy as judges.

[ 1 ] Inquisitions also expanded to other European countries, [ 2 ] resulting in the Spanish Inquisition and the Portuguese Inquisition . The Spanish and Portuguese inquisitions often focused on the New Christians or Conversos (the former Jews who converted to Christianity to avoid antisemitic regulations and persecution), the Marranos (people who were forced to abandon Judaism against their will by violence and threats of expulsion), and on the Moriscos ( Muslims who had been forced to convert to Catholicism ), as a result of suspicions that they had secretly maintained or reverted to their previous religions, as well as the fear of possible rebellions, as had occurred in previous times (such as the First and Second Morisco Rebellions ).

Spain and Portugal also operated inquisitorial courts not only in Europe , but also throughout their empires: the Goa Inquisition , the Peruvian Inquisition , and the Mexican Inquisition , among others.

[ 3 ] Inquisitions conducted in the Papal States were known as the Roman Inquisition .

The scope of the inquisitions grew significantly in response to the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation . In 1542, a putative governing institution, the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was created. With the exception of the Papal States, ecclessiastical inquisition courts were abolished in the early 19th century, after the Napoleonic Wars in Europe and the Spanish American wars of independence in the Americas. The papal institution survived as part of the Roman Curia , although it underwent a series of name and focus changes, now part of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith .

Definition and goals [ edit ] Tribunal at the Inquisitor's Palace in Birgu , Malta . Eymeric's  manual recommends that the accused be seated on a backless low bench.

[ 4 ] Further information: Medieval Inquisition Further information: Inquisitorial system § History Today, the English term "Inquisition" is popularly applied to any one of the regional tribunals or later national institutions that worked against heretics or other offenders against the canon law of the Catholic Church . Although the term "Inquisition" is usually applied to ecclesiastical courts of the Catholic Church, in the Middle Ages it properly referred to an organized judicial process.

The term "Inquisition" comes from the Medieval Latin word inquisitio , which described a court process based on Roman law , which came back into use during the Late Middle Ages .

[ 5 ] It was a new, less arbitrary form of trial that replaced the denunciatio and accussatio process [ 6 ] which required a denouncer or used an adversarial process, the most unjust being trial by ordeal and the secular Germanic trial by combat .

Henry A. Kelly concludes that inquisition was "a brilliant and much-needed innovation in trial procedure, instituted by the greatest lawyer-pope of the Middle Ages" and that later "abusive practices" should be identified as a perversion of the original inquisitorial process.

[ 6 ] Theoretically, the Inquisition, as a church court, had no jurisdiction over Muslims and Jews as such. Despite several exceptions, like the infamous example of the Holy Child of La Guardia [ 7 ] the Inquisition was concerned mainly with the heretical behaviour of Catholic adherents or converts (including forced converts).

[ 8 ] Inquisitors 'were called such because they applied a judicial technique known as inquisitio , which could be translated as "inquiry" or "inquest". "In this process, which was already widely used by secular rulers ( Henry II used it extensively in England in the 12th century), an official inquirer called for information on a specific subject from anyone who felt he or she had something to offer." [ 9 ] "The Inquisition" usually refers to specific regional tribunals authorized to concern themselves with the heretical behaviour of Catholic adherents or converts (including forced converts).

[ 8 ] As with sedition inquisitions, heresy inquisitions were supposed to use the standard inquisition procedures: these included that the defendant must be informed of the charges, has a right to a lawyer, and a right of appeal (to the Pope.) The inquisitor could only start a heresy proceeding if there was some broad public opinion of the "infamy" of the defendant (rather than a formal denunciation or accusation) to prevent fishing, or charging for private opinions. However, such inquisitions could proceed with minimal distraction by lawyers, the identity of witnesses was protected, tainted witness were allowed, and once found guilty of heresy there was no right to a lawyer.

[ 6 ] However, many inquisitors did not follow these rules scrupulously, notably from the late 1300s: many inquisitors had theological not legal training.

[ 6 ] : 448 Controversy and revisionism [ edit ] Main article: Historical revision of the Inquisition The opening of Spanish and Roman archives over the last 50 years has caused some historians to revise their understanding of the Inquisition, some to the extent of viewing previous views as "a body of legends and myths".

[ 10 ] It has also been suggested that some instruments of torture, like "the pear of anguish," were not invented until the 16th century or later.

[ 11 ] Some of these revisions from scholars may be due to their own subjective religion, the historic erasure of crimes committed by the church, or erasure of minority lives and voices.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Many of the sources that discredit or undermine the torture are written by practicing Catholics. One example is Reverend Brian Van Hove, S.J., who suggests that the inquisition is overblown in popular imagination. Van Hove writes "...secular historians now tend to speak of how fair the system actually was. They observe how many people were released because of technicalities in the law which withstood whim and abuse. They note how many opportunities the accused persons had to avoid further prosecution." [ 14 ] However, this perspective fails to address that the majority of inquisitions led to torture, mass excommunications, and burnings which incited fear and submission in the general population, creating lasting effects on Europe.

[ 15 ] The majority of historical scholars continue to see the inquisition as an example of extremist religious leaders enforcing order and rooting out paganism through false accusations and inordinate violence.

[ 16 ] Sentences [ edit ] When a suspect was convicted of  "wilful, unrepentant" heresy, canon law required the inquisitorial tribunal to hand the person over to secular authorities for final sentencing. A secular magistrate, the "secular arm", would then determine the penalty based on local law.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Those local laws included proscriptions against certain religious crimes, and the punishments included death by burning in regions where the secular law equated persistent heresy with sedition. Thus the inquisitors generally knew the expected fate of anyone so remanded.

[ 19 ] The "secular arm" didn't have access to the trial record of the defendants, only declared and executed the sentences and was obliged to do so on pain of heresy and excommunication.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] While the notational purpose of the trial itself was for the salvation of the individual soul, allegedly by persuasion, according to the 1578 edition of the Directorium Inquisitorum (a standard manual for inquisitions) the penalties themselves were preventative not retributive, thought to spread an example by terror: " ... quoniam punitio non refertur primo & per se in correctionem & bonum eius qui punitur, sed in bonum publicum ut alij terreantur, & a malis committendis avocentur (translation: "... for punishment does not take place primarily and per se for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the evils they would commit").

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Statistics [ edit ] Beginning in the 19th century, historians have gradually compiled statistics drawn from the surviving court records, from which estimates have been calculated by adjusting the recorded number of convictions by the average rate of document loss for each time period.

Gustav Henningsen and Jaime Contreras studied the records of the Spanish Inquisition, which list 44,674 cases of which 826 resulted in executions in person and 778 in effigy (i.e. a straw dummy was burned in place of the person).

[ 24 ] William Monter estimated there were 1000 executions in Spain between 1530–1630 and 250 between 1630 and 1730.

[ 25 ] Jean-Pierre Dedieu studied the records of Toledo's tribunal, which put 12,000 people on trial.

[ 26 ] For the period prior to 1530, Henry Kamen estimated there were about 2,000 executions in all of Spain's tribunals.

[ 27 ] Origin [ edit ] Before the 12th century, the Catholic Church suppressed what they believed to be heresy , usually through a system of ecclesiastical proscription or imprisonment, but without using torture, [ 28 ] and seldom resorting to executions.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Such punishments were opposed by a number of clergymen and theologians, although some countries punished heresy with the death penalty .

[ 31 ] [ 2 ] Pope Siricius , Ambrose of Milan , and Martin of Tours protested against the execution of Priscillian , largely as an undue interference in ecclesiastical discipline by a civil tribunal. Though widely viewed as a heretic, Priscillian was executed as a sorcerer. Ambrose refused to give any recognition to Ithacius of Ossonuba, "not wishing to have anything to do with bishops who had sent heretics to their death".

[ 32 ] In the 12th century, to counter the spread of Catharism , and other heresies, prosecution of heretics became more frequent. The Church charged councils composed of bishops and archbishops with establishing inquisitions (the Episcopal Inquisition ). Pope Lucius III issued the bull Ad Abolendam (1184), which condemned heresy as contumacy toward ecclesiastical authority.

[ 33 ] The bull Vergentis in Senium in 1199 stipulated that heresy would be considered, in terms of punishment, equal to treason ( Lèse-majesté ) , and the punishment would be imposed also on the descendants of the condemned.

[ 34 ] The first Inquisition was temporarily established in Languedoc (south of France) in 1184. The murder of Pope Innocent III's papal legate Pierre de Castelnau by Cathars in 1208 sparked the Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229). The Inquisition was permanently established in 1229 ( Council of Toulouse ), run largely by the Dominicans [ 35 ] in Rome and later at Carcassonne in Languedoc.

In 1252, the Papal Bull Ad extirpanda , following another assassination by Cathars, charged the head of state with funding and selecting inquisitors from monastic orders; this caused friction by establishing a competitive court to the Bishop's courts.

Medieval Inquisitions [ edit ] Main articles: Medieval Inquisition and Ad extirpanda Historians use the term "Medieval Inquisition" to describe the various inquisitions that started around 1184, including the Episcopal Inquisitions (1184–1230s) and later the Papal Inquisitions (1230s). These inquisitions responded to large popular movements throughout Europe considered apostate or heretical to Christianity , in particular the Cathars in southern France and the Waldensians in both southern France and northern Italy. Other inquisitions followed after these first inquisition movements. The legal basis for some inquisitorial activity came from Pope Innocent IV 's papal bull Ad extirpanda of 1252, which authorized the use of tortures in certain circumstances by inquisitors for eliciting confessions and denunciations from heretics.

[ 36 ] By 1256 Alexander IV's Ut negotium allowed the inquisitors to absolve each other if they used instruments of torture.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] In the 13th century, Pope Gregory IX (reigned 1227–1241) assigned the duty of carrying out inquisitions to the Dominican Order and Franciscan Order . By the end of the Middle Ages, England and Castile were the only large western nations without a papal inquisition. Most inquisitors were friars who taught theology and/or law in the universities. They used inquisitorial procedures , a common legal practice adapted from the earlier Ancient Roman court procedures.

[ 5 ] They judged heresy along with bishops and groups of "assessors" (clergy serving in a role that was roughly analogous to a jury or legal advisers), using the local authorities to establish a tribunal and to prosecute heretics. After 1200, a Grand Inquisitor headed but did not control each regional Inquisition. Grand Inquisitions persisted until the mid 19th century.

[ 39 ] Inquisitions in Medieval Italy [ edit ] Not to be confused with Roman Inquisition .

Only fragmentary data is available for the period before the Roman Inquisition of 1542. In 1276, some 170 Cathars were captured in Sirmione , who were then imprisoned in Verona , and there, after a two-year trial, on 13 February from 1278, more than a hundred of them were burned.

[ 40 ] In Orvieto , at the end of 1268/1269, 85 heretics were sentenced, none of whom were executed, but in 18 cases the sentence concerned people who had already died.

[ 41 ] In Tuscany , the inquisitor Ruggiero burned at least 11 people in about a year (1244/1245).

[ 42 ] Excluding the executions of the heretics at Sirmione in 1278, 36 Inquisition executions are documented in the March of Treviso between 1260 and 1308.

[ 43 ] Ten people were executed in Bologna between 1291 and 1310.

[ 44 ] In Piedmont , 22 heretics (mainly Waldensians ) were burned in the years 1312–1395 out of 213 convicted.

[ 44 ] 22 Waldensians were burned in Cuneo around 1440 and another five in the Marquisate of Saluzzo in 1510.

[ 45 ] There are also fragmentary records of a good number of executions of people suspected of witchcraft in northern Italy in the 15th and early 16th centuries.

[ 46 ] Wolfgang Behringer estimates that there could have been as many as two thousand executions.

[ 47 ] This large number of witches executed was probably because some inquisitors took the view that the crime of witchcraft was exceptional, which meant that the usual rules for heresy trials did not apply to its perpetrators. Many alleged witches were executed even though they were first tried and pleaded guilty, which under normal rules would have meant only canonical sanctions, not death sentences.

[ 48 ] The episcopal inquisition was also active in suppressing alleged witches: in 1518, judges delegated by the Bishop of Brescia , Paolo Zane, sent some 70 witches from Val Camonica to the stake.

[ 49 ] Inquisitions in Medieval France [ edit ] Main article: French Inquisition The Albigensian massacre (chronicle of Saint-Denis, 14th century, London, British Library) The Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229) a crusade proclaimed by the Catholic Church against heresy, mainly Catharism , with many thousands of victims (men, women and children, some of them Catholics), had already paved the way for the later Inquisition.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] France has the best preserved archives of medieval inquisitions (13th–14th centuries), although they are still very incomplete. The activity of the inquisition in this country was very diverse, both in terms of time and territory. In the first period (1233 to c. 1330), the courts of Languedoc ( Toulouse , Carcassonne ) are the most active. After 1330 the center of the persecution of heretics shifted to the Alpine regions , while in Languedoc they ceased almost entirely. In northern France, the activity of the inquisitors was irregular throughout this period and, except for the first few years, it was not very intense.

[ 52 ] France's first Dominican inquisitor, Robert le Bougre [ fr ] , working in the years 1233–1244, earned a particularly grim reputation. In 1236, Robert burned about 50 people in the area of Champagne and Flanders, and on 13 May 1239, in Montwimer, he burned 183 Cathars.

[ 53 ] Following Robert's removal from office, Inquisition activity in northern France remained very low. One of the largest trials in the area took place in 1459–1460 at Arras ; 34 people were then accused of witchcraft and Satanism, 12 of them were burned at the stake.

[ 54 ] The main center of the medieval inquisition was undoubtedly the Languedoc. The first inquisitors were appointed there in 1233, but due to strong resistance from local communities in the early years, most sentences concerned dead heretics, whose bodies were exhumed and burned. Actual executions occurred sporadically and, until the fall of the fortress of Montsegur (1244), probably accounted for no more than 1% of all sentences.

[ 55 ] In addition to the cremation of the remains of the dead, a large percentage were also sentences in absentia and penances imposed on heretics who voluntarily confessed their faults (for example, in the years 1241–1242 the inquisitor Pierre Ceila reconciled 724 heretics with the Church).

[ 56 ] Inquisitor Ferrier of Catalonia, investigating Montauban between 1242 and 1244, questioned about 800 people, of whom he sentenced 6 to death and 20 to prison.

[ 57 ] Between 1243 and 1245, Bernard de Caux handed down 25 sentences of imprisonment and confiscation of property in Agen and Cahors.

[ 58 ] After the fall of Montsegur and the seizure of power in Toulouse by Count Alfonso de Poitiers , the percentage of death sentences increased to around 7% and remained at this level until the end of the Languedoc Inquisition around from 1330.

[ 59 ] Between 1245 and 1246, the inquisitor Bernard de Caux carried out a large-scale investigation in the area of Lauragais and Lavaur . He covered 39 villages, and probably all the adult inhabitants (5,471 people) were questioned, of whom 207 were found guilty of heresy. Of these 207, no one was sentenced to death, 23 were sentenced to prison and 184 to penance.

[ 60 ] Between 1246 and 1248, the inquisitors Bernard de Caux and Jean de Saint-Pierre handed down 192 sentences in Toulouse, of which 43 were sentences in absentia and 149 were prison sentences.

[ 61 ] In Pamiers in 1246/1247 there were 7 prison sentences [201] and in Limoux in the county of Foix 156 people were sentenced to carry crosses.

[ 62 ] Between 1249 and 1257, in Toulouse, the inquisitors handed down 306 sentences, without counting the penitential sentences imposed during "times of grace". 21 people were sentenced to death, 239 to prison, in addition, 30 people were sentenced in absentia and 11 posthumously; In another five cases the type of sanction is unknown, but since they all involve repeat offenders, only prison or burning at stake.

[ 63 ] Between 1237 and 1279, at least 507 convictions were passed in Toulouse (most in absentia or posthumously) resulting in the confiscation of property; in Albi between 1240 and 1252 there were 60 sentences of this type.

[ 64 ] The activities of Bernard Gui, inquisitor of Toulouse from 1307 to 1323, are better documented, as a complete record of his trials has been preserved. During the entire period of his inquisitorial activity, he handed down 633 sentences against 602 people (31 repeat offenders), including: 41 death sentences, 40 convictions of fugitive heretics (in absentia), 20 sentences against people who died before the end of the trial (3 of them Bernardo considered unrepentant, and his remains were burned at the stake), 69 exhumation orders for the remains of dead heretics (66 of whom were subsequently burned), 308 prison sentences, with confiscation of  property, 136 orders to carry crosses, 18 mandates to make a pilgrimage (17) or participate in a crusade (1), in one case, sentencing was postponed.

In addition, Bernard Gui issued 274 more sentences involving the mitigation of sentences already served to convicted heretics; in 139 cases he exchanged prison for carrying crosses, and in 135 cases, carrying crosses for pilgrimage. To the full statistics, there are 22 orders to demolish houses used by heretics as meeting places and one condemnation and burning of Jewish writings (including commentaries on the Torah).

[ 65 ] The episcopal inquisition was also active in Languedoc. In the years 1232–1234, the Bishop of Toulouse, Raymond, sentenced several dozen Cathars to death. In turn, Bishop Jacques Fournier of Pamiers (he was  later Pope Benedict XII) in the years 1318–1325 conducted an investigation against 89 people, of whom 64 were found guilty and 5 were sentenced to death.

[ 66 ] After 1330, the center of activity of the French inquisitions moved east, to the Alpine regions, where there were numerous Waldensian communities. The repression against them was not continuous and was very ineffective. Data on sentences issued by inquisitors are fragmentary. In 1348, 12 Waldensians were burned in Embrun , and in 1353/1354 as many as 168 received penances.

[ 67 ] In general, however, few Waldensians fell into the hands of the inquisitors, for they took refuge in hard-to-reach mountainous regions, where they formed close-knit communities. Inquisitors operating in this region, in order to be able to conduct trials, often had to resort to the armed assistance of local secular authorities (e.g. military expeditions in 1338–1339 and 1366). In the years 1375–1393 (with some breaks), the Dauphiné was the scene of the activities of the inquisitor Francois Borel, who gained an extremely gloomy reputation among the locals. It is known that on 1 July 1380, he pronounced death sentences in absentia against 169 people, including 108 from the Valpute valley, 32 from Argentiere and 29 from Freyssiniere. It is not known how many of them were actually carried out, only six people captured in 1382 are confirmed to be executed.

[ 68 ] In the 15th and 16th centuries, major trials took place only sporadically, e.g. against the Waldensians in Delphinate in 1430–1432 (no numerical data) and 1532–1533 (7 executed out of about 150 tried) or the aforementioned trial in Arras 1459–1460 . In the 16th century, the jurisdiction of the inquisitors in the kingdom of France was effectively limited to clergymen, while local parliaments took over the jurisdiction of the laity. Between 1500 and 1560, 62 people were burned for heresy in the Languedoc, all of whom were convicted by the Parliament of Toulouse.

[ 69 ] Inquisitions in Medieval Germany [ edit ] Main article: German Inquisition The Rhineland and Thuringia in the years 1231–1233 were the field of activity of the notorious inquisitor Konrad of Marburg. Unfortunately, the documentation of his trials has not been preserved, making it impossible to determine the number of his victims. The chronicles only mention "many" heretics that he burned. The only concrete information is about the burning of four people in Erfurt in May 1232.

[ 70 ] After the murder of Konrad of Marburg, burning at the stake in Germany was virtually unknown for the next 80 years. It was not until the early fourteenth century that stronger measures were taken against heretics, largely at the initiative of bishops. In the years 1311–1315, numerous trials were held against the Waldensians in Austria, resulting in the burning of at least 39 people, according to incomplete records.

[ 71 ] In 1336, in Angermünde , in the diocese of Brandenburg, another 14 heretics were burned.

[ 72 ] The number of those convicted by the papal inquisitors was smaller.

[ 73 ] Walter Kerlinger burned 10 begards in Erfurt and Nordhausen in 1368–1369. In turn, Eylard Schöneveld burned a total of four people in various Baltic cities in 1402–1403.

[ 74 ] In the last decade of the 14th century, episcopal inquisitors carried out large-scale operations against heretics in eastern Germany, Pomerania, Austria, and Hungary. In Pomerania, of 443 sentenced in the years 1392–1394 by the inquisitor Peter Zwicker, the provincial of the Celestinians, none went to the stake, because they all submitted to the Church. Bloodier were the trials of the Waldensians in Austria in 1397, where more than a hundred Waldensians were burned at the stake. However, it seems that in these trials the death sentences represented only a small percentage of all the sentences, because according to the account of one of the inquisitors involved in these repressions, the number of heretics reconciled with the Church from Thuringia to Hungary amounted to about 2,000.

[ 75 ] In 1414, the inquisitor Heinrich von Schöneveld arrested 84 flagellants in Sangerhausen , of whom he burned 3 leaders, and imposed penitential sentences on the rest. However, since this sect was associated with the peasant revolts in Thuringia from 1412, after the departure of the inquisitor, the local authorities organized a mass hunt for flagellants and, regardless of their previous verdicts, sent at least 168 to the stake (possibly up to 300) people.

[ 76 ] Inquisitor Friedrich Müller (d. 1460) sentenced to death 12 of the 13 heretics he had tried in 1446 at Nordhausen. In 1453 the same inquisitor burned 2 heretics in Göttingen .

[ 77 ] Inquisitor Heinrich Kramer , author of the Malleus Maleficarum , in his own words, sentenced 48 people to the stake in five years (1481–1486).

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Jacob Hoogstraten, inquisitor of Cologne from 1508 to 1527, sentenced four people to be burned at the stake.

[ 80 ] A notable former inquisitor, Jesuit Friedrich Spee , published a book Cautio Criminalis (1631) which helped end witch-hunting and the reliance on torture, highly regarded in Catholic and Protestant circles.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Inquisition in Hungary and the Balkans [ edit ] Very little is known about the activities of inquisitors in Hungary and the countries under its influence (Bosnia, Croatia), as there are few sources about this activity.

[ 83 ] Numerous conversions and executions of Bosnian Cathars are known to have taken place around 1239/40, and in 1268 the Dominican inquisitor Andrew reconciled many heretics with the Church in the town of Skradin, but precise figures are unknown.

[ 84 ] The border areas with Bohemia and Austria were under major inquisitorial action against the Waldensians in the early 15th century. In addition, in the years 1436–1440 in the Kingdom of Hungary, the Franciscan Jacobo de la Marcha acted as an inquisitor... his mission was mixed, preaching and inquisitorial. The correspondence preserved between James, his collaborators, the Hungarian bishops and Pope Eugene IV shows that he reconciled up to 25,000 people with the Church. This correspondence also shows that he punished recalcitrant heretics with death, and in 1437 numerous executions were carried out in the diocese of Sirmium, although the number of those executed is also unknown.

[ 85 ] Inquisitions in the Czech lands and Poland [ edit ] Main article: Inquisition in the Czech lands In Bohemia and Poland, the inquisition was established permanently in 1318, although anti-heretical repressions were carried out as early as 1315 in the episcopal inquisition, when more than 50 Waldensians were burned in various Silesian cities.

[ 86 ] The fragmentary surviving protocols of the investigations carried out by the Prague inquisitor Gallus de Neuhaus in the years 1335 to around 1353 mention 14 heretics burned out of almost 300 interrogated, but it is estimated that the actual number executed could have been even more than 200, and the entire process was covered to varying degrees by some 4,400 people.

[ 87 ] In the lands belonging to the Kingdom of Poland little is known of the activities of the Inquisition until the appearance of the Hussite heresy in the 15th century. Polish courts of the inquisition in the fight against this heresy issued at least 8 death sentences for some 200 trials carried out.

[ 88 ] There are 558 court cases finished with conviction researched in Poland from the 15th to 18th centuries.

[ 89 ] Inquisition in Medieval Spain [ edit ] Portugal and Spain in the late Middle Ages consisted largely of multicultural territories of Muslim and Jewish influence, reconquered from Islamic control , and the new Christian authorities could not assume that all their subjects would suddenly become and remain orthodox Catholics. So the Inquisition in Iberia , in the lands of the Reconquista counties and kingdoms like León , Castile , and Aragon , had a special socio-political basis as well as more fundamental religious motives.

[ 90 ] In some parts of Spain towards the end of the 14th century, there was a wave of violent anti-Judaism , encouraged by the preaching of Ferrand Martínez , Archdeacon of Écija . In the pogroms of June 1391 in Seville , hundreds of Jews were killed, and the synagogue was completely destroyed. The number of people killed was also high in other cities, such as Córdoba , Valencia , and Barcelona.

[ 91 ] One of the consequences of these pogroms was the mass conversion of thousands of surviving Jews. Forced baptism was contrary to the law of the Catholic Church, and theoretically anybody who had been forcibly baptized could legally return to Judaism. However, this was very narrowly interpreted. Legal definitions of the time theoretically acknowledged that a forced baptism was not a valid sacrament, but confined this to cases where it was literally administered by physical force. A person who had consented to baptism under threat of death or serious injury was still regarded as a voluntary convert, and accordingly forbidden to revert to Judaism.

[ 92 ] After the public violence, many of the converted "felt it safer to remain in their new religion".

[ 93 ] Thus, after 1391, a new social group appeared and were referred to as conversos or New Christians .

Emblem of the Spanish Inquisition (1571). The olive branch symbolizes grace and the sword symbolizes punishment.  The inscription in Latin means: "Arise, Lord, and judge your cause" Early modern European history [ edit ] Waldensians flying on a broom,  in a manuscript by Martin Le France (1451) With the sharpening of debate and of conflict between the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Counter-Reformation , Protestant societies came to see/use the Inquisition as a terrifying " other ", [ 94 ] while staunch Catholics regarded the Holy Office as a necessary bulwark against the spread of reprehensible heresies. Since the beginning of the most serious heretic groups, like the Cathars or the Waldensians , they were soon accused of the most fantastic  behavior, like having wild sexual orgies, eating babies, copulating with demons, worshipping the Devil.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Spanish Inquisition [ edit ] Main articles: Spanish Inquisition and Tomás de Torquemada Pedro Berruguete , Saint Dominic Guzmán presiding over an Auto da fe (c. 1495).

[ 99 ] (Portuguese for "Act of Faith").

[ 90 ] King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella I of Castile established the Spanish Inquisition in 1478 to be overseen by 14 local Tribunals. In contrast to the previous inquisitions, it operated completely under royal Christian authority, though staffed by clergy and orders, and independently of the Holy See . It operated first in Spain, then in Portugal, and eventually in most Spanish colonies and territories, which included the Canary Islands , the Kingdom of Sicily , and all Spanish possessions in North, Central, and South America.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] It primarily focused upon forced converts from Islam ( Moriscos , conversos , and "secret Moors") and from Judaism ( conversos , Crypto-Jews , and Marranos )—both groups which continued to reside in Spain and who came under suspicion of either continuing to adhere to their old religion or of having fallen back into it.

Under the Alhambra Decree of 1492, all Jews who had not converted were expelled from Spain in 1492 .

Tomás de Torquemada was chosen to be the first Grand Inquisitor , to oversee the Inquisition; and it is estimated that up to 2,000 Jews were burned at the stake during the reign of Queen Isabella.(See Jewish Encyclopedia ).

All Muslims were ordered to convert in different stages starting in 1507 and culminating in 1614, when Muslims who had previously converted were now expelled .

[ 102 ] Those who converted or simply remained after the relevant edict became nominally and legally Catholics, and thus subject to the Inquisition.

Inquisition in the Spanish overseas empire [ edit ] See also: Mexican Inquisition and Peruvian Inquisition In 1569, King Philip II of Spain set up three tribunals in the Americas (each formally titled Tribunal del Santo Oficio de la Inquisición ): one in Mexico , one in Cartagena de Indias (in modern-day Colombia), and one in Peru . The Mexican office administered Mexico (central and southeastern Mexico), Nueva Galicia (northern and western Mexico), the Audiencias of Guatemala (Guatemala, Chiapas, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica), and the Spanish East Indies . The Peruvian Inquisition , based in Lima, administered all the Spanish territories in South America and Panama .

[ 103 ] The Spanish Inquisition was formerly ended by proclamation on July 15, 1834 , by Maria Cristina de Bourbon, then queen regent of Spain, also known as Maria Cristina of Naples and Sicily .

Portuguese Inquisition [ edit ] Main article: Portuguese Inquisition A copper engraving from 1685: "Die Inquisition in Portugall" The Portuguese Inquisition formally started in Portugal in 1536 at the request of King João III .

Manuel I had asked Pope Leo X for the installation of the Inquisition in 1515, but only after his death in 1521 did Pope Paul III acquiesce. At its head stood a Grande Inquisidor , or General Inquisitor, named by the Pope but selected by the Crown, and always from within the royal family.

[ citation needed ] Jews who fled Spain and the Spanish Inquisition now found themselves subject to the Inquisition in Portugal. The Portuguese Inquisition principally focused upon the Jews from Spain, the Sephardi Jews , who had fled or whom the state had forced to convert to Christianity.

The Portuguese Inquisition held its first auto-da-fé in 1540. The Portuguese inquisitors mostly focused upon the Jewish New Christians (i.e.

conversos or marranos ). The Portuguese Inquisition expanded its scope of operations from Portugal to its colonial possessions, including Brazil, Cape Verde , and Goa . In the colonies, it continued as a religious court, investigating and trying cases of breaches of the tenets of orthodox Catholicism until 1821. King João III (reigned 1521–57) extended the activity of the courts to cover censorship , divination , witchcraft , and bigamy . Originally oriented for a religious action, the Inquisition exerted an influence over almost every aspect of Portuguese society: political, cultural, and social.

According to Henry Charles Lea , between 1540 and 1794, tribunals in Lisbon , Porto , Coimbra , and Évora resulted in the burning of 1,175 persons, the burning of another 633 in effigy, and the penancing of 29,590.

[ 104 ] But documentation of 15 out of 689 autos-da-fé has disappeared, so these numbers may slightly understate the activity.

[ 105 ] Inquisition in the Portuguese overseas empire [ edit ] Goa Inquisition [ edit ] See also: Goa Inquisition The Goa Inquisition began in 1560 at the order of John III of Portugal . It had originally been requested in a letter in the 1540s by Jesuit priest Francis Xavier , because of the New Christians who had arrived in Goa and then reverted to Judaism . The Goa Inquisition also focused upon Catholic converts from Hinduism or Islam who were thought to have returned to their original ways. In addition, this inquisition prosecuted non-converts who broke prohibitions against the public observance of Hindu or Muslim rites or interfered with Portuguese attempts to convert non-Christians to Catholicism.

[ 106 ] Aleixo Dias Falcão and Francisco Marques set it up in the palace of the Sabaio Adil Khan.

Brazilian Inquisition [ edit ] The inquisition was active in colonial Brazil . The religious mystic and formerly enslaved prostitute, Rosa Egipcíaca was arrested, interrogated and imprisoned, both in the colony and in Lisbon. Egipcíaca was the first black woman in Brazil to write a book – this work detailed her visions and was entitled Sagrada Teologia do Amor Divino das Almas Peregrinas .

[ 107 ] Roman Inquisition [ edit ] Main article: Roman Inquisition With the Protestant Reformation , Catholic authorities became much more ready to suspect heresy in any new ideas, [ 108 ] including those of Renaissance humanism , [ 109 ] previously strongly supported by many at the top of the Church hierarchy. The extirpation of heretics became a much broader and more complex enterprise, complicated by the politics of territorial Protestant powers, especially in northern Europe. The Catholic Church could no longer exercise direct influence in the politics and justice-systems of lands that officially adopted Protestantism. Thus war (the French Wars of Religion , the Thirty Years' War ), massacre (the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre ) and the missional [ 110 ] and propaganda work (by the Sacra congregatio de propaganda fide ) [ 111 ] of the catholic Counter-Reformation came to play larger roles in these circumstances, and the Roman law type of a "judicial" approach to heresy represented by the Inquisition became less important overall. In 1542 Pope Paul III established the Congregation of the Holy Office of the Inquisition as a permanent congregation staffed with cardinals and other officials. It had the tasks of maintaining and defending the integrity of the faith and of examining and proscribing errors and false doctrines; it thus became the supervisory body of local Inquisitions.

[ 112 ] A famous case tried by the Roman Inquisition was that of Galileo Galilei in 1633 .

The penances and sentences for those who confessed or were found guilty were pronounced together in a public ceremony at the end of all the processes. This was the sermo generalis or auto-da-fé .

[ 113 ] Penances (not matters for the civil authorities) might consist of pilgrimages, a public scourging, a fine, or the wearing of a cross. The wearing of two tongues of red or other brightly colored cloth, sewn onto an outer garment in an "X" pattern, marked those who were under investigation. The penalties in serious cases were confiscation of property by the Inquisition or imprisonment. This led to the possibility of false charges to enable confiscation being made against those over a certain income, particularly rich marranos . Following the French invasion of 1798 , the new authorities sent 3,000 chests containing over 100,000 Inquisition documents to France from Rome.

[ citation needed ] In France [ edit ] Between 1657 and 1659, twenty-two alleged witches were burned on the orders of the inquisitor Pierre Symard in the province of Franche-Comté, then part of the Empire.

[ 114 ] The inquisitorial tribunal in papally-ruled Avignon, established in 1541, passed 855 death sentences, almost all of them (818) in the years 1566–1574, but the vast majority of them were pronounced in absentia.

[ 115 ] Witch-hunts [ edit ] See also: Witch trials in the early modern period The fierce denunciation and persecution of supposed sorceresses that characterized the cruel witchhunts of a later age were not generally found in the first thirteen hundred years of the Christian era.

[ 116 ] While belief in witchcraft , and persecutions directed at or excused by it, were widespread in pre-Christian Europe, and reflected in old Germanic law , the growing influence of the Church in the early medieval era in pagan areas resulted in the revocation of these laws in many places, bringing an end to the traditional witch hunts.

[ 117 ] Throughout the medieval era, mainstream Christian teaching had disputed the existence of witches and denied any power to witchcraft, condemning it as pagan superstition.

[ 118 ] Black magic practitioners were generally dealt with through confession, repentance, and charitable work assigned as penance.

[ 119 ] In 1258, Pope Alexander IV ruled that inquisitors should limit their involvement to those cases in which there was some clear presumption of heretical belief [ 120 ] but slowly this vision changed.

[ 121 ] The prosecution of witchcraft generally became more prominent in the late medieval and Renaissance era, perhaps driven partly by the upheavals of the era – the Black Death , the Hundred Years War , and a gradual cooling of the climate that modern scientists call the Little Ice Age (between about the 15th and 19th centuries). Witches were sometimes blamed.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Since the years of most intense witch-hunting largely coincide with the age of the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation , some historians point to the influence of the Reformation on the European witch-hunt. However, witch-hunting began almost one hundred years before Luther 's  ninety-five theses.

[ 124 ] Manuals for Inquisitors [ edit ] Over the centuries that it lasted, several procedure manuals for inquisitors were produced for dealing with different types of heresy. The primordial text was Pope Innocent IV's bull, Ad Extirpanda , from 1252, which in its thirty-eight laws details in detail what must be done and authorizes the use of torture.

[ 125 ] Of the various manuals produced later, some stand out: by Nicholas Eymerich, Directorium Inquisitorum, written in 1376; by  Bernardo Gui, Practica inquisitionis heretice pravitatis, written between 1319 and 1323. Witches were not forgotten: the book Malleus Maleficarum ("the witches' hammer"), written in 1486, by Heinrich Kramer, deals with the subject.

[ 126 ] In Portugal, several "Regimentos" (four) were written for the use of the inquisitors, the first in 1552 at the behest of the inquisitor Cardinal D. Henrique and the last in 1774, this sponsored by the Marquis of Pombal , himself a familiar [ 127 ] of the inquisition. The Portuguese 1640 Regiment determined that each court of the Holy Office should have a Bible, a compendium of canon and civil law, Eymerich's Directorium Inquisitorum, and Diego de Simancas ' Catholicis institutionibus .

[ 126 ] In 1484, Spanish inquisitor Torquemada,  based in Nicholas Eymerich's Directorium Inquisitorum , wrote his twenty eight articles code, Compilación de las instrucciones del oficio de la Santa Inquisición (i.e. Compilation of the instructions of the office of the Holy Inquisitio n).

Later additions would be made, based on experience, many by the canonist Francisco Peña.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Malleus Maleficarum [ edit ] Main article: Malleus Maleficarum Dominican priest Heinrich Kramer was assistant to the Archbishop of Salzburg, a sensational preacher, and an appointed local inquisitor.  Historian Malcolm Gaskill calls Kramer a "superstitious psychopath".

[ 130 ] In 1484 Kramer requested that Pope Innocent VIII clarify his authority to conduct inquisitions into witchcraft throughout Germany , where he had been refused assistance by the local ecclesiastical authorities. They maintained that Kramer could not legally function in their areas.

[ 131 ] Despite some support [ 132 ] from Pope Innocent VIII , [ 133 ] he was expelled from the city of Innsbruck by the local bishop, George Golzer, who ordered Kramer to stop making false accusations.

Golzer described Kramer as senile in letters written shortly after the incident. This rebuke led Kramer to write a justification of his views on witchcraft in his 1486 book Malleus Maleficarum ("Hammer against witches").

[ 116 ] The book distinguishes itself from other demonologies by its obsessive hate of women and sex, seemingly reflecting the twisted psyche of the author.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] Historian Brian Levack calls it "scholastic pornography".

[ 135 ] Despite Kramer's claim that the book gained acceptance from the clergy at the University of Cologne , it was in fact condemned by the clergy at Cologne for advocating views that violated Catholic doctrine and standard inquisitorial procedure. In 1538 the Spanish Inquisition cautioned its members not to believe everything the Malleus said.

[ 136 ] Despite this, Heinrich Kramer was never excommunicated and even enjoyed considerable prestige till his death.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] Inquisition Proceedings [ edit ] Denunciations [ edit ] The usual procedure began with the visitation by the inquisitors in a chosen location. The so-called heretics were then asked to be present and denounce themselves and others;  it was not enough to denounce himself as a heretic.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Many confessed alleged heresies for fear that a friend or neighbor might do so later.  The terror of the Inquisition provoked chain reactions and denunciations [ 141 ] even of spouses, children and friends.

[ 142 ] If they confessed within a "grace period" — usually 30 days — they could be accepted back into the church without punishment.  In general, the benefits proposed by the "edicts of grace" to those who presented themselves spontaneously were the forgiveness of the death penalty or life imprisonment and the forgiveness of the penalty of confiscation of property.

[ 143 ] Anyone suspected of knowing about another's heresy and who did not make the obligatory denunciation would be excommunicated and then subject to prosecution as a "promoter of heresy." [ 144 ] If the denouncer named other potential heretics, they would also be summoned. All types of complaints were accepted by the Inquisition, regardless of the reputation or position of the complainant. Rumors, mere suppositions, and even anonymous letters were accepted, "if the case were of such a nature that such action seemed appropriate to the service of God and the good of the Faith".

[ 145 ] It was foreseen that prison guards themselves could report and be witnesses against the accused.

[ 146 ] This strategy transformed everyone into an Inquisition agent, reminding them that a simple word or deed could bring them before the tribunal. Denunciation was elevated to the status of a superior religious duty, filling the nation with spies and making every individual suspicious of his neighbor, family members, and any strangers he might met.

[ 147 ] Methods of torture used [ edit ] The primary method of torture was psychological: solitary confinement and indefinite incarceration.

The real prevalence of torture is ignored. Some defend that victims were interrogated under physical torture only in extreme cases. The view of historian Ron E. Hassner is that  'inquisitors knew that information obtained through torture often was not reliable. [So] They built their cases patiently, gathering information from a variety of sources, using a variety of methods. With any given subject, they used torture only intermittently, in sessions sometimes months apart. Their main goal was not to compel a confession or a profession of faith, but to extract factual information that would confirm or corroborate information already in hand.' [ 148 ] The summary of the Directorium Inquisitorum , by Nicolás Aymerich , made by Marchena, notes a comment by the Aragonese inquisitor: Quaestiones sunt fallaces et inefficaces ("The interrogations are misleading and useless").

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] In spite of this, Eymerich strongly recommends the use of torture and describes in detail the rules to be followed in order to recommend its use, which he considers very praiseworthy.

[ 151 ] Defendants were punished if found guilty, with their property being confiscated to cover legal and prison costs and to maintain the heavy machinery of persecution. The victims could also repent of their accusation and receive reconciliation with the Church. The execution of the tortures was attended by the inquisitor, the doctor, the secretary and the torturer, applying them on the nearly naked prisoner. In the year 1252, the bull Ad extirpanda allowed torture, but always with a doctor involved to avoid endangering life, and limited its use to non-bloody methods that did not break bones: [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Strappado Rack, or potro Water cure Strappado : the victim was lifted to the ceiling with his arms tied behind his back, and then dropped violently, but without touching the ground. This usually meant the dislocation of the victim's arms.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Rack or potro : the prisoner was tied to a frame and the executioner pressed, but stopping before or if the meat was pierced or blood flowed. In another version, the victim was stretched on a sort of table, usually with serious impact in later life.

[ 156 ] [ 155 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] Many inquisitors believed the rack was not allowed.

[ 6 ] Water cure , now known as water boarding : the prisoner was tied, a cloth was inserted through his mouth down to his throat, and one liter jugs of water were poured in to his mouth. The victim had the sensation of drowning, and the stomach swelled until near bursting.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] According to Catholic apologists, the method of torture (which was socially accepted in the context of the time) was adopted only in exceptional cases, and the inquisitorial procedure was meticulously regulated in interrogation practices.

[ 162 ] Torture could not endanger the subject's life.

[ 162 ] However, at times torture was allowed when guilt was "half proven" or even not proven, or there existed a "presumption of guilt", or confession was considered incomplete, as stated in Article XV of Torquemada's instruciones and in Eymerich's directions or Portuguese Regimentos.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] Torture could not cause the subject to lose a limb.

[ 162 ] However, at time the defendant was informed that if he died, broke any limbs or lose consciousness during torment, it would be his fault, and not theirs, the inquisitors, because with "such impudence" he put himself in danger of life and health.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Torture could only be applied once, and only if the subject appeared to be lying.

[ 162 ] However, in practice torture was repeated or "continued".

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] The Portuguese instructions ( Regimentos ) stipulate that defendants may not appear at autos de fé showing marks of torture, so did not recommend using torture other than potro in the previous fortnight.

[ 172 ] [ 166 ] It is clear that after the proceedings the tortured were left in a sorry state.  Some  perished as a result.

[ 173 ] Despite the loss of thousands of documents over the years, many of the meticulous records of torture sessions have survived.

[ 167 ] Fake instruments of torture [ edit ] Despite what is popularly believed, the cases in which torture was used during the inquisitorial processes were rare, since it was considered (according to some authors) to be ineffective in obtaining evidence .

[ 174 ] [ 162 ] Before torture, some inquisitors may have displayed  the  instruments mainly on the purpose of intimidation of the accused, so  he  could understand what to expect. If he wished to avoid punishment, he should only  confess his faults.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 167 ] In the words of historian Helen Mary Carrel : "the common view of the medieval justice system as cruel and based on torture and execution is often unfair and inaccurate." [ 177 ] As the historian Nigel Townson wrote: "The sinister torture chambers equipped with cogwheels, bone crushing contraptions, shackles, and other terrifying mechanisms only existed in the imagination of their detractors." [ 178 ] In fact, it seems likely that the inquisitors favoured simpler and "cleaner" methods, which left few apparent marks. Aymerich points out that canon law does not prescribe either this or that particular torture, so judges can use whatever they see fit, as long as it's not an unusual torture. Many types of torments have been chosen, but Eymerich think they seem more like the inventions of executioners than the works of theologians. "It is true that it is a very praiseworthy practice to subject the accused to torture, but no less reprehensible are those bloodthirsty judges who base their vain glory on the invention of crude and exquisite torments" – he adds.

[ 179 ] Also, Rafael Sabatini notes that the available records do not show these uncommon inventions. It seems that the inquisitors  must have been satisfied with the  devices already in use, or a limited number of the most efficient.

[ 180 ] Probably falsified instruments of torture of the inquisition, of which there is no evidence of their use in inquisitorial processes. The most blatant case is the Iron Maiden; there are no records of its use.

Many torture instruments were designed by late 18th and early 19th century pranksters, entertainers, and con artists who wanted to profit from people's morbid interest in the Dark Age myth by charging them to witness such instruments in Victorian-era circuses.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] However, several torture instruments are accurately described in Foxe's Book of Martyrs , including but not limited to the dry pan.

[ 183 ] Some of the instruments that "the Inquisition" never used, but that are erroneously registered in various inquisition museums: [ 184 ] The troublemaker's flute: [ 185 ] Created in the 17th century. Its first mention comes from the years 1680–90 of the Republic of Venice used against deserters from the war between the Ottoman Empire and the Republic of Venice .

[ citation needed ] Head crusher : Created in the 14th century. Its first mention comes from 1340 in Germany . It was not used by the Inquisition but by the German courts against the enemies of some prince-electors .

Judas's cradle: Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450 to 1480 in France. Used by the parlement and not by the Inquisition, it was abolished in 1430.

[ citation needed ] The Spanish donkey : Created in the 16th century. The name connects the instrument to the Spanish Inquisition , although it was only used in certain regions, which were not primarily Spain nor as part of the Inquisition, but by Central European civil authorities (most notably Reformed Germany and the Bohemian Crown ), New France , the Netherlands Antilles , the British Empire , and the United States . It is unclear exactly who invented this device, and it is likely that it was ascribed to Spain as "Black Legend" propaganda .

The Spanish tickle: Created in 2005 as a false rumor on Wikipedia.

[ 181 ] The Thumbscrew : Created in the 16th century.

[ 186 ] It was used for the persecution of Catholics by William Cecil in England during the reign of Elizabeth I . It was not used by the Inquisition, but by the English courts against dissidents to the Protestant Reformation , [ citation needed ] later also for the torture of slaves .

[ 187 ] The saw : Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450 to 1470. Used by the Hungarian court against Muslims in the context of the war between the Ottoman Empire , the Byzantine Empire and the Kingdom of Hungary .

[ 188 ] Pear of anguish : Created in the fifteenth century. Its first mention comes from 1450. Used by the French parlement and not by the Inquisition, it was abolished in 1430.

[ 189 ] The historian Chris Bishop came to postulate that it could have actually been a sock stretcher, since it has been proven that it was too weak to open into a body orifice.

[ 190 ] The Spanish Boot : Created in the 14th century. Its first mentions come from Scotland with the buskin. Used by the authorities in England to persecute Catholics in Ireland . Later the civil authorities of France and Venice would use it, but not by the Spanish Inquisition.

The "Cloak of Infamy". Created in the 17th century. It was first mentioned by Johann Philipp Siebenkees in 1790, and was used by the Nuremberg parliament (Protestant) against thieves and prostitutes.

[ citation needed ] The Iron Maiden . The use of iron maidens in judicial proceedings or executions is doubted.

[ 191 ] Several replicas of the Iron Maiden existed, and the one of Nuremberg Castle  was destroyed in 1944 as a result of bombing during  World War II. It was probably based on the 17th century Cloak of Infamy.

[ 192 ] The Breast ripper . Created at the end of the 16th century. The first reference dates back to Bavaria (Germany) in 1599 and presumably it would have been used in France and Holy Roman Empire by civil authorities and not by the Inquisition. However, there are no reliable first-hand historical sources on the use of the devices, so, like the Iron Maiden, there is a possibility that the devices shown in the images are fakes of a later manufacture (such as from the 17th century) or assembled from small fragments that may have been parts of another device. Most likely, it was often mentioned to frighten and force the accused to confess, rather than such dubiously existent torture being inflicted on them.

[ 193 ] The Stocks . Created in the Middle Ages and used by the civil authorities of London , not the Inquisition, in order to publicly shame criminals, but not physically harm them or take life.

The bronze bull . Created in the Ancient Age and never used in medieval Europe, much less in the Inquisition. In fact, there is a chance that it never existed at all and was just a popular legend of Greco-Latin culture.

The Scold's bridle . Created in the 16th century. It was never legalized and was only used unofficially by some civilians in Scotland and England, not by the Inquisition.

The dungeon of rats . Created in the 16th century, its main reference is from John Lothrop Motley about some anecdotes of torture against the "papists" during the Dutch war of independence . It is also said that Catholics who resisted the Church of England under Elizabeth I were tortured in the Tower of London .

[ 194 ] Used by some Protestant governments and not by the Inquisition.

[ 195 ] Heretic's Fork, Boots , Cat's Paw, and Iron Cage. Created in the 15th–16th century. Used by the French parlement and not by the Inquisition.

[ citation needed ] Trials [ edit ] The Inquisition's trials were secret [ 196 ] and there was no possibility of appealing the decisions.

[ 197 ] The defendant was pressured to confess to the "crimes" assigned to him. The Inquisitors kept the accusations made and evidence they possessed hidden, to achieve a confession without announcing the accusation.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] The main goal was to make the defendant confess. When a lawyer was assigned to him, he was an employee of the Inquisition and worked for it, not in the defense of the accused.

[ 199 ] Each court had its own staff (lawyers, prosecutors, notaries, etc.) and prison. The guards who served the inquisition spied the accused in their cells; if they refused to eat for example, this could be considered a fast, a Jewish custom.

[ 200 ] In many cases, it was common for false accusations to be made against New Christians and it was difficult to prove their innocence. It was therefore more convenient for many to make a false confession to the inquisitors, including a list of imaginary accomplices, in the hope that they would not receive extreme penalties, such as the death penalty, but only the confiscation of property or lesser penalties.

[ 201 ] There was no trial in the modern sense of the term, but an interrogation; the prisoner was usually not told about the reasons for his arrest — often for months or years. There was no precise accusation and therefore little chance of a plausible defence. The prisoner was advised "to search his conscience, confess the truth, and trust to the mercy of the tribunal'".

[ 202 ] Eventually, the prisoner was informed of the charges against him — but omitting the names of the witnesses.

[ 203 ] [ 202 ] After the interrogations, hearings and waiting periods came to an end, the sentence could be pronounced.

Walter Ullmann , a historian, summarises his evaluation of the trials: "There is hardly one item in the whole Inquisitorial procedure that could be squared with the demands of justice; on the contrary, every one of its items is the denial of justice or a hideous caricature of it [...] its principles are the very denial of the demands made by the most primitive concepts of natural justice [...] This kind of proceeding has no longer any semblance to a judicial trial but is rather its systematic and methodical perversion." [ 204 ] Portuguese author A. José Saraiva points out the analogy of the trials with the absurdity of the Kafka's novel The Trial or the show trials of Stalin's era.

[ 205 ] Punishments [ edit ] The Inquisition's sentences could be simple penances, for example  private devotions, or heavy punishments. One of the Inquisition's punishments was the forced wearing of distinctive clothing or signs  such as the sambenito , sometimes for an entire life.

[ 19 ] Other punishments were exile, compulsory pilgrimages , fines, the galleys , life imprisonment (in fact prison for some years) and in addition the confiscation of goods and property.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] The bull Ad Extirpanda determined that the houses of heretics should be completely razed to the ground.

[ 208 ] Furthermore, the impact of the Inquisition's activity on the fabric of society was not limited to these penances or punishments. As under the terror of the Inquisition entire families denounced each other,  they were soon reduced to misery,  completed  by the confiscation of property, public humiliation and ostracism .

[ 209 ] [ 207 ] Even dead people could be accused, and sentenced up to forty years after the death. When inquisitors considered proven that the deceased were heretics in their lifetime, their corpses were exhumed and burned, their property confiscated and the heirs disinherited.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Legitimation by the texts [ edit ] The Inquisition always referred to biblical passages, as well as to church fathers , like Augustine of Hippo, to legitimise his actuation.

The New Testament contains some sentences that the church could interpret for dealing with heretics. The excommunication of a deviant from the faith was equivalent to handing him over to the Devil: "When you have gathered together, and my spirit with you, in the power of our Lord Jesus, hand this man over to Satan for destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord."  (The Pauline letters: 1 Corinthians, B. Incest in Corinth, 5:4 and 5:5) [ 212 ] The sentence of Paul could also be understood in this way: he handed over to the Devil those "who have suffered shipwreck in the faith [...] so that they may be  taught not to be blasphemous." (The Pastoral epistles: 1 Timothy – The first letter from Paul to Timothy—Timothy's responsibility: 1:19 and 1:20) [ 212 ] Paul's view reflects less the idea of punishment than the idea of isolation when he says: " After a first and second warning have nothing to do with a disputatious person, since you may be sure that such a person is warped and is self-condemned as a sinner." (The Pastoral epistles : Titus – The letter from Paul to Titus—3:10 and 3:11) [ 212 ] In the Gospel of John, Jesus tells the apostates in a parable: "I am the vine, you are the branches. Whoever remains in me, and I in that person, bears fruit in plenty; for apart from me you can do nothing. Anyone who does not remain in me is thrown away like a branch and withers. These branches are collected, thrown on the fire and burnt." This parable can be interpreted as the burning of stubborn heretics at the stake. (The Gospel according to John: The true vine—15:5 and 15:6) [ 212 ] The celebrated theologian Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) supplied the theoretical foundation for the medieval Inquisition in his Summa theologica II 2. 11. A heretic who repents, the first time, should be allowed penance and their life safeguarded by the church from the punishment of the secular authorities (who treated pernicious and public heresy as a kind of sedition.) A subsequent lapse into heresy would show insincerity that called for excommunication, leaving them to the secular authorities who could impose the death penalty on unprotected heretics: " Accipere fidem est voluntatis, sed tenere fidem iam acceptam est  necessitatis" (i.e. "The acceptance of faith is voluntary, maintaining the accepted faith is necessary. So heretics should be compelled to keep the faith.") [ 213 ] [ 214 ] Luis de Páramo , theologian  and Inquisitor of then Spanish-ruled Sicily from 1584 to 1605, asserted that Jesus Christ was "the first Inquisitor under the Evangelical law" and  that John the Baptist and the apostles were also inquisitors.

[ 215 ] However, another traditional stream of Catholic thought, for example championed by Erasmus , was that the Parable of the wheat and tares forbade any premature culling of heretics.

Saint Augustine (354–430)  led a debate in Africa with the Donatist community, which had split from the Roman Church. In his works, he called for moderate severity or measures by secular power,  including the death penalty,  against heretics, however he did not consider it desirable: "Corrigi eos volumus, non necari, nec disciplinam circa eos negligi volumus, nec suppliciis quibus digni sunt exerci" , meaning "We would like them to be improved, not killed; we desire the triumph of church discipline, not the death they deserve." [ 216 ] Opposition and resistance [ edit ] In many regions and times, there was opposition to the Inquisition.

Assassinations [ edit ] In some cases, heretics and other targets did not hesitate to attempt to murder the inquisitors, or destroy its voluminous archives, because they had much to lose in the face of an inquisitorial investigation: their freedom, their property, their lives.

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] [ 220 ] Monument to the Waldensians burned by Petrus Zwicker,  in Steyr , Austria The much hated Inquisitor Konrad von Marburg , who also initiated inquisition trials against nobles, was murdered in 1233 by six mounted men on an open country road on the way to Marburg .

In 1242, a Cathar group armed with axes entered the castle of the town of Avignonet (southern France) and murdered the inquisitors Guillaume Arnaud and Étienne de Saint-Thibéry .

[ 221 ] In 1252, the inquisitor Peter of Verona was killed by Cathars. Eleven months after his assassination, he was made a Catholic saint, the quickest canonization in history. As Christine Caldwell Ames writes, "Inquisition changed what it meant to be a martyr, to be holy, and to be an imitator of Christ." [ 222 ] In 1395 near Steyr , where the inquisitor Petrus Zwicker was quartered with associates, an assassination attempt on him failed: someone had tried to set fire to the place and burn him alive.

[ 223 ] Clergy opposition [ edit ] Opposition to Inquisition power and abuses sometimes came from within the clergy: including friars, priests and bishops.

During French Inquisition, a Franciscan friar, Bernard Délicieux , opposed the actions of the Inquisition in Languedoc . The infamous Bernard Gui presented him as the commander-in-chief  of the "iniquitous army" against the Dominicans and the Inquisition. Délicieux alleged the Inquisitiors were pursuing innocent Catholics for heresy, trying to destroy their towns.

[ 224 ] He stated that the methods of the inquisition would have condemned even Peter and Paul as heretics if they  appeared before the inquisitors. Délicieux later became one more victim of the Inquisition for his criticism.  In 1317, Pope John XXII called him and other Franciscan Spirituals to Avignon, and he was arrested, questioned, and tortured by the Inquisition. In 1319, he was found guilty and sentenced to life in prison.

[ 225 ] Fragile and old, he died shortly thereafter.

[ 226 ] In Spain, several bishops contended with inquisitorial tribunals. In 1532, the Archbishop of Toledo Alonso III Fonseca had to ransom converso Juan de Vergara ( Cisneros ' Latin secretary) from Spanish inquisitors. Fonseca had previously rescued Ignatius of Loyola from them.

[ 227 ] : 80 Far from being a monolithic institution, sometimes the tribunals threatened individuals protected by the Inquisitor-General, such as with the Inquisitor General Alonso Manrique de Lara and Erasmus .

In Portugal, Father António Vieira (1608–1697), himself a Jesuit, philosopher, writer and orator, was one of the most important opponents of the Inquisition. Arrested by the Inquisition for "heretical, reckless, ill-sounding and scandalous propositions" in October 1665, was  imprisoned until December 1667.

[ 228 ] Under the Inquisitorial sentence, he was forbidden to teach, write or preach.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] Only perhaps Vieira's prestige, his intelligence and his support among members of the royal family saved him from greater consequences.

[ 231 ] Father Vieira led an anti-inquisition movement in Rome, where he spent six years.

[ 232 ] In addition to his humanitarian objections, he also had others: he realised that a mercantile middle class was being attacked that would be sorely missed in the country's economic development.

[ 233 ] He is believed to have been the author of the anonymous writing Notícias Recônditas do Modo de Proceder a Inquisição de Portugal com os seus Presos ,  which reveals a great deal about the inner workings of the Inquisitorial mechanism and which he delivered to Pope Clement X in favour of the cause of the persecuted of the Inquisition. The Inquisition was suspended by Clement X between 1674 and 1681.

[ 234 ] Ending of the Inquisition in the 19th and 20th centuries [ edit ] By decree of Napoleon's government in 1797, the Inquisition in Venice was abolished in 1806.

[ 235 ] In Portugal, in the wake of the Liberal Revolution of 1820 , the "General Extraordinary and Constituent Courts of the Portuguese Nation" abolished the Portuguese Inquisition in 1821.

The wars of independence of the former Spanish colonies in the Americas concluded with the abolition of the Inquisition in every quarter of Hispanic America between 1813 and 1825.

The last execution of the Inquisition was in Spain in 1826.

[ 236 ] This was the execution by garroting of the Catalan school teacher Gaietà Ripoll for purportedly teaching Deism in his school.

[ 236 ] In Spain the practices of the Inquisition were finally outlawed in 1834.

[ 237 ] In Italy, the restoration of the Pope as the ruler of the Papal States in 1814 brought the Inquisition back to the Papal States. It remained active there until the late-19th century, notably in the well-publicised Mortara affair (1858–1870).

A putative governing institution, the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition was created in 1542 in the Vatican. This office survives to this day as part of the Roman Curia , although it underwent a series of name changes. In 1908, it was renamed the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office . In 1965, it became the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith .

[ 238 ] In 2022, this office was renamed the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith , as retained to the present day.

Current position of the Catholic Church [ edit ] Reflection on the inquisitorial activity of the Catholic Church began to be seriously undertaken in the period of preparation for the Great Jubilee of 2000 , on the initiative of John Paul II , who called for repentance for "examples of thought and action that are in fact a source of anti-witness and scandal". On 12 March 2000, during the celebration of the Jubilee, the Pope, on behalf of the entire Catholic Church and all Christians, apologized for these acts and in general for many others.

[ 239 ] The Pope asked for forgiveness for seven categories of sins: general sins; sins "in the service of truth"; sins against Christian unity; sins against the Jews; against respect for love, peace and cultures; sins against the dignity of women and minorities; and against human rights. Some theologians were of the opinion that this unprecedented apology would undermine the authority of the Church. Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger gave an apology on behalf of his office, the successor to the Roman Inquisition: "Even men of the church, in the name of faith and morals, have sometimes used methods not in keeping with the Gospel." [ 240 ] John Paul II's apology was considered imperfect by several critics, including Jewish figures, who among other points raised the issue of the beatification, at the same time, of Pope Pius IX , known for his anti-Judaism [ 241 ] and his approval of the  abduction of Edgardo Mortara as the then six-year-old child had been forcibly taken from his Jewish family by Papal States police, under orders of the Inquisitor of Bologna, and was eventually raised in the papal household .

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] [ 244 ] Several inquisitors are considered saints by the Catholic Church, such as Peter of Verona , [ 222 ] Pedro de Arbués , or John of Capistrano ; some were even Popes, such as Michele Ghislieri , who would later become Pope Pius V, and Jacques Fournier —later Pope Benedict XII.

Raymond of Penyafort , author of one of the first manuals for use by inquisitors—the Directorium inquisitoriale (1242) -- is also a Catholic saint.

See also [ edit ] Auto-da-fé Black Legend (Spain) Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition Cathars List of people executed in the Papal States Witch-cult hypothesis Witch trials in the early modern period Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith Historical revision of the Inquisition Marian Persecutions Documents and works [ edit ] Directorium Inquisitorum Histoire de l'Inquisition en France Malleus Maleficarum Notable inquisitors [ edit ] Grand Inquisitor Konrad von Marburg Tomás de Torquemada Bernard Gui Notable cases [ edit ] Galileo affair Execution of Giordano Bruno Trial of Joan of Arc Edgardo Mortara Basque witch trials Caterina Tarongí Rosa Egipcíaca Repentance [ edit ] List of apologies made by Pope John Paul II References [ edit ] ^ Peters, Edward. "Inquisition", p. 54.

^ a b Lea (1887a) , Chapter VII. The Inquisition Founded .

^ Murphy, Cullen (2012).

God's Jury . New York: Mariner Books – Houghton, Mifflin, Harcourt. p. 150.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 69-70.

^ a b Peters (1989) , pp. 12–13.

^ a b c d e Kelly, Henry Ansgar (1989).

"Inquisition and the Prosecution of Heresy: Misconceptions and Abuses" .

Church History .

58 (4): 439– 451.

doi : 10.2307/3168207 .

ISSN 0009-6407 .

JSTOR 3168207 .

^ Sabatini (1930) , pp. 296–383.

^ a b Salomon, H. P. and Sassoon, I. S. D., and Saraiva, Antonio José.

The Marrano Factory. The Portuguese Inquisition and Its New Christians, 1536–1765 (Brill, 2001), Introduction pp. XXX.

^ "Internet History Sourcebooks Project" .

Fordham.edu .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2014 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ Iarocci, Michael P. (1 March 2006).

Properties of Modernity . Vanderbilt University Press. p. 218.

ISBN 0-8265-1522-3 .

^ Bishop, Chris.

"The 'pear of anguish': Truth, torture and dark medievalism" .

journals.sagepub . Sage Journals . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Sehgal, Parul.

"Fighting Erasure" .

New York Times Magazine . New York Times . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ "Catholic Church Child Sexual Abuse Scandal" .

BBC . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Van Hove, Brian.

"The inquisitions of history: the mythology and the reality" .

Ignatius Insight . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Smith, Lauren.

"The effects of the Spanish Inquisition" .

University of Sydney . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Ray, Micheal.

"Timeline of the Spanish Inquisition  A dark chapter in Christian history" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Peters writes: "When faced with a convicted heretic who refused to recant, or who relapsed into heresy, the inquisitors were to turn him over to the temporal authorities – the "secular arm" – for animadversio debita , the punishment decreed by local law, usually burning to death." (Peters, Edwards. "Inquisition", p. 67.) ^ Lea (1887a) , Chapter VII. The Inquisition Founded : "Obstinate heretics, refusing to abjure and return to the Church with due penance, and those who after abjuration relapsed, were to be abandoned to the secular arm for fitting punishment." ^ a b Kirsch (2008) , p. 85.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 109.

^ Haliczer, Stephen (1990).

Inquisition and Society in the Kingdom of Valencia, 1478–1834 . University of California Press. pp.

83– 85.

^ Eymerich Directorium inquisitorum, Nicholas.

"Directorium inquisitorum" .

Cornell University Library Digital Collections Bookreader . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Eymeric-, Nicholas (1821).

Manual de Inquisidores, para uso de las Inquisiciones de España y Portugal - Translated from French into Spanish language, by J. Marchena (abridged version) (in Spanish). Imprenta de Feliz Avinon.

^ Mohnhaupt, Heinz; Simon, Dieter (1992).

Vorträge zur Justizforschung: Geschichte und Theorie (in German). V. Klostermann.

ISBN 978-3-465-02627-3 .

^ W. Monter, Frontiers of Heresy: The Spanish Inquisition from the Basque Lands to Sicily , Cambridge 2003, p. 53.

^ Jean-Pierre Dedieu, Los Cuatro Tiempos , in Bartolomé Benassar, Inquisición Española: poder político y control social , pp. 15–39.

^ H. Kamen , Inkwizycja Hiszpańska , Warszawa 2005, p. 62; and H. Rawlings, The Spanish Inquisition , Blackwell Publishing 2004, p. 15.

^ Lea (1887a) , Chapter VII. The Inquisition Founded : "The judicial use of torture was as yet happily unknown..." ^ Foxe, John .

"Chapter monkey" (PDF) .

Foxe's Book of Martyrs . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 November 2012 . Retrieved 31 August 2010 .

^ Blötzer, J. (1910).

"Inquisition" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Ava Rojas Company.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 August 2012 .

... in this period the more influential ecclesiastical authorities declared that the death penalty was contrary to the spirit of the Gospel, and they themselves opposed its execution. For centuries this was the ecclesiastical attitude both in theory and in practice. Thus, in keeping with the civil law, some Manichæans were executed at Ravenna in 556. On the other hand, Elipandus of Toledo and Felix of Urgel, the chiefs of Adoptionism and Predestinationism, were condemned by councils, but were otherwise left unmolested. We may note, however, that the monk Gothescalch, after the condemnation of his false doctrine that Christ had not died for all mankind, was by the Synods of Mainz in 848 and Quiercy in 849 sentenced to flogging and imprisonment, punishments then common in monasteries for various infractions of the rule.

^ Blötzer, J. (1910).

"Inquisition" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Robert Appleton Company.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 August 2012 .

[...] the occasional executions of heretics during this period must be ascribed partly to the arbitrary action of individual rulers, partly to the fanatic outbreaks of the overzealous populace, and in no wise to ecclesiastical law or the ecclesiastical authorities.

^ Hughes, Philip (1979). History of the Church Volume 2: The Church In The World The Church Created: Augustine To Aquinas . A&C Black. pp.27–28, ISBN 978-0-7220-7982-9 ^ Peters (1980) , p. 170-173.

^ Théry, Julien; Gilli, Patrick (2010).

" " Expérience italienne et norme inquisitoriale ", chap.11(in Le gouvernement pontifical et l'Italie des villes au temps de la théocratie (fin XIIe-mi-XIVe siècle)" .

Academia (in French). Presses universitaires de la Méditerranée. pp.

547– 592 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Inquisition" .

Newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ Bishop, Jordan (2006).

"Aquinas on Torture" .

New Blackfriars .

87 (1009): 229– 237.

doi : 10.1111/j.0028-4289.2006.00142.x .

^ Larissa Tracy, Torture and Brutality in Medieval Literature: Negotiations of National Identity , (Boydell and Brewer Ltd, 2012), 22; " In 1252 Innocent IV licensed the use of torture to obtain evidence from suspects, and by 1256 inquisitors were allowed to absolve each other if they used instruments of torture themselves, rather than relying on lay agents for the purpose...

".

^ Pegg, Mark G. (2001).

The Corruption of Angels – The great Inquisition of 1245–1246 . Princeton University Press. p. 32.

^ "Appendix 2: List of Inquisitors-General" .

libro.uca.edu . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ Kras, Paweł.

Ad abolendam diversarum haeresium pravitatem. System inkwizycyjny w średniowiecznej Europie . KUL 2006, p. 411. Del Col, Andrea.

Inquisizione in Italia , p. 3.

^ Lansing, Carol.

Power and Purity: Cathar Heresy in Medieval Italy , 2001, p. 138.

^ Prudlo, Donald.

The martyred inquisitor . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2008. p. 42.

^ Del Col, p. 96–98. Already in 1233 in Verona, 60 Cathars were burnt on the order of the Dominican Giovanni da Vicenza, but formally he issued this sentence as the podesta of this city, and not the inquisitor, which he became only in 1247. Cf.

Lea (1887b) , pp. 204, 206.

^ a b Paweł Kras: Ad abolendam diversarum haeresium pravitatem. System inkwizycyjny w średniowiecznej Europie , KUL 2006, p. 413.

^ Lea, vol. II, pp. 264, 267.

^ Tavuzzi, Michael M.

Renaissance inquisitors: Dominican inquisitors and inquisitorial districts in Northern Italy, 1474–1527 . Leiden & Boston: Brill (2007). p. 197, 253–258; Del Col, p. 196–211.

^ Behringer, W.

Witches and Witch-Hunts: A Global History . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press Ltd (2004). p. 130 ^ Lea, vol. III, p. 515; cf. Tavuzzi, p. 150–151, 184–185.

^ Tavuzzi, p. 188–192; Del Col, p. 199–200, 204–209.

^ Sumption (1978) , pp. 230–232.

^ Costen (1997) , p. 173.

^ The characteristics of the activities of the Inquisition in France in the 13th–15th centuries are presented by Lea (1887b) , pp. 113–161.

^ Robert's activities are described by Lea (1887b) , pp. 114–116; P. Kras, Ad abolendam ..., pp. 163–165; and M. Lambert, The Cathars , pp. 122–125.

^ Richard Kieckhefer: Magia w średniowieczu, Cracovia 2001, págs. 278–279.

^ P. Kras, Ad abolendam...

, p.412.

^ Lea (1887b) , p. 30.

^ Wakefield, s. 184; M. Barber, Katarzy , p. 126.

^ M.D. Costen, The Cathars and the Albigensian Crusade , Manchester University Press, 1997, p. 170.

^ P. Kras: Ad abolendam...

, p. 412–413.

^ Malcolm Lambert: Średniowieczne herezje , Wyd. Marabut Gdańsk-Warszawa 2002, p. 195–196.

^ Lea (1887a) , p. 485.

^ M.D. Costen: The Cathars and the Albigensian Crusade , Manchester University Press, 1997, p. 171 ^ Wakefield, p. 184.

^ M.D. Costen: The Cathars and the Albigensian Crusade , Manchester University Press, 1997, p. 171.

^ List of judgments from: James Given: Inquisition and Medieval Society , Cornell University Press, 2001, s. 69–70.

^ P. Kras: Ad abolendam...

, p. 413.

^ Jean Guiraud: Medieval Inquisition , Kessinger Publishing 2003, p. 137.

^ Marx: L'inquisition en Dauphine , 1914, p. 128 note. 1, pp. 134–135, and Tanon, pp. 105–106.

Jean Paul Perrin : History of the ancient Christians inhabiting the valleys of the Alps , Philadelphia 1847, p. 64, gives figures of over 150 convicts from the Valpute valley and 80 from the other two, but cites the same document as Marx and Tanon.

^ Raymond Mentzer: Heresy Proceedings in Languedoc, 1500–1560 , American Philosophical Society, 2007, s. 122.

^ Lea (1887b) , pp. 332, 346.

^ P. Kras: Ad abolendam...

, s. 414.

^ Lea (1887b) , p. 375.

^ "Urkundliche Mittheilungen über die Beghinen- und Begharden-Häuser zu Rostock" .

mvdok.lbmv.de . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Lea (1887b) , p. 390.

^ The description of these persecutions is published by: Lea (1887b) , pp. 395–400; and R. Kieckhefer: Repression of heresy , p. 55.

^ Manfred Wilde , Die Zauberei- und Hexenprozesse in Kursachsen , Böhlau Verlag Köln Weimar, 2003, p. 100–101; K.B. Springer : Dominican Inquisition in the archidiocese of Mainz 1348–1520 , w: Praedicatores, Inquisitores, Vol. 1: The Dominicans and the Medieval Inquisition. Acts of the 1st International Seminar on the Dominicans and the Inquisition, 23–25 February 2002 , red. Arturo Bernal Palacios, Rzym 2004, p. 378–379; R. Kieckhefer : Repression of heresy , p. 96–97.

Lea (1887b) , p. 408 mentions at least 135 executions in 1414 and another 300 two years later, but most likely the sources he cites speak of the same repressive action, with different dates ( Springer : p. 378 note 276; Kieckhefer : p. 378, note 276; : pp. 97 and 147).

^ K.B. Springer: Dominican Inquisition in the archidiocese of Mainz 1348–1520 , w: Praedicatores, Inquisitores, Vol. 1: The Dominicans and the Medieval Inquisition. Acts of the 1st International Seminar on the Dominicans and the Inquisition, 23–25 February 2002 , red. Arturo Bernal Palacios, Rzym 2004, p. 381. The mass executions of flagellants in Thuringia in 1454 were the work of secular authorities, see Kieckhefer, Repression of heresy , p. 147; Manfred Wilde, Die Zauberei- und Hexenprozesse in Kursachsen , Böhlau Verlag Köln Weimar, 2003, p. 106–107.

^ Institoris, Heinrich; Sprenger, Jakob; Sprenger, James (2000).

The Malleus Maleficarum of Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger . Book Tree.

ISBN 978-1-58509-098-3 .

^ cf.

Lea (1887c) , p. 540 ^ BBKL: Jacob von Hoogstraaten ^ Pinker (2011, pp. 138–139).   Mannix (1964, pp. 134–135).  Mackay (1841 / 2009, p. 320).

^ Limborch, Philippus van (1692).

Philippi a Limborch historia inquisitionis: acced. liber sententiarum inquisitionis Tholosanae ab anno Chr. 1307 ad annum 1323 (in Latin). éditeur non identifié.

^ P. Kras, Ad abolendam...

, p. 182.

^ Šanjek, Franjo (1976).

"Le catharisme des " chrétiens " bosniaques" .

Revue de l'histoire des religions .

190 (2): 149– 156.

doi : 10.3406/rhr.1976.6356 .

^ Lea (1887b) , pp. 542–543. Thomas A. Fudge, The magnificent ride: the first reformation in Hussite Bohemia , Ashgate 1998, s. 282.

^ P. Kras, Ad abolendam...

, p. 416.

^ Malcolm Lambert, Średniowieczne herezje , 2002, s. 219.

^ P. Kras, Ad abolendam...

, p. 417.

^ Pilaszek, Wislicz ^ a b "Secrets of the Spanish Inquisition Revealed" .

Catholic Answers .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 .

^ Kamen , Spanish Inquisition , p. 17. Kamen cites approximate numbers for Valencia (250) and Barcelona (400), but no solid data about Córdoba.

^ Raymond of Peñafort , Summa , lib. 1 p.33, citing D.45 c.5.

^ Kamen , Spanish Inquisition , p. 10.

^ Compare Haydon, Colin (1993).

Anti-Catholicism in eighteenth-century England, c. 1714–80: a political and social study . Studies in imperialism. Manchester: Manchester University Press. p. 6.

ISBN 0-7190-2859-0 . Retrieved 28 February 2010 .

The popular fear of Popery focused on the persecution of heretics by the Catholics. It was generally assumed that, whenever it was in their power, Papists would extirpate heresy by force, seeing it as a religious duty. History seemed to show this all too clearly. [...] The Inquisition had suppressed, and continued to check, religious dissent in Spain. Papists, and most of all, the Pope, delighted in the slaughter of heretics. 'I most firmly believed when I was as boy', William Cobbett [born 1763], coming originally from rural Surrey, recalled, 'that the Pope was a prodigious woman, dressed in a dreadful robe, which had been made red by being dipped in the blood of Protestants'.

^ Kors, Alan (2001).

Witchcraft in Europe 400–1700: A Documentary History . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

114– 116.

^ Gregorio IX (1232).

Vox In Rama ( Papa Gregorio IX) .

^ Deane, Jennifer Kolpacoff (2011).

A History of Medieval Heresy and Inquisition . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

197– 198.

^ Richards, Jeffrey (2013).

Sex, Dissidence and Damnation: Minority Groups in the Middle Ages . Barnes & Noble. pp.

58– 62.

^ Saint Dominic Guzmán presiding over an Auto da fe Archived 2013-11-06 at the Wayback Machine , Prado Museum . Retrieved 2012-08-26 ^ Aron-Beller, Katherine; Black, Christopher (22 January 2018).

The Roman Inquisition: Centre versus Peripheries . BRILL. p. 234.

ISBN 978-90-04-36108-9 .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 .

^ Zeldes, N. (2003).

The Former Jews of This Kingdom: Sicilian Converts After the Expulsion 1492–1516 . BRILL. p. 128.

ISBN 978-90-04-12898-9 .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 December 2021 .

^ Breve historia de Isabel la Católica.

Nowtilus, 320 pages.

^ "Inquisition – Spanish, Roman & Torture" .

HISTORY . 8 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ H. C. Lea , A History of the Inquisition of Spain , vol. 3, Book 8 ^ Saraiva, António José; Salomon, Herman Prins; Sassoon, I. S. D.

(2001) [First published in Portuguese in 1969].

The Marrano Factory: the Portuguese Inquisition and its New Christians 1536–1765 . Brill. p. 102.

ISBN 978-90-04-12080-8 . Retrieved 13 April 2010 .

^ Salomon, H. P. and Sassoon, I. S. D., in Saraiva, Antonio Jose.

The Marrano Factory. The Portuguese Inquisition and Its New Christians, 1536–1765 (Brill, 2001), pgs. 345-7 ^ "Enslaved: Peoples of the Historical Slave Trade" .

enslaved.org .

Archived from the original on 21 August 2021 . Retrieved 21 August 2021 .

^ Stokes, Adrian Durham (2002) [1955].

Michelangelo: a study in the nature of art . Routledge classics (2 ed.). Routledge. p. 39.

ISBN 978-0-415-26765-6 .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2009 .

Ludovico is so immediately settled in heaven by the poet that some commentators have divined that Michelangelo is voicing heresy, that is to say, the denial of purgatory.

^ Erasmus, the arch-Humanist of the Renaissance, came under suspicion of heresy, see Olney, Warren (2009).

Desiderius Erasmus; Paper Read Before the Berkeley Club, March 18, 1920 . BiblioBazaar. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-113-40503-6 .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2009 .

Thomas More, in an elaborate defense of his friend, written to a cleric who accused Erasmus of heresy, seems to admit that Erasmus was probably the author of Julius .

^ Vidmar, John C.

(2005).

The Catholic Church Through the Ages . New York: Paulist Press. p. 241.

ISBN 978-0-8091-4234-7 .

^ Soergel, Philip M. (1993).

Wondrous in His Saints: Counter Reformation Propaganda in Bavaria . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 239.

ISBN 0-520-08047-5 .

^ "The Galileo Project | Christianity | The Inquisition" .

galileo.rice.edu . Retrieved 30 April 2024 .

^ Blötzer, J. (1910).

"Inquisition" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Robert Appleton Company.

Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 August 2012 .

^ William E. Burns (red.): Witch hunts in Europe and America: an encyclopedia , Greenwood Publishing Group 2003, s. 104.

^ Andrea Del Col: Inquisizione in Italia , p. 434, 780.

^ a b "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Witchcraft" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 26 April 2024 .

^ Hutton, Ronald.

The Pagan Religions of the Ancient British Isles: Their Nature and Legacy . Oxford, UK and Cambridge, US: Blackwell, 1991.

ISBN 978-0-631-17288-8 . p. 257 ^ Behringer, Witches and Witch-hunts: A Global History , p. 31 (2004). Wiley-Blackwell.

^ Rio, Martin Antoine Del (2000).

Investigations Into Magic . Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7190-4976-7 .

^ Bailey, Michael D. (2010).

Battling demons : witchcraft, heresy, and reform in the late Middle Ages . Pennsylvania State University Press. p.

35 .

ISBN 978-0271022260 .

OCLC 652466611 .

^ Caputi, Jane (1987).

The Age of Sex Crime . Bowling Green State University Popular Press. p. 96.

^ Levack , The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe , p. 49 ^ Heinrich Institoris, Heinrich; Sprenger, Jakob; Summers, Montague.

The Malleus maleficarum of Heinrich Kramer and James Sprenger . Dover Publications; New edition, 1 June 1971; ISBN 0-486-22802-9 ^ Brian P. Levack , The Witch-Hunt in Early Modern Europe (in German) (London/New York 2013 ed.), pp. 110, 111, The period during which all of this reforming activity and conflict took place, the age of the Reformation, spanned the years 1520–1650. Since these years include the period when witch-hunting was most intense, some historians have claimed that the Reformation served as the mainspring of the entire European witch-hunt.(...) It would be unwise, however, to attribute the entire European witch-hunt to these religious developments, since witch-hunting began again almost one hundred years before Luther nailed his ninety-five theses to the castle church at Wittenberg." ^ "Ad Extirpanda" (PDF) .

documentacatholicaomnia.eu . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ a b Saraiva (2001) , p. 43-45.

^ Freitas, Jordão de (1916).

O Marquez de Pombal e o Santo Oficio da Inquisição (Memoria enriquecida com documentos inéditos e facsimiles de assignaturas do benemerito reedificador da cidade de Lisboa) [ The Marquis of Pombal and the Holy Office of the Inquisition (Memoir enriched with unpublished documents and facsimiles of signatures of the benevolent rebuilder of the city of Lisbon) ] (in Portuguese). Soc. Editora José Bastos. pp. 10, 106, 122.

^ Pérez (2005) , p. 135.

^ Sabatini (1930) , pp. 142, 147.

^ Gaskill, Malcolm (2010).

Witchcraft : A very short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-19-923695-4 .

^ Kors, Alan Charles; Peters, Edward.

Witchcraft in Europe, 400–1700: A Documentary History . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2000.

ISBN 0-8122-1751-9 . p. 177 ^ "Internet History Sourcebooks Project" .

sourcebooks.fordham.edu .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Darst, David H., "Witchcraft in Spain: The Testimony of Martín de Castañega's Treatise on Superstition and Witchcraft (1529)", Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , 1979, vol. 123, issue 5, p. 298 ^ Burns (2003) , p. 158-160.

^ a b Levack, Brian (1992).

The Literature of Witchcraft . Garland Publishing. pp.

16– 17.

ISBN 0-8153-1026-9 .

^ Jolly, Karen; Raudvere, Catharina; Peters, Edward (2002).

Witchcraft and magic in Europe: the Middle Ages . The Athlone Press. p. 241.

^ Burns (2003) , p. 160.

^ Summers, Montague (2000).

Witchcraft and Black Magic . Dover Publications. p. 30.

^ Saraiva (2001) , pp. 46–47.

^ Kirsch (2008) , p. 8.

^ Burman (2004) , p. 143.

^ Kirsch (2008) , p. 14.

^ Bethencourt, Francisco (1997).

La Inquisition en la Epoca Moderna – España, Portugal e Italia Siglos XV-XIX (in Spanish). Akal Ediciones. pp.

202– 204.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 47.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 45.

^ Saraiva (2001) , pp. 47–48.

^ Lea, Henry Charles (1906).

A History of the Inquisition of Spain . Vol. 2. The MacMillan Company. p. 91.

^ Lempinen, Edward (20 July 2022).

"The tortures of the Spanish Inquisition hold dark lessons for our time" .

Berkeley News .

^ Eymerich (1821) , p. 40.

^ Eymerich, Nicholas (1587).

Directorium Inquisitorum (in Latin). In aedibus Populi Romani apud Georgium Ferrarium. p. 481.

^ Eymerich (1821) , pp. 37–41.

^ Sanz, Javier (16 September 2019).

"Todo lo que te creíste de la Inquisición y no era verdad. Procedimientos y torturas (2/3)" .

Historias de la Historia (in Spanish).

^ Innocentius IV.

"1243–1254 – SS Innocentius IV – Bulla 'Ad_Extirpanda' [AD 1252-05-15]" (PDF) .

Documenta Catholica Omnia . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ Carroll, James (2002).

Constantine's Sword: The Church and the Jews: A History . Houghton Mifflin Books. pp.

356– 357.

^ a b Donnelly, Mark P.; Diehl, Daniel (2011). "Torture by stretching and suspension".

The big book of Pain: Torture & punishment through History . The History Press.

^ a b Pérez, Joseph (2004).

The Spanish Inquisition: a history . Translated by Lloyd, Janet. Profile Books. pp.

147– 148.

^ Innes, Brian (2016).

History of torture . Amber Books. pp.

69– 71.

^ Currie, Stephen (2015).

Medieval punishment and torture . Reference Point Press. pp.

57– 58.

^ Fernández Carrasco, Eulogio (2018).

La Inquisición: Procesos y autos de fe en el Antiguo Régimen . Editorial Sanz y Torres. pp.

48– 52.

ISBN 9788416466603 .

^ Hassner, Ron Eduard (2022).

Anatomy of torture . Cornell University Press. pp.

12– 13.

^ Donnelly, Mark P.; Diehl, Daniel (2011). "Torture by water".

The big book of Pain: Torture & punishment through History . The History Press.

^ a b c d e Tracy, Matthew.

"Busting the Inquisitorial Myths" .

Special Faculty of Theology . Retrieved 22 June 2023 .

^ Sabatini (1930) , pp. 162, 197, 198.

^ Saraiva (2001) , pp. 48, 53.

^ Baião (1924) , p. 179.

^ a b Saraiva (2001) , p. 54.

^ a b c Murphy (2013) , p. 89.

^ Hill (2019) , p. 122.

^ Eymerich (1821) , pp. 40–41.

^ Lea (1887a) , p. 427.

^ Kamen (1999) , p. 188.

^ Eymerich (1821) , p. 41.

^ Kamen (1999) , pp. 190–191.

^ "El mito de la Inquisición española: menos del 4% acababan en la hoguera" .

Diario ABC (in Spanish). 4 December 2015 . Retrieved 22 June 2023 .

^ Kirsch (2008) , p. 112.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 53.

^ "Medieval Justice Not So Medieval" .

Live Science . 3 August 2006 . Retrieved 4 May 2024 .

^ "El Mito de la Inquisición Española: el famoso documental de la BBC de 1994" .

Biblia y Tradición (in Spanish). 19 May 2010 . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Eymerich (1821) , p. 43.

^ Sabatini (1930) , pp. 202–203.

^ a b McDaniel, Spencer (12 November 2019).

"Why Most So-Called "Medieval Torture Devices" Are Fake" .

Tales of Times Forgotten . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Marks, Anna (18 June 2016).

"Victorian Con Men Faked the Middle Ages' Darkest Devices" .

Vice . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Foxe, John.

Fox's Book of Martyrs .

^ Medievalists.net (20 March 2016).

"Why Medieval Torture Devices are Not Medieval" .

Medievalists.net . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ "The Flute of Shame: Discover the Instrument/Device Used to Publicly Humiliate Bad Musicians During the Medieval Period" .

Open Culture . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

^ "7 Famous Torture Devices, Real and Mythical" .

HISTORY . 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2024 .

^ Equiano, Olaudah (1789).

The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, Or Gustavus Vassa, The African .

^ "Medieval Torture Devices and Methods That Date Back to the Ancient World" .

explorethearchive.com . 30 June 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ "HISTORIAS PARA MENTES CURIOSAS: "Juguetes decimonónicos": la pera oral o vaginal" .

HISTORIAS PARA MENTES CURIOSAS . 6 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ "Things People Believe About Historical Torture That Are Just Not True" .

Ranker . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Kerrigan, Michael (2001).

The instruments of Torture . Lyons Press. pp.

142– 143.

^ Madrid, Darío (30 August 2020).

"La "Doncella de Hierro" no fue empleada como método de tortura por la Inquisición España. Nunca existió" .

Darío Madrid Historia y Fotografía (in Spanish) . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ " 'Breast Ripper' Torture Device, Probably German, 17th/18th C" .

Antique Weapon Store . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Craik, George Lillie; McFarlane, Charles (1846).

The pictorial history of England, being a history of the people, as well as a history of the kingdom .

New York Public Library. New York, Harper & brothers.

^ Motley, John Lothrop.

"The Rise of the Dutch Republic — Complete (1555–84)" .

gutenberg.org . Retrieved 23 June 2023 .

^ Balk (2008) , p. 386.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 46.

^ Kamen (1999) , p. 193-194.

^ a b Saraiva (2001) , pp. 43–48.

^ Saraiva (2001) , pp. 43–48, 63, 174.

^ Rowland, Robert (2010).

"Cristãos-novos, marranos e judeus no espelho da Inquisição" .

Topoi (in Portuguese).

11 (20): 172– 188.

doi : 10.1590/2237-101X011020012 .

ISSN 1518-3319 .

^ a b Burman (2004) , p. 151.

^ Kamen (1999) , pp. 194–195.

^ Saraiva (2001) , pp. 61–62.

^ Saraiva, António José (1969).

Inquisição e Cristãos-Novos (in Portuguese) (4th ed.). Editorial Inova. pp. 11, 142– 144.

^ Peters (1989) , p. 66-67.

^ a b Deane, Jennifer K. (2011).

A History of Medieval Heresy and Inquisition . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

113– 114.

^ Innocentius IV (15 May 1252).

"1243–1254 – SS Innocentius IV – Bulla 'Ad_Extirpanda' [AD 1252-05-15]" (PDF) .

Documenta Catholica Omnia .

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 104-105.

^ Sabatini (1930) , p. 169-172, 222, 277–279, 432.

^ Homza, Lu Ann (2006).

The Spanish Inquisition, 1478–1614 An Anthology of Sources . Hackett Publishing. p. XIV.

^ a b c d Wansbrough, Henry (2019).

The Revised New Jerusalem Bible . Image Catholic Books.

^ Thomsett (2010) , p. 35.

^ Scheuers, Timothy (2023).

Consciences and the Reformation: Scruples over Oaths and Confessions in the era of Calvin and his contemporaries . Oxford University Press. p. 28.

^ Andrew, Christopher (2018).

The Secret World: A History of Intelligence . Yale University Press. p. 116.

^ Thomsett (2010) , p. 4.

^ Peters (1980) , pp. 170–173.

^ Théry, Julien (2010). "11 - Expérience italienne et norme inquisitoriale".

Le gouvernement pontifical et l'Italie des villes au temps de la théocratie (fin XIIe-mi-XIVe siècle) (in French). pp.

547– 592.

^ Gregorio IX (1232).

Vox In Rama ( Papa Gregorio IX) .

^ Pope Innocent IV (15 May 1252).

"Bulla 'Ad_Extirpanda' [AD 1252-05-15]" (PDF) .

Documenta Catholica Omnia .

^ Clare Prophet, Elizabeth (1997).

Reincarnation: The Missing Link in Christianity . Summit Publications. pp.

240– 243.

^ a b Ames, Christine Caldwell (2009).

Righteous Persecution: Inquisition, Dominicans, and Christianity in the Middle Ages . University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 62, 63, 67.

^ Smelyansky, Eugene (2021).

Heresy and Citizenship: Persecution of Heresy in Late Medieval German Cities . Routledge. pp. 51, 73.

^ Sullivan (2011) , p. 147.

^ Thomsett (2011) , p. 94.

^ Lea (1887b) , pp. 99–102.

^ Ingram, Kevin (2006).

Secret lives, public lies: the conversos and socio-religious non-conformism in the Spanish Golden Age (Thesis). UC San Diego.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 4 January 2024 .

^ "António Vieira Portuguese author and diplomat" .

Britannica . 12 April 2024 . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ Prestage, Edgar (1911).

"Vieira, Antonio" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 28 (11th ed.). pp.

49– 50.

^ Joanabraga (2 October 2015).

"Padre António Vieira nos cárceres da Inquisição" .

Arquivo Nacional da Torre do Tombo (in European Portuguese) . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ Paiva, José Pedro (2011).

"Revisitar o processo inquisitorial do padre António Vieira" .

Lusitania Sacra .

23 : 151– 168.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 177.

^ Saraiva (2001) , p. 147,152,159,160,197,208.

^ Vieira, António (1821).

Noticias reconditas do modo de proceder a Inquisição de Portugal com os seus prezos . Imprensa Nacional.

^ "The Public Gardens of Venice and the Inquisition" .

venetoinside.com . Archived from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 .

^ a b Law, Stephen (2011).

Humanism: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-19-955364-8 .

^ "Spanish Inquisition – Spanish history [1478–1834]" .

Britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ "Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith – Profile" .

Vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2013 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ "12 March 2000, Day for pardon | John Paul II" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Carroll, Rory (13 March 2000).

"Pope says sorry for sins of church" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Kertzer (2001) , p. 116, 130.

^ Carroll, Rory (9 March 2000).

"Pope berated for beatifying child-snatching Pius IX" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Kertzer (1997) , pp. 3–12.

^ Dawkins (2006) , pp. 311–315.

Bibliography [ edit ] Adler, E. N.

(April 1901). "Auto de fe and Jew".

The Jewish Quarterly Review .

13 (3). University of Pennsylvania Press: 392– 437.

doi : 10.2307/1450541 .

JSTOR 1450541 .

Baião, António (1924).

Episódios dramáticos da Inquisição Portuguesa – Volume I (in Portuguese). Renascença Portuguesa.

Balk, Antti (2008).

Saints & sinners: an account of Western civilization . Thelema Publications.

ISBN 978-952-5700-00-8 .

Burman, Edward (2004).

The Inquisition: The Hammer of Heresy . Sutton Publishers.

ISBN 978-0850303773 .

Burns, William (2003).

Witch hunts in Europe and America: an encyclopedia . Greenwood Press.

Carroll, Warren H.

, Isabel: the Catholic Queen Front Royal , Virginia, 1991 (Christendom Press) Costen, Michael D. (1997).

The Cathars and the Albigensian Crusade . Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press.

ISBN 0-7190-4331-X .

Dawkins, Richard (2006).

The God delusion . Bantam Press.

ISBN 9780593055489 .

Eimerici, Nicolai (1578).

Directorvm Inqvisitorivm -cvm commentariis Francisci Pegn̄ae (in Latin). In aedibus Populi Romani apud Georgium Ferrarium.

Eymerich, Nicholas (1821).

Manual de Inquisidores, para uso de las Inquisiciones de España y Portugal -Traducida del frances en idioma castellano, por J. Marchena (in Spanish). Imprenta de Feliz Avinon.

Eymerich, Nicholas; Peña, Francisco (1973).

Le manuel des inquisiteurs (in French). Translated by Sala-Molins, Louis. Mouton Éditeur.

Foxe, John (1997) [1563]. Chadwick, Harold J. (ed.).

The new Foxe's book of martyrs/John Foxe; rewritten and updated by Harold J. Chadwick . Bridge-Logos.

ISBN 0-88270-672-1 .

Given, James B, Inquisition and Medieval Society (Cornell University Press, 2001) Hassner, Ron (2022).

Anatomy of torture . Cornell University Press.

Hill, Derek (2019).

Inquisition in the Fourteenth Century: The Manuals of Bernard Gui and Nicholas Eymerich . York Medieval Press.

ISBN 978-1-903153-87-1 .

Kamen, Henry (1999).

The Spanish Inquisition: A Historical Revision . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-07880-3 .

This revised edition of his 1965 original contributes to the understanding of the Spanish Inquisition in its local context.

Kertzer, David I.

(1997).

The kidnapping of Edgardo Mortara . Alfred A. Knopf Inc.

ISBN 0-679-45031-9 .

Kertzer, David I. (2001).

The Popes against the Jews . Alfred A. Knopf Inc.

ISBN 0-375-40623-9 .

Kirsch, Jonathan (2008).

The Grand Inquisitors Manual: A History of Terror in the Name of God . Harper One.

ISBN 978-0-06-081699-5 .

Lea, Henry Charles (1906).

A History of the Inquisition of Spain . The MacMillan Company.

Lea, Henry Charles (1887a).

A History of The Inquisition of The Middle Ages . Vol. I. New York: Harper & Brothers – via Project Gutenberg .

Lea, Henry Charles (1887b).

A History of The Inquisition of The Middle Ages . Vol. II. New York: Harper & Brothers – via Project Gutenberg .

Lea, Henry Charles (1887c).

A History of The Inquisition of The Middle Ages . Vol. III. New York: Harper & Brothers – via Project Gutenberg .

Charles Mackay (2009), Memoirs of extraordinary popular delusions and the madness of crowds , Digireads.com, Wikidata Q116897625 Daniel P. Mannix (1964), The History of Torture , OL 3048886W , Wikidata Q116896896 Murphy, Cullen (2013).

God's Jury : The Inquisition and the Making of the Modern World . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company.

Parker, Geoffrey (1982). "Some Recent Work on the Inquisition in Spain and Italy".

Journal of Modern History .

54 (3): 519– 532.

doi : 10.1086/244181 .

S2CID 143860010 .

Pérez, Joseph (2005).

The Spanish Inquisition: A History . Yale University Press.

Peters, Edward (1980).

Heresy and authority in medieval Europe:Documents in translation . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 0-8122-1103-0 .

Peters, Edward (1989).

Inquisition . U of California Press.

ISBN 9780520066304 .

Steven Pinker (2011), The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined , Viking Press , OL 16239379W , Wikidata Q1520283 Richards, Jeffrey (2013).

Sex, Dissidence and Damnation: Minority Groups in the Middle Ages . Barnes & Noble.

Sabatini, Rafael (1930).

Torquemada and the Spanish Inquisition (revised edition of 1930) . Houghton Mifflin Company.

Saraiva, António José (2001).

The Marrano factory: The Portuguese Inquisition and Its New Christians 1536–1765 . Brill.

Sullivan, Karen (15 April 2011).

The Inner Lives of Medieval Inquisitors . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226781679 .

Sumption, Jonathan (1978).

The Albigensian Crusade . London, England: Faber.

ISBN 0-571-11064-9 .

Thomsett, Michael C. (2010).

The Inquisition: a History . McFarland & Company, Inc. Publishers.

Thomsett, Michael C.

(2011).

Heresy in the Roman Catholic Church:a History . McFarland & Company.

Torquemada, Tomás de (1667).

Compilacion de las Instrucciones del Oficio de la Santa Inquisicion (in Spanish). Diego Diaz de la Carrera.

Vieira, Padre António (1821).

Notícias Recônditas do Modo de Proceder a Inquisição de Portugal com os seus Presos: Informação que ao Pontífice Clemente X deu o P. Antonio Vieira (in Portuguese). Imprensa Nacional.

Wansbrough, Henry (2019).

The Revised New Jerusalem Bible . Image Catholic Books.

ISBN 9780525573203 .

Walsh, William Thomas , Characters of the Inquisition (TAN Books and Publishers, Inc, 1940/97); ISBN 0-89555-326-0 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Inquisition .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Inquisition .

The book Directorium Inquisitorum (1587 edition) in Latin Malleus Maleficarum (a 1928 edition) in English and Latin – Publisher J. Rodker Frequently Asked Questions About the Inquisition by James Hannam Jewish Virtual Library on the Spanish Inquisition v t e Antisemitism See also: Massacres or pogroms against Jews Core topics Canards Economics Eliminationist antisemitism Geography History Religious antisemitism Persecution of Jews Antisemitism studies Nazism Adolf Hitler Americas Propaganda New antisemitism Three Ds Working definition Racial antisemitism Rootless cosmopolitan Secondary antisemitism Stereotypes of Jews Timeline 19th C.

20th 21st Antisemitism and Christianity New Testament Healthcare Islam Middle Ages Nation of Islam Olympic Games Soviet mathematics Social media Reddit Universities Columbia Related topics Anti-Indigenous sentiment Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Polish sentiment Anti-Romani sentiment Anti-Zionism Christian Identity Cultural Marxism Double genocide theory International Jewish conspiracy The International Jew Jewish Bolshevism Żydokomuna Khazar theory Ku Klux Klan Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Normalization of antisemitism Persecution of Jews during the Black Death On the Jews and Their Lies Philosemitism The Protocols of the Elders of Zion Contemporary imprints Racism Rothschild conspiracy theories The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Self-hating Jew George Soros conspiracy theories Xenophobia Weaponization White genocide conspiracy theory Zhyd Zionist antisemitism Religious antisemitism Anti-Judaism Jewish deicide Catholic Inquisition Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Rhineland massacres Martin Luther Blood curse Blood libel Host desecration Judensau Pogrom Antisemitic laws, policies and government actions Ghetto benches Hep-Hep riots Pogroms in the Russian Empire May Laws 1968 Polish political crisis Jewish Anti-Zionist League Leo Frank trial (US) Expulsions of Poles and Jews by Germany (DE/PL) Prussian deportations Act of 5th November Generalplan Ost Dreyfus affair (FR) Beilis trial (Russian Empire) Farhud (Iraq) Anti-Zionist League (IQ) General Order No. 11 (US, 1862) Racial policy of Nazi Germany Madagascar Plan Final Solution The Holocaust Anti-cosmopolitan campaign Night of the Murdered Poets Slánský trial Doctors' plot Holocaust denial Yellow badge ZOG conspiracy Antisemitism on the internet Bible Believers The Daily Stormer Institute for Historical Review Jew Watch Metapedia Podblanc QAnon Radio Islam Redwatch The Right Stuff (blog) Stormfront Terrorgram Wikipedia and antisemitism Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Expulsion Yellow badge Organizations working against antisemitism Anti-Defamation League (ADL) Bay Area Holocaust Oral History Project (BAHOHP) Community Security Trust Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) Simon Wiesenthal Center (SWC) Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) Stephen Roth Institute Yad Vashem By region Arab world Saudi Arabia Argentina Australia Canada China Chile Costa Rica Europe Austria Belgium France 21st century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Norway Romania Russia Imperial Soviet Spain Sweden Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party Japan Mexico New Zealand Palestinian Territories Pakistan South Africa Turkey United States History 21st century Venezuela v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Catalonia Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nn7dx
Cached time: 20250816110411
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.508 seconds
Real time usage: 2.843 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16926/1000000
Revision size: 133740/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 485263/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12841/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 615260/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.604/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20722158/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 6/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2334.743      1 -total
 38.38%  896.144      1 Template:Reflist
 26.30%  614.131     91 Template:Cite_book
 10.97%  256.212     74 Template:Sfnp
 10.02%  233.881     45 Template:Cite_web
  6.29%  146.880      3 Template:Cite_Q
  5.57%  130.097      3 Template:Lang
  5.07%  118.396      2 Template:Navbox
  3.86%   90.127      7 Template:Citation_needed
  3.23%   75.442      1 Template:Antisemitism_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15191:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816110411 and revision id 1306035053. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inquisition&oldid=1306035053 " Categories : Inquisition Anti-Islam sentiment in Europe Anti-Judaism Antisemitism in Europe Christianity-related controversies Counter-Reformation Human intelligence (information gathering) Islamophobia in Europe Persecution of Muslims by Christians Tribunals of the Catholic Church Violence against Muslims Ethnic persecution Political and cultural purges Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 European Portuguese-language sources (pt-pt) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles containing Medieval Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 14:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inquisition 90 languages Add topic

