Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Teachings and writings 1.2 Hagia Sophia 2 References 3 Sources Toggle the table of contents Isidore of Miletus 37 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Frysk Հայերեն Italiano Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century Byzantine Greek architect and mathematician Roof figure by Ludwig Simek at the Kunsthistorisches Museum , Vienna (Museumsstraße) The vaults in the Hagia Sophia, originally designed by Isidore of Miletus.

Isidore of Miletus ( Greek : Ἰσίδωρος ὁ Μιλήσιος ; Medieval Greek pronunciation: [iˈsiðoros o miˈlisios] ; Latin : Isidorus Miletus ) was one of the two main Byzantine Greek mathematician, physicist and architects ( Anthemius of Tralles was the other) [ 1 ] that Emperor Justinian I commissioned to design the cathedral Hagia Sophia in Constantinople from 532 to 537. He was born c.

475 AD .

[ 2 ] The creation of an important compilation of Archimedes ' works has been attributed to him.

[ 3 ] The spurious Book XV from Euclid's Elements has been partly attributed to Isidore of Miletus.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Exterior of the Hagia Sophia , 2013 Interior panorama of the Hagia Sophia , the patriarchal basilica designed by Isidore. The influence of Archimedes' solid geometry works, which Isidore was the first to compile, is evident ( annotated image ).

Isidore of Miletus was a renowned scientist and mathematician before Emperor Justinian I hired him. Isidorus taught stereometry and physics at the universities of Alexandria and then of Constantinople, and wrote a commentary on an older treatise on vaulting .

[ 5 ] Eutocius together with Isidore studied Archimedes' work.

[ 6 ] Isidore is also renowned for producing the first comprehensive compilation of Archimedes ' work, the Archimedes palimpsest survived to the present.

Teachings and writings [ edit ] A majority of Isidore's preserved work are his edits and commentaries on older Greek mathematical texts. For example, Isidore is known to have revised and checked some of Archimedes' works and also Book XV of Euclid's elements.

[ 7 ] That being said, claims from Alan Cameron have been made about a hypothetical "School of Isidore".

[ 7 ] Between his work on architectural exploits, Isidore taught about math and geometry of the time. The School of Isidore is supported more by the presence of his teaching's in much of his students (such as Eutocious ) works rather than his own writings.

[ 2 ] In an edit of the fifteenth book of Euclid's Elements, for instance, the editor quotes Isidore, but then proceeds to explain that Isidore did not publish much of his work himself.

[ 7 ] Instead, he taught, and once he himself could understand the material, did not see a need to write it down.

[ 7 ] It is because of this that Cameron claims that Isidore helped to revitalize interest in ancient mathematicians in Constantinople and Alexandria circa 510.

In addition to editing the works of others, Isidore is known to have written his own commentary on Hero of Alexandria's "On Vaulting", which discussed aspects of vault construction and design in relation to geometry .

[ 8 ] While this commentary is lost Eutocius makes mention of it in his own writings. It is when referring to this work that Eutocius credits Isidore with designing a special compass for the purpose of drawing parabolas.

[ 9 ] Isidore's invention allowed for the drawing of parabolas with a greater level accuracy than that of which many previous methods were capable.

[ 10 ] From Eutocius (or his copyist) it is believed that one notable use for Isidores invention was to visually solve the problem of doubling the volume of a cube. This was said to be done by drawing two parabolas and finding the point where they intersect.

[ 11 ] In addition to their mathematical applications, Isidore is believed to have highlighted the uses of applying the use of parabolas to the construction of vaults.

[ 12 ] Hagia Sophia [ edit ] Emperor Justinian I appointed his architects to rebuild the Hagia Sophia following his victory over protesters within the capital city of the Roman Empire , Constantinople. The first basilica was completed in 360 and remodelled from 404 to 415, but had been damaged in 532 in the course of the Nika Riot , “The temple of Sophia, the baths of Zeuxippus , and the imperial courtyard from the Propylaia all the way to the so-called House of Ares were burned up and destroyed, as were both of the great porticoes that lead to the forum that is named after Constantine, houses of prosperous people, and a great deal of other properties.” [ 13 ] The rival factions of Constantinople's populace, the Blues and Greens , opposed each other in the chariot races at the Hippodrome and often resorted to violence.  During the Nika Riot, more than thirty thousand people were killed.

[ 14 ] Emperor Justinian I ensured that his new structure would not be burned down, like its predecessors, by commissioning architects that would build the church mainly out of stone, rather than wood, “He compacted it of baked brick and mortar, and in many places bound it together with iron, but made no use of wood, so that the church should no longer prove combustible.” [ 15 ] The construction of the Hagia Sophia began so fast after the riots were quelled that many think that Justinian had his architects begin planning it before the riots even stopped.

[ 16 ] Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles originally planned on a main hall of the Hagia Sophia that measured 70 by 75 metres (230 x 250 ft), making it the largest church in Constantinople, but the original dome was nearly 6 metres (20 ft) lower than it was constructed, “Justinian suppressed these riots and took the opportunity of marking his victory by erecting in 532-7 the new Hagia Sophia, one of the largest, most lavish, and most expensive buildings of all time.” [ 17 ] Although Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles were not formally educated in architecture , they were scientists who could organize the logistics of drawing thousands of labourers and unprecedented loads of rare raw materials from around the Roman Empire to construct the Hagia Sophia for Emperor Justinian I. Isidore and Anthemius obtained stone from as far away as Egypt, Syria, and Libya, and columns from several temples in Rome.

[ 16 ] The finished product was built in admirable form for the Roman Emperor, “All of these elements marvellously fitted together in mid-air, suspended from one another and reposing only on the parts adjacent to them, produce a unified and most remarkable harmony in the work, and yet do not allow the spectators to rest their gaze upon any one of them for a length of time.” [ 18 ] It is believed that Isidore did much of the work on the domes of the Hagia Sophia due to his extensive work on vaults, and his commentary, "On Vaulting".

[ 19 ] The Hagia Sophia architects innovatively combined the longitudinal structure of a Roman basilica and the central plan of a drum-supported dome, in order to withstand the high magnitude earthquakes of the Marmara Region , “However, in May 558, little more than 20 years after the Church’s dedication, following the earthquakes of August 553 and December 557 , parts of the central dome and its supporting structure system collapsed.” [ 20 ] The Hagia Sophia was repeatedly cracked by earthquakes and was quickly repaired. Isidore of Miletus’ nephew, Isidore the Younger , introduced the new dome design that can be viewed in the Hagia Sophia in present-day Istanbul , Turkey . Originally the dome was constructed without ribs, but achieved its present-day construction with ribs when Isidore the Younger repaired the church.

[ 19 ] After a great earthquake in 989 ruined the dome of Hagia Sophia, the Byzantine officials summoned Trdat the Architect to Byzantium to organize repairs. The restored dome was completed by 994.

[ 21 ] References [ edit ] ^ Beaton, Roderick (2021).

The Greeks: A Global History .

Faber and Faber .

ISBN 978-0-571-35358-3 .

The creation of two Greek architects from Anatolia, Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles, Hagia Sophia successfully marries the old Greek science of theoretical geometry to Roman skills of practical engineering.

^ a b Cameron, Alan (1990).

Isidore of Miletus and Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical texts . p. 106.

^ Reviel Netz (2004).

The Works of Archimedes: Volume 1, The Two Books On the Sphere and the Cylinder: Translation and Commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521661607 .

^ Boyer (1991).

"Euclid of Alexandria" .

A History of Mathematics . pp.

130– 131.

^ Krautheimer, page 215 ^ Alan Cameron (1990).

"Isidore of Miletus and Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical Texts" . p. 127.

^ a b c d Cameron, Alan (1990).

Isidore of Miletus and Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical texts . p. 119.

^ Martines, Gaingiacomo (2014). "Isidore's Compass: A Scholium by Eutocius on Hero's Treatise on Vaulting".

Nuncius: Journal of the Material and Visual History of Science : 291.

^ Cameron, Alan (1990).

"Isidore of Miletus and Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical Texts" . p. 120,121.

^ Martines, Giangiacomo (2014). "Isidore's Compass: A Scholium by Eutocius on Hero's Treatise On Vaulting".

Nuncius: Journal of the Material and Visual History of Science : 286.

^ Martines, Giangiacomo (2014). "Isidore's Compass: A Scholium by Eutocius on Hero's Treatise On Vaulting".

Nuncius: Journal of the Material and Visual History of Science : 282.

^ Martines, Giangiacomo (2014). "Isidore's Compass: A Scholium by Eutocius on Hero's Treatise on Vaulting".

Nuncius: Journal of the Material and Visual History of Science : 311.

^ Prokopios, page 138 ^ Prokopios, page 144 ^ Mango, page 78 ^ a b Cavendish, Richard (December 2013). "Church of Hagia Sophia reconsecrated".

History Today .

63 (12) – via EBSCOhost.

^ Watkin, page 76 ^ Mango, page 75 ^ a b Podles, Mary Elizabeth (May 2021). "A Thousand Words Hagia Sophia, Church of the Holy Wisdom".

Touchstone: A Journal of Mere Christianity .

34 (3): 54– 55 – via Academic Search Premier.

^ Cakmak, page 693 ^ Maranci, pages 294–305 Sources [ edit ] Cakmak, AS; Taylor, RM; Durukal, E (2009). "The Structural Configuration of the First Dome of Justinian's Hagia Sophia (AD 537–558): An Investigation Based on Structural and Literary Analysis".

Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering .

29 (4): 693– 698.

doi : 10.1016/j.soildyn.2008.07.007 .

Krautheimer, Richard (1965).

Early Christian and Byzantine Architecture . Baltimore: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-300-05294-7 .

Mango, Cyril A. (1972).

The Art of the Byzantine Empire, 312-1453: Sources and Documents . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 0-8020-6627-5 .

Maranci, Christina (September 2003).

"The Architect Trdat: Building Practices and Cross-Cultural Exchange in Byzantium and Armenia" .

The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians .

62 (3): 294– 305.

doi : 10.2307/3592516 .

JSTOR 3592516 .

Prokopios (2010). Anthony Kaldellis (ed.).

The Secret History: With Related Texts . Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-60384-180-1 .

Watkin, David (1986).

A History of Western Architecture . New York: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 978-1-85669-459-9 .

Cameron, Alan (Spring 1990).

Isidore of Miletus and Hypatia: On the Editing of Mathematical Texts (Volume 31, Issue 1). Cambridge: Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies.

Martines, Giangiacomo (2014). "Isidore's Compass: A Scholium by Eutocius on Hero's Treatise On Vaulting".

Nuncius: Journal of the Material and Visual History of Science: 279-311 Podles, Mary Elizabeth (May 2021). "A Thousand Words Hagia Sophia, Church of the Holy Wisdom".

Touchstone: A Journal of Mere Christianity.

Cavendish, Richard (December 2013). "Church of Hagia Sophia reconsecrated".

History Today.

Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Artists ULAN People Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isidore_of_Miletus&oldid=1305199259 " Categories : 470s births Byzantine architects 6th-century Byzantine scientists 6th-century mathematicians 6th-century Byzantine writers 6th-century architects Byzantine Milesians Hagia Sophia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isidore of Miletus 37 languages Add topic

