Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Solver types 2 See also Toggle See also subsection 2.1 Lists of solvers 3 References Toggle the table of contents Solver 5 languages Deutsch Français Magyar Polski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Software for a class of mathematical problems For the band, see Solver (band) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Solver" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A solver is a piece of mathematical software , possibly in the form of a stand-alone computer program or as a software library , that 'solves' a mathematical problem. A solver takes problem descriptions in some sort of generic form and calculates their solution. In a solver, the emphasis is on creating a program or library that can easily be applied to other problems of similar type.

Solver types [ edit ] Types of problems with existing dedicated solvers include: Linear and non-linear equations . In the case of a single equation, the "solver" is more appropriately called a root-finding algorithm .

Systems of linear equations .

Nonlinear systems .

Systems of polynomial equations , which are a special case of non linear systems, better solved by specific solvers.

Linear and non-linear optimisation problems Systems of ordinary differential equations Systems of differential algebraic equations Boolean satisfiability problems , including SAT solvers Quantified boolean formula solvers [ 1 ] Constraint satisfaction problems Shortest path problems Minimum spanning tree problems Combinatorial optimization [ 2 ] Game solvers for problems in game theory [ 3 ] Three-body problem [ 4 ] The General Problem Solver ( GPS ) is a particular computer program created in 1957 by Herbert Simon , J. C. Shaw , and Allen Newell intended to work as a universal problem solver, that theoretically can be used to solve every possible problem that can be formalized in a symbolic system, given the right input configuration. It was the first computer program that separated its knowledge of problems (in the form of domain rules) from its strategy of how to solve problems (as a general search engine ).

General solvers typically use an architecture similar to the GPS to decouple a problem's definition from the strategy used to solve it. The advantage in this decoupling is that the solver does not depend on the details of any particular problem instance. The strategy utilized by general solvers was based on a general algorithm (generally based on backtracking ) with the only goal of completeness. This induces an exponential computational time that dramatically limits their usability. Modern solvers use a more specialized approach that takes advantage of the structure of the problems so that the solver spends as little time as possible backtracking.

For problems of a particular class (e.g., systems of non-linear equations ) multiple algorithms are usually available. Some solvers implement multiple algorithms.

See also [ edit ] Mathematical software for other types of mathematical software.

Problem solving environment : a specialized software combining automated problem-solving methods with human-oriented tools for guiding the problem resolution.

Satisfiability modulo theories for solvers of logical formulas with respect to combinations of background theories expressed in classical first-order logic with equality.

Semantic reasoner Lists of solvers [ edit ] List of linear programming solvers List of SMT solvers List of solvers for ordinary differential equations References [ edit ] ^ Using QBF Solvers to Solve Games and Puzzles - Boston College ^ Zhang, Weixiong (2012-12-06).

State-Space Search: Algorithms, Complexity, Extensions, and Applications . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4612-1538-7 .

^ Bowling, Michael, and Manuela Veloso.

An analysis of stochastic game theory for multiagent reinforcement learning . No. CMU-CS-00-165. Carnegie-Mellon Univ Pittsburgh Pa School of Computer Science, 2000.

^ "A neural net solves the three-body problem 100 million times faster" .

MIT Technology Review . October 26, 2019 . Retrieved 2021-05-16 .

v t e Industrial and applied mathematics Computational Algorithms design analysis Automata theory Automated theorem proving Coding theory Computational geometry Constraint satisfaction Constraint programming Computational logic Cryptography Information theory Statistics Mathematical software Arbitrary-precision arithmetic Finite element analysis Tensor software Interactive geometry software Optimization software Statistical software Numerical-analysis software Numerical libraries Solvers Discrete Computer algebra Computational number theory Combinatorics Graph theory Discrete geometry Analysis Approximation theory Clifford analysis Clifford algebra Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Stochastic differential equations Differential geometry Differential forms Gauge theory Geometric analysis Dynamical systems Chaos theory Control theory Functional analysis Operator algebra Operator theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Multilinear algebra Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Multivariable calculus Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Numerical analysis Numerical linear algebra Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations Numerical methods for partial differential equations Validated numerics Variational calculus Probability theory Distributions ( random variables ) Stochastic processes / analysis Path integral Stochastic variational calculus Mathematical physics Analytical mechanics Lagrangian Hamiltonian Field theory Classical Conformal Effective Gauge Quantum Statistical Topological Perturbation theory in quantum mechanics Potential theory String theory Bosonic Topological Supersymmetry Supersymmetric quantum mechanics Supersymmetric theory of stochastic dynamics Algebraic structures Algebra of physical space Feynman integral Poisson algebra Quantum group Renormalization group Representation theory Spacetime algebra Superalgebra Supersymmetry algebra Decision sciences Game theory Operations research Optimization Social choice theory Statistics Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Other applications Biology Chemistry Psychology Sociology " The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences " Related Mathematics Organizations Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Japan Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics European Community on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences Category Mathematics portal / outline / topics list Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solver&oldid=1226805599 " Categories : Numerical software Formal methods tools Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 June 2024, at 23:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solver 5 languages Add topic

