Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Relational aesthetics 1.2 Relational art 2 Critical reception 3 Exhibitions 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Relational art 14 languages Català Dansk Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mode or tendency in fine art Relational art or relational aesthetics is a mode or tendency in fine art practice that emerged under various names in the 1990s. In 1998 French art critic Nicolas Bourriaud defined esthétique relationnelle (relational aesthetics) as "a set of artistic practices which take as their theoretical and practical point of departure the whole of human relations and their social context, rather than an independent and private space." [ 1 ] The artist can be more accurately viewed as the "catalyst" in relational art, rather than an author at the center.

[ 2 ] While helpfully moving aesthetics beyond the sole concerns of the individual into a larger social sphere, relational art as Bourriaud defines it stays within the human realm, reflecting a humanist value system rooted in modernism. This sets relational art and aesthetics in contrast to its immediate predecessor, Brooklyn Immersionism , a posthumanist art movement which began in the late 1980s and involved dozens of creative groups in a sustained and transformative relationship with a living urban ecosystem.

[ 3 ] Both systems aesthetics shared some of the features of social practice art and all three had roots in the process art of the 1970s and "web of life" philosophies of Native Americans.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] Main article: Traffic (art exhibition) One of the first attempts to analyze and categorize art from the 1990s, [ 5 ] the term relational art [ 6 ] was developed by Nicolas Bourriaud in 1998 in his book Esthétique relationnelle ( Relational Aesthetics ).

[ 7 ] The term was first used in 1996, in the catalogue for the exhibition Traffic curated by Bourriaud at CAPC musée d'art contemporain de Bordeaux .

[ 8 ] Traffic included the artists that Bourriaud would continue to refer to throughout the 1990s, such as Henry Bond , Vanessa Beecroft , Maurizio Cattelan , Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster , Liam Gillick , Christine Hill, Carsten Höller , Pierre Huyghe , Miltos Manetas , Jorge Pardo , Philippe Parreno , Gabriel Orozco , Jason Rhoades , Douglas Gordon and Rirkrit Tiravanija . The exhibition took its title and inspiration from Jacques Tati 's film Trafic (1971), in which Tati's protagonist is a Parisian automobile designer preparing a new model for an international auto show. In a denouement that became a fundamental relational aesthetics strategy, particularly for Tiravanija, Tati's entire film is about the designer's journey to the auto show at which he arrives just in time for the show to close.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Relational aesthetics [ edit ] Bourriaud wishes to approach art in a way that ceases "to take shelter behind Sixties art history", [ 13 ] and instead seeks to offer different criteria by which to analyse the often opaque and open-ended works of art of the 1990s. To achieve this, Bourriaud imports the language of the 1990s internet boom, using terminology such as user-friendliness , interactivity and DIY (do-it-yourself).

[ 14 ] In his 2002 book Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World , Bourriaud describes "relational aesthetics" as works that take as their point of departure the changing mental space opened by the internet.

[ 15 ] The interactive, communal expression afforded by the emergence of the World Wide Web can be seen in many ways to echo older, indigenous notions of webs and environmental engagement. Relational art, Social Practices , Process Art and Immersionism are all indebted to Native American insights into the larger web of nature, as Chief Seattle (Si'ahl) makes clear from a speech in 1854: "All things are connected like the blood that unites us all. Humanity did not weave the web of life, we are merely a strand in it. Whatever we do to the web, we do to ourselves." [ 4 ] Relational art [ edit ] Bourriaud explores the notion of relational aesthetics through examples of what he calls relational art. According to Bourriaud, relational art encompasses "a set of artistic practices which take as their theoretical and practical point of departure the whole of human relations and their social context, rather than an independent and private space." The artwork creates a social environment in which people come together to participate in a shared activity. Bourriaud claims "the role of artworks is no longer to form imaginary and utopian realities, but to actually be ways of living and models of action within the existing real, whatever scale chosen by the artist." [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Robert Stam, the head of new media and film studies at New York University , coined a term for the shared activity group: witnessing publics. Witnessing publics are "that loose collection of individuals, constituted by and through the media, acting as observers of injustices that might otherwise go unreported or unanswered." The meaning of relational art is created when arts perception is altered while leaving the original artifact intact.

[ 18 ] In relational art, the audience is envisaged as a community. Rather than the artwork being an encounter between a viewer and an object, relational art produces encounters between people. Through these encounters, meaning is elaborated collectively , rather than in the space of individual consumption.

[ 19 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Writer and director Ben Lewis has suggested that relational art is a new "ism", analogous to art movements of earlier periods such as impressionism , expressionism and cubism .

[ 20 ] As a systems aesthetic emerging at the turn of the 21st century, it parallels Brooklyn Immersionism which began a few years earlier and has been described by the arts historian, Cisco Bradley in 2023 as "the next stage of evolution of the New York art scene." [ 3 ] In that immersion and relationships are deeply related processes, an eco-social zeitgeist in the arts can be said to have emerged out of both movements.

In "Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics", published in 2004 in October , Claire Bishop describes the aesthetic of Palais de Tokyo as a "laboratory", the "curatorial modus operandi" of art produced in the 1990s.

[ 21 ] Bishop writes, "An effect of this insistent promotion of these ideas as artists-as-designer, function over contemplation, and open-endedness over aesthetic resolution is often ultimately to enhance the status of the curator, who gains credit for stage-managing the overall laboratory experience. As Hal Foster warned in the mid-1990s, 'the institution may overshadow the work that it otherwise highlights: it becomes the spectacle, it collects the cultural capital, and the director-curator becomes the star.'" [ 22 ] Bishop identifies Bourriaud's book as an important first step in identifying tendencies in the art of the 1990s [ 23 ] but also writes in the same essay that such work “seems to derive from a creative misreading of poststructuralist theory: rather than the interpretations of a work of art being open to continual reassessment, the work of art itself is argued to be in perpetual flux.” [ 24 ] Bishop also asks, "if relational art produces human relations, then the next logical question to ask is what types of relations are being produced, for whom, and why?" [ 25 ] She continues that "the relations set up by relational aesthetics are not intrinsically democratic , as Bourriaud suggests, since they rest too comfortably within an ideal of subjectivity as whole and of community as immanent togetherness." [ 26 ] In "Traffic Control", published one year later in Artforum , artist and critic Joe Scanlan goes one step further in ascribing to relational aesthetics a palpable peer pressure. Scanlan writes, "Firsthand experience has convinced me that relational aesthetics has more to do with peer pressure than collective action or egalitarianism, which would suggest that one of the best ways to control human behavior is to practice relational aesthetics." Exhibitions [ edit ] In 2002, Bourriaud curated an exhibition at the San Francisco Art Institute , Touch: Relational Art from the 1990s to Now , "an exploration of the interactive works of a new generation of artists." [ 27 ] Exhibited artists included Angela Bulloch , Liam Gillick , Felix Gonzalez-Torres , Jens Haaning , Philippe Parreno , Gillian Wearing and Andrea Zittel . Critic Chris Cobb suggests that Bourriaud's "snapshot" of 1990s art is a confirmation of the term (and idea) of relational art, while illustrating "different forms of social interaction as art that deal fundamentally with issues regarding public and private space." [ 28 ] In 2008, Guggenheim Museum curator Nancy Spector organized an exhibition with most of the artists associated with Relational Aesthetics, but the term itself was shelved in favor of calling the show Theanyspacewhatever . The exhibition included stalwarts Bulloch, Gillick, Gonzalez-Foerster, Höller, Huyghe, and Tiravanija, along with loosely affiliated artists Maurizio Cattelan, Douglas Gordon, Jorge Pardo, and Andrea Zittel.

[ 29 ] The LUMA Foundation has presented many artists associated with Relational Aesthetics.

References [ edit ] ^ Bourriaud, Nicolas, Relational Aesthetics p.113 ^ "PLACE Program" . Archived from the original on 2008-07-04 . Retrieved 2008-06-03 .

^ a b The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront by Cisco Bradley, Duke University Press, 2023, p. 27 ^ a b Perry, Ted. ""Chief Seattle's Speech"". Center for the Study of the Pacific Northwest. Retrieved April 21, 2022.

^ "BOILER - context" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-22 . Retrieved 2008-06-03 .

^ As a term, "relational art" has become accepted over "relational aesthetics" by the art world and Bourriaud himself as indicated by the 2002 exhibition Touch: Relational Art from the 1990s to Now at San Francisco Art Institute , curated by Bourriaud.

^ "PLACE Program" . Archived from the original on 2008-07-04 . Retrieved 2008-06-03 .

^ Simpson, Bennett. "Public Relations: Nicolas Bourriaud Interview." ^ Bishop, Claire. "Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics", pp. 54-55 ^ Bourriaud, Nicolas.

Relational Aesthetics , pp. 46-48 ^ Bourriaud, Nicolas.

Traffic, Catalogue Capc Bordeaux , 1996 ^ "TRAFFIC CONTROL" .

www.mutualart.com .

^ Bourriaud p. 7 ^ Bishop p. 54 ^ Bourriaud, Nicolas, Caroline Schneider and Jeanine Herman.

Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World , p. 8 ^ Bourriaud, Relational Aesthetics p. 113 ^ Bourriaud p. 13 ^ Stam, Robert (2015).

Keywords in Subversive Film / Media Aesthetics .

John Wiley & Sons . p. 282.

ISBN 978-1118340615 .

^ Bourriaud pp. 17-18 ^ "BBC iPlayer - BBC Four" .

Bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 2016-11-21 .

^ Bishop p.52 ^ Bishop p.53 ^ Bishop p.53.

^ Bishop p.52 ^ Bishop, p.65 ^ Bishop p.67 ^ "Features | Nicolas Bourriaud and Karen Moss" . Stretcher.org . Retrieved 2016-11-21 .

^ Cobb, Chris (2002-12-14).

"Features | Touch - Relational Art from the 1990s to Now" .

Stretcher.org . Retrieved 2016-11-21 .

^ "theanyspacewhatever" .

web.guggenheim.org .

Further reading [ edit ] Bishop, Claire (Fall 2004).

"Antagonism and Relational Aesthetics" .

October .

110 (110): 51– 79.

doi : 10.1162/0162287042379810 .

ISSN 0162-2870 .

JSTOR 3397557 .

S2CID 9591417 .

Bourriaud, Nicolas (2002).

Relational Aesthetics . Translated by Simon Pleasance & Fronza Woods with the participation of Mathieu Copeland. Dijon: Les presses du réel. p. 113.

ISBN 978-2-84066-060-6 .

OCLC 1045824516 .

Bourriaud, Nicolas (2002). Schneider, Caroline (ed.).

Postproduction: Culture as Screenplay: How Art Reprograms the World . Translated by Jeanine Herman. New York: Lukas & Sternberg.

ISBN 9780971119307 .

OCLC 224720888 .

Dezeuze, Anna (November 2006). "Everyday Life, 'Relational Aesthetics' and the 'Transfiguration of the Commonplace' ".

Journal of Visual Art Practice .

5 (3): 143– 152.

doi : 10.1386/jvap.5.3.143_1 .

S2CID 191465284 .

Downey, Anthony (May 2007). "Towards a Politics of (Relational) Aesthetics".

Third Text .

21 (3): 267– 275.

doi : 10.1080/09528820701360534 .

S2CID 144661814 .

Hemment, Drew (August 2006).

"Locative Arts" (PDF) .

Leonardo .

39 (4: Pacific Rim New Media Summit Companion): 348– 355, 331.

doi : 10.1162/leon.2006.39.4.348 .

JSTOR 20206267 .

S2CID 57562967 .

Johansson, Troels Degn (23–25 October 2001). Marie le Sourd; et al. (eds.).

Visualizing Relations: Superflex's Relational Art in the Cyberspace Geography . Culture in the Cyber-Age: report from the Asia-Europe Forum, Kyongju, South Korea, October 23–25. Singapore: Asia-Europe Foundation.

Jones, Kip (April 2006).

"A Biographic Researcher in Pursuit of an Aesthetic: The use of arts-based (re)presentations in 'performative' dissemination of life stories" .

Qualitative Sociology Review .

II (1: "Biographical Sociology").

ISSN 1733-8077 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

Levinson, Jerrold (Winter 1989). "Refining Art Historically".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

47 (1): 21– 33.

doi : 10.2307/431990 .

JSTOR 431990 .

Nakajima, Seio (April 2012). "Prosumption in Art".

American Behavioral Scientist .

56 (4): 550– 569.

doi : 10.1177/0002764211429358 .

S2CID 146148268 .

Scanlan, Joe (Summer 2005).

"Traffic Control: Joe Scanlan on Social Space and Relational Aesthetics" .

Artforum . Vol. 43, no. 10. p. 123 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

Simpson, Bennett (April 2001).

"Public Relations: Nicolas Bourriaud Interview" .

Artforum . Vol. 39, no. 8 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

Stahl, Antje (9 May 2011).

"Frankreichs Kunststreit: Künstler als Köche verderben den Brei" .

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Frankfurt, Germany . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

Svetlichnaja, Julia (December 19–21, 2005).

Relational Paradise as a Delusional Democracy—a Critical Response to a Temporary Contemporary Relational Aesthetics .

BISA 31st Annual Conference, "Art and Politics" panel. University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Scotland. Archived from the original ( Microsoft Word document) on 12 December 2006 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Extracts from Nicolas Bourriaud's Relational Esthetics (Dijon: les Presses du réel, 2002) as pdf Interview with Nicolas Bourriaud Interview with Claire Bishop, July 2009 University of New Mexico, College of Fine Arts Open Engagement 2007 conference "What is a Participatory Practice?" in Fillip v t e Relational art Artists Abel Azcona Vanessa Beecroft Henry Bond Angela Bulloch Maurizio Cattelan Liam Gillick Douglas Gordon Jens Haaning Carsten Höller Pierre Huyghe Henrik Plenge Jakobsen Miltos Manetas Philippe Parreno Honoré d'O Gabriel Orozco Felix Gonzalez-Torres Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster Jorge Pardo Jason Rhoades Rirkrit Tiravanija Gillian Wearing Related artists Art & Language Dan Graham Franz West Martin Creed Martin Kippenberger Michael Asher Shows Backstage Traffic Theanyspacewhatever Touch: Relational Art from the 1990s to Now Curators Daniel Birnbaum Nicolas Bourriaud Charles Esche Maria Lind Hans-Ulrich Obrist Julia Peyton-Jones Jérôme Sans Nancy Spector Eric Troncy See also Conceptual art Gilles Deleuze Frieze Art Fair Turner Prize v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Relational_art&oldid=1295104261 " Categories : Relational art Movements in aesthetics Books about the visual arts Contemporary art movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 18:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Relational art 14 languages Add topic

