Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Sovereign states in both hemispheres 3 Countries, dependencies and other territories in the Eastern Hemisphere but not in Europe, Africa, Asia, or Oceania 4 Demographics 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eastern Hemisphere 73 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Half of Earth which lies east of the prime meridian Eastern Hemisphere The Eastern Hemisphere is the half of the planet Earth which is east of the prime meridian (which crosses Greenwich , London , United Kingdom ) and west of the antimeridian (which crosses the Pacific Ocean and relatively little land from pole to pole). It is also used to refer to Afro-Eurasia ( Africa and Eurasia ) and Australia , in contrast with the Western Hemisphere , which includes mainly North and South America . The Eastern Hemisphere may also be called the " Oriental Hemisphere ", and may in addition be used in a cultural or geopolitical sense as a synonym for the European term, " Old World ." Geography [ edit ] The almost perfect circle (the earth is an oblate spheroid that is wider around the equator), drawn with a line, demarcating the Eastern and Western Hemispheres must be an arbitrarily decided and published convention, unlike the equator (an imaginary line encircling Earth , equidistant from its poles ), which divides the Northern and Southern hemispheres. The prime meridian at 0° longitude and the antimeridian , at 180° longitude, are the conventionally accepted boundaries, since they divide eastern longitudes from western longitudes. This convention was established in 1884 at the International Meridian Conference held in Washington, D.C.

where the standard time concepts of Canadian railroad engineer Sir Sandford Fleming were adopted. The Hemispheres agreed do not correspond with exact continents. Portions of Western Europe , West Africa , Oceania , and extreme northeastern Russia are in the Western Hemisphere, divorcing it from the continents which form the touchstone for most geopolitical constructs of "the East" and "the West".

Consequently, meridians of 20°W and the diametrically opposed 160°E are often used outside of matters of physics and navigation, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] which includes all of the European and African mainlands, but also includes a small portion of northeast Greenland (typically reckoned as part of North America ) and excludes more of eastern Russia and Oceania (e.g., New Zealand ). Prior to the global adoption of standard time, numerous prime meridians were decreed by various countries where time was defined by local noon (thereby, local).

The centre of the Eastern Hemisphere is located in the Indian Ocean at the intersection of the equator and the 90th meridian east , 910 km west of Indonesia in the Ninety East Ridge . The nearest land is Simeulue Island at 2°35′N 96°05′E ﻿ / ﻿ 2.583°N 96.083°E ﻿ / 2.583; 96.083 .

The land mass of the Eastern Hemisphere is larger than that of the Western Hemisphere and has a wide variety of habitats .

Sovereign states in both hemispheres [ edit ] Below is a list of the sovereign states in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres on the IERS Reference Meridian , in order from north to south: Denmark , due to the entirety of Greenland and the Faroe Islands .

Denmark proper lies entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

Norway , due only to Jan Mayen . Mainland Norway, Svalbard and Bouvet Island lie entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

United Kingdom , passing through Greenwich , London . Most of the country lies within the Western Hemisphere.

The Netherlands has overseas islands that lie entirely within the Western Hemisphere, while mainland Netherlands lies entirely within the Eastern Hemisphere.

France , passing through Puynormand ( Gironde ). About 1/3 of the country, including cities like Nantes or Bordeaux , as well as the overseas regions of Guadeloupe , Martinique , and French Guiana lie within the Western Hemisphere.

Spain , passing through Castellón de la Plana ( Valencian Community ). Most of Spain, including the capital Madrid , the Canary Islands and the southern half of its Mediterranean territorial waters , lies within the Western Hemisphere. Spanish, Moroccan and Algerian Mediterranean waters are the only part of the Mediterranean Sea located in the Western Hemisphere.

Algeria , passing through Stidia . About 1/4 of the country, including Oran , Algeria's second-largest city, lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Mali , passing through the municipal area of Gao . Most of Mali, including the capital Bamako , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Burkina Faso , passing through Lalgaye . Most of the country, including the capital Ouagadougou , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Ghana , passing through Tema . Most of Ghana, including the capital Accra , lies within the Western Hemisphere.

Togo , passing near Tami ( Tône Prefecture in Savanes Region ).

Below is a list of additional sovereign states which are in both the Western and Eastern hemispheres along the 180th meridian , in order from north to south. (France is not listed below due to its inclusion above, though the meridian does pass Wallis and Futuna .) With the exception of the United States (due to Wake Island , Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands ), all of them are located on just one side of the International Date Line , which curves around them.

Russia , passing through Chukotka Autonomous Okrug . Its portion lying east of the 180th meridian is the only part of the country lying in the Western Hemisphere.

United States , passing through the Aleutian Islands ( Alaska ). Except for the portion of Aleutian Islands and waters lying west of the 180th meridian, Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , and Wake Island , most of the country lies east of the 180th meridian.

Kiribati , passing close to Arorae . The country has both the Equator and the 180th meridian ( antimeridian ) crossing through its territory. It is the only country located in four hemispheres.

Tuvalu , passing close to its capital, Funafuti .

Fiji , passing close to its dependency Rotuma and passing through Taveuni .

Most of New Zealand proper lies within the Eastern Hemisphere; but Chatham Islands and Kermadec Islands , as well as the self-governing states of the Cook Islands and Niue and the dependent territory of Tokelau , lie east of the 180th meridian.

Countries, dependencies and other territories in the Eastern Hemisphere but not in Europe, Africa, Asia, or Oceania [ edit ] The following countries and territories lie outside Europe , Asia , Africa , and Oceania and are entirely, mostly, or partially within the Western Hemisphere Americas Entirely Canada United States Mexico Guatemala Honduras El Salvador Nicaragua Costa Rica Panama Colombia Ecuador Peru Chile Argentina Uruguay Brazil Demographics [ edit ] 82% of humans live in the Eastern Hemisphere, and 18% in the Western Hemisphere .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Land and water hemispheres Eastern world Western Hemisphere References [ edit ] ^ Olson, Judy M.  " Projecting the hemisphere Archived 2007-08-14 at the Wayback Machine ", ch. 4 from Matching the map projection to the need , Archived 2007-08-18 at the Wayback Machine ; Robinson, Arthur H. & Snyder, John P., eds. 1997.  Bethesda, MD: Cartography and Geographic Information Society, American Congress on Surveying and Mapping.

^ "Eastern Hemisphere".

Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary, 3rd ed.  2001.  Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster, Inc., p. 340.

^ "How Much of Humanity is in Your Hemisphere? - Brilliant Maps" .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-16 . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Eastern Hemisphere at Wikimedia Commons v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eastern_Hemisphere&oldid=1288422712 " Categories : Eastern Hemisphere Hemispheres of Earth Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 14:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eastern Hemisphere 73 languages Add topic

