Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 B'nai Brith library (1892–1925) 1.2 Hebrew University library (1925–2007) 1.3 National Library legal status (2007) 1.4 New building 1.5 Temporary closure (2020) 2 Goals and objectives Toggle Goals and objectives subsection 2.1 Mission 2.2 Scanning and online access 2.2.1 Books from the Islamic world 3 Special collections Toggle Special collections subsection 3.1 Institutional, community, and topical collections 3.2 Personal papers, private research archives & libraries 3.3 Books from private libraries of Arab Palestinians who fled in 1948 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National Library of Israel 79 languages Afrikaans العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Македонски മലയാളം Māori मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 31°46′38″N 35°12′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 31.77722°N 35.20333°E ﻿ / 31.77722; 35.20333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jewish heritage library in Jerusalem National Library of Israel הספרייה הלאומית The reading room (2023) 31°46′38″N 35°12′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 31.77722°N 35.20333°E ﻿ / 31.77722; 35.20333 Location Jerusalem , Israel Established 1892 ; 133 years ago ( 1892 ) Reference to legal mandate The Legal Deposit of generally available documents Collection Items collected Unique collections of manuscripts , special collections of books , music, radio and television programmes, film, theatre, maps , posters , photographs, electronic documents and newspapers .

Size 5 million volumes Other information Budget Approximately 100 million NIS Director Oren Weinberg Employees 367 Website nli.org.il The National Library of Israel ( NLI ; Hebrew : הספרייה הלאומית , romanized : HaSifria HaLeumit ; Arabic : المكتبة الوطنية في إسرائيل ), formerly Jewish National and University Library ( JNUL ; Hebrew : בית הספרים הלאומי והאוניברסיטאי , romanized : Beit Ha-Sfarim Ha-Le'umi ve-Ha-Universita'i ), is the library dedicated to collecting the cultural treasures of Israel and of Jewish heritage . The library holds more than 5 million books, and is located in the Government complex ( Kiryat HaMemshala ) near the Knesset .

The National Library owns the world's largest collections of Hebraica and Judaica , [ 1 ] and is the repository of many rare and unique manuscripts, books and artifacts.

History [ edit ] B'nai Brith library (1892–1925) [ edit ] Joseph Chazanovitz B'nai Brith library, Jerusalem The establishment of a Jewish National Library in Jerusalem was the brainchild of Joseph Chazanovitz [ he ] (1844–1919). His idea was creating a "home for all works in all languages and literatures which have Jewish authors, even though they create in foreign cultures." Chazanovitz (variously spelled Chasanowitz in German, Chazanowicz in Polish, etc.), a subject of the Russian Czar, collected some 15,000 volumes which later became the core of the library.

[ 2 ] The B'nai Brith library, founded in Jerusalem in 1892, was the first public library in the region of Palestine to serve the Jewish community. The library was located on B'nai Brith Street, between the Meah Shearim neighborhood and the Russian Compound .

[ 3 ] Ten years later, the Bet Midrash Abrabanel library, as it was then known, moved to Ethiopia Street.

[ 4 ] Hebrew University library (1925–2007) [ edit ] Hebrew university library on Mount Scopus (1925–1937) In 1920, when plans were drawn up for the Hebrew University, the B'nai Brith collection became the basis for a university library. The books were moved to Mount Scopus when the university opened five years later.

[ 3 ] In 1948, when access to the university campus on Mount Scopus was blocked, most of the books were moved to the university's temporary quarters in the [[ Search
Notifications (2)
Terra Sancta College (Jerusalem) |Terra Sancta building]] in Rehavia . By that time, the university collection included over one million books. For lack of space, some of the books were placed in storerooms around the city. In 1960, they were moved to the new JNUL building in Givat Ram .

[ 3 ] In the late 1970s, when the new university complex on Mount Scopus was inaugurated and the faculties of Law, Humanities and Social Science returned there, departmental libraries opened on that campus and the number of visitors to the Givat Ram library dropped. In the 1990s, the building suffered from maintenance problems such as rainwater leaks and insect infestation.

[ 3 ] National Library legal status (2007) [ edit ] In 2007 the library was officially recognized as The National Library of the State of Israel after the passage of the National Library Law.

[ 3 ] The law, which came into effect on 23 July 2008, changed the library's name to "National Library of Israel" and turned it temporarily to a subsidiary company of the University, later to become a fully independent community interest company , jointly owned by the Government of Israel (50%), the Hebrew University (25%) and other organizations.

New building [ edit ] In 2014, the project for a new home of the Library in Jerusalem was unveiled.

[ 5 ] The 45,000 square meters [ 6 ] building was designed by the Basel -based architecture firm Herzog & de Meuron .

[ 7 ] The cornerstone laying ceremony took place in 2016. The completion date was postponed a number of times and the old library building at Givat Ram continued to be used till September 2023. The grand opening events planned for the week of 22 October were cancelled due to the October 7 attacks and the ensuing Gaza war . Ad a result, the new building opened its doors to the public on 29 October 2023, with service and capacity being subject to war-related limitations.

[ 8 ] The New building by Herzog & de Meuron (2023) Temporary closure (2020) [ edit ] In August 2020, the National Library announced its immediately forthcoming closure "until further notice" due to the ongoing financial and government crisis (see COVID-19 pandemic in Israel ).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The closure lasted for a number of weeks. A small skeleton staff continued coming to work, but most of the employees either worked from home or took partial or full paid leave. During this period, the library, mainly the reference, education and culture departments, provided online services.

[ 11 ] Goals and objectives [ edit ] The National Library of Israel (2023) Ardon windows in the old library building, Givat Ram Mission [ edit ] The library's mission is to secure copies of all material published in Israel, in any language; all publications on the subject of the State of Israel , the Land of Israel , Judaism and the Jewish people , published in any language, in any country in the world; and all material published in Hebrew or any of the languages spoken in the Jewish Diaspora (such as Yiddish and Ladino ).

By law, two copies of all printed matter published in Israel must be deposited in the National Library. In 2001, the law was amended to include audio and video recordings, and other non-print media.

[ 12 ] Scanning and online access [ edit ] Many manuscripts, including some of the library's unique volumes such the thirteenth-century Worms Mahzor , [ 13 ] have been scanned and are available on the library's website.

[ citation needed ] Books from the Islamic world [ edit ] Due to be completed in 2023, the National Library of Israel is digitizing over 2,500 rare manuscripts and books which will be available online for free. The works are written in Arabic, Persian, Turkish and Urdu and date from the ninth to twentieth centuries.

[ 14 ] Special collections [ edit ] Among the library's special collections are the personal papers of hundreds of outstanding Jewish figures, and various collections from institutions and private archives as well as numerous other collections of Hebraica and Judaica .

[ 15 ] Institutional, community, and topical collections [ edit ] the National Sound Archives [ 15 ] Eran Laor Cartographic Collection [ 15 ] The Sidney Edelstein Collection (for the history of science) [ 15 ] the Genealogical History of the Irish Jewish Communities (GHIJC): on 19 December 2022, Irishman Stuart Rosenblatt, President of the Genealogical Society of Ireland , donated to the NIL his 22 volume collection, being the GHIJC, in the presence of the Irish Ambassador to Israel.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Personal papers, private research archives & libraries [ edit ] Isaac Newton : the library possesses some of his manuscripts dealing with theological subjects.

[ 15 ] The collection, donated by the family of the collector Abraham Yahuda , includes many works by Newton about mysticism, analyses of holy books, predictions about the end of days and the appearance of the ancient Temple in Jerusalem. It also contains maps that Newton sketched about mythical events to assist him in his end of days calculations.

[ 18 ] Martin Buber , the personal archives [ 19 ] Gershom Scholem : the personal archives [ 19 ] The Gershom Scholem Collection for the Research of Kabbalah and Hasidism, including Scholem's personal library and items added since his death in 1982.

Max Brod : NIL completed its collection of the Max Brod archive in August 2019.

[ 20 ] The Israel Supreme Court, in a highly controversial decision, ordered the papers including the Franz Kafka papers to be deposited there, although Max Brod had expressly left the ultimate decision to the daughters of his secretary and heir Ester Hoffe, providing that they were to hand them over to the "Bibliothek der Hebräischen Universität Jerusalem oder der Städtischen Bibliothek Tel Aviv oder einem anderen öffentlichen Archiv im Inland oder Ausland", lit. 'library of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, or the City Library Tel Aviv, or another domestic or foreign public archive'.

Reading room at the new National Library of Israel Books from private libraries of Arab Palestinians who fled in 1948 [ edit ] Following the occupation of Arab and mixed neighbourhoods of West Jerusalem by Haganah forces in May 1948 , the libraries of a number of Palestinian Arabs who fled the country as well as of other well-to-do Palestinians were transferred to the National Library.

[ 21 ] These collections included those of Henry Cattan , Khalil Beidas , Khalil al-Sakakini and Aref Hikmet Nashashibi .

[ 22 ] About 30,000 books were removed from homes in West Jerusalem, with another 40,000 taken from other cities in Mandatory Palestine. It is unclear whether the books were being kept and protected or if they were looted from the abandoned houses of their owners.

[ 23 ] About 6,000 of these books are in the library today indexed with the label AP – "Abandoned Property".

[ 24 ] The books are cataloged, can be viewed from the Library's general catalog and are regularly consulted by the public.

See also [ edit ] Judaica Archival Project List of national and state libraries Union List of Israel , combined library catalog with over 5 million entries References [ edit ] ^ "Judaica Collection" .

web.nli.org.il .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2024 . Retrieved 4 March 2021 .

^ Gelber, Mark H. (2014).

Melancholy Pride: Nation, Race, and Gender in the German Literature of Cultural Zionism .

Walter de Gruyter .

ISBN 9783110956085 .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ a b c d e Dayan, Aryeh .

"New chapter in a sad saga" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2017 . Retrieved 29 May 2017 .

^ "Hebrew University Hails 'Landmark Legislation' for the Establishment of the National Library" . Canadian Friends of the Hebrew University. 27 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017 . Retrieved 1 October 2008 .

^ Rosenfield, Karissa (29 April 2013).

"Herzog & de Meuron to Design the National Library of Israel" .

ArchDaily .

^ "National Library of Israel Renewal" .

www.nli.org.il . Retrieved 14 July 2025 .

^ Gintoff, Vladimir (14 April 2016).

"Herzog & de Meuron Share New Images of the National Library of Israel" .

ArchDaily .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2017 .

^ "הספרייה הלאומית החדשה פתוחה לקהל הרחב" .

National Library of Israel .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ Hen, Yitzhak, "Israel's National Library Is Closing Down. How Much Do You Care?" Archived 26 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Haaretz , 18 August 2020.

^ Oster, Marcy, "National Library of Israel to suspend services, put 300 workers on unpaid leave" Archived 26 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Times of Israel , 6 August 2020.

^ Rothbart, Zack (26 January 2021).

"How Has Israel's National Library Responded to the COVID-19 Crisis?" .

The Librarians .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 October 2023 .

^ "History and aims" .

About the Library . Jewish National & University Library History. Archived from the original on 21 April 2007.

^ The 999 at the NLI website (in Hebrew).

^ Grey, Tobias (17 July 2020).

"Islamic Civilization Reflected in Writing; A new project by the National Library of Israel will digitize more than 2,500 rare manuscripts and books in Arabic, Persian and other languages" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2022 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ a b c d e Newton Collection Archived 24 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine (in English) ^ " 'Living encyclopedia' Stuart Rosenblatt donates Irish-Jewish family records to National Library of Israel Archived 3 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ", by Avi Kumar, Jewish News Syndicate , 2 December 2022.

^ " Grapevine 11 December 2022: Beyond Blarney Archived 17 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine ", by Greer Fay Cashman, in The Jerusalem Post , 11 December 2022.

^ "Israel National Library Uploads Trove of Newton's Theological Tracts" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ a b "National Library, Germany Partner to Put Papers Online" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ "Israel Gets Missing Kafka Papers, Ending Long Legal Battle" .

Courthouse News Service . Agence France-Presse. 7 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2019 .

^ Amit, Gish.

"The Looting of the Palestinian Books" Archived 13 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine , English translation from Hebrew by Rebecca Gillis, on Ben Gurion U. website; from the doctoral dissertation "The Jewish National and University Library 1945-1955: The Appropriation of Palestinian Books, the Confiscation of Cultural Property from Jewish Immigrants from Arab Countries and the Collection of Books Left Behind by Holocaust Victims"; chapter published in Mita'am: A Review of Literature and Radical Thought 8 (Dec. 2006), pp. 12–22.

^ Israel State Archive, Jerusalem, 1429/3 ^ Aderet, Ofer (7 December 2012).

"Preserving or Looting Palestinian Books in Jerusalem" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 20 November 2021 .

^ Mermelstein, Hannah (Autumn 2011).

"Overdue Books: Returning Palestine's "Abandoned Property" of 1948" (PDF) .

Jerusalem Quarterly . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2014.

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: J9U ID (P8189) (see uses ) Media related to National Library of Israel at Wikimedia Commons Official website v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Tourism in Jerusalem Landmarks Armon HaNatziv Chords Bridge Dome of the Rock Gates of the Old City Damascus Gate Dung Gate Golden Gate Herod's Gate Jaffa Gate ( The Architects Tombs at Jaffa Gate ) Lions' Gate New Gate Zion Gate Knesset Montefiore Windmill National Library of Israel Navon railway station Shrine of the Book Supreme Court of Israel Temple Mount Tower of David Walls of Jerusalem Western Wall Museums Armenian Art and Culture Museum Armenian Library Bible Lands Museum Bloomfield Science Museum Burnt House Chamber of the Holocaust Friends of Zion Museum Heichal Shlomo Herodian Quarter – Wohl Archaeological Museum Herzl Museum Islamic Museum Israel Museum Shrine of the Book Menachem Begin Heritage Center Museum for Islamic Art Museum of Tolerance Jerusalem Museum of Underground Prisoners Museum on the Seam North Africa Jewish Heritage Center Old Yishuv Courtyard Paulus-Haus Rockefeller Archeological Museum Russian Compound Schottenstein campus Siebenberg House Stern House Temple Institute Terra Sancta Museum Ticho House Tower of David U. Nahon Museum of Italian Jewish Art Yad Levi Eshkol Yad Vashem Religious sites Judaism Ades Synagogue Ari Synagogue Beit El Kabbalist yeshiva Belz Great Synagogue Four Sephardic Synagogues Great Synagogue of Jerusalem Hecht Synagogue Heichal Shlomo Hurva Synagogue Ohel Yitzchak Synagogue Ohr ha-Chaim Synagogue Old Motza Synagogue Or Zaruaa Synagogue Rabbi Dr. I. Goldstein Synagogue Ramban Synagogue Temple Mount Tiferet Yisrael Synagogue Tzuf Dvash Synagogue Western Wall‎ Plaza Wilson's Arch Zoharei Chama Synagogue Christianity Chapel of Simon of Cyrene Cathedral of the Annunciation Church of the Flagellation Church of the Holy Sepulchre Deir es-Sultan Chapel of Saint Helena Church of Saint Anne Church of the Holy Family Co-Cathedral of the Most Holy Name of Jesus Garden Tomb Gethsemane Church of All Nations Monastery of Saint Saviour Cathedral of Saint James Church of Saint Toros Church of the Holy Archangels Armenian Monastery of Saint Saviour Monastery of Saint Mark Christ Church Via Dolorosa Islam Al-Aqsa Mosque Al-Khanqah al-Salahiyya Mosque Madrasa Al-Ashrafiyya Marwani Mosque Mosque of Omar Archaeological sites Broad Wall Cave of Nicanor Cave of the Minor Sanhedrin Cave of the Ramban City of David Siloam tunnel Ein Lavan Israelite Tower Jason's Tomb Jerusalem Archaeological Park Jerusalem Walls National Park Ketef Hinnom Mamilla Pool Old Kathisma The Cardo Tomb of Absalom Tomb of Benei Hezir Tombs of the Kings Tomb of the Prophets Tombs of the Sanhedrin Tomb of Zechariah Tower of David (northeast tower) Western Wall Tunnel Zedekiah's Cave Gates, streets, squares, areas of interest Bukharan Quarter Artists' Colony Ein Kerem Ethiopia Street Jaffa Road Davidka Square Zion Square Tzahal Square Safra Square Old City of Jerusalem Jewish Quarter Christian Quarter Armenian Quarter Muslim Quarter Muristan Nahalat Shiv'a Paris Square Yemin Moshe Zion Square Parks and gardens Bible Hill Garden of the Righteous Among the Nations Gazelle Valley Independence Park Jerusalem Biblical Zoo Jerusalem Bird Observatory Jerusalem Botanical Gardens Jerusalem Metropolitan Park Jerusalem Trail Liberty Bell Park Orson Hyde Memorial Garden Sacher Park The Nature Park & Galleries Teddy Park Train Track Park Wohl Rose Park Yad Kennedy Sport venues Givat Ram Stadium Jerusalem Sports Quarter Malha Arena Pais Arena Teddy Stadium Hotels American Colony Hotel Austrian Pilgrim Hospice to the Holy Family David Citadel Hotel The Heritage House Inbal Jerusalem Hotel Jerusalem Gate Hotel King David Hotel Leonardo Plaza Hotel Jerusalem Mount of Olives Hotel Seven Arches Hotel Cemeteries Har HaMenuchot Mamilla Cemetery Mount of Olives Jewish Cemetery Mount Herzl Garden of the Missing in Action Victims of Acts of Terror Memorial Sanhedria Cemetery Shaare Zedek Cemetery Sheikh Badr Cemetery Tabachnik Garden Entertainment and performance arts centers Gerard Behar Center International Convention Center Jerusalem Cinematheque Jerusalem Theatre Khan Theatre Markets and shopping centers Ben Yehuda Street Mahane Yehuda Market Malha Mall Mamilla Mall Suq el-Bazaar Events 1st Jerusalem Biennale Day of Prayer for the Peace of Jerusalem Holy Fire Israel Festival Jerusalem Day Jerusalem Festival of Light Jerusalem Film Festival Jerusalem Food Truck Festival Temple Mount Sifting Project Culture and cuisine Armenian ceramics Placing notes in the Western Wall Jerusalem bagel Jerusalem mixed grill Kubbeh Yerushalmi Kugel Macaroni Hamin Orez Shu'it Sofrito Related Jerusalem syndrome Cuisine of Jerusalem Tourism in Israel v t e National libraries of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel People ISIL : IL-NNL Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Library_of_Israel&oldid=1306345163 " Categories : National Library of Israel 1892 establishments in Ottoman Syria Academic libraries in Israel Archives in Israel Deposit libraries Government buildings in Israel Hebrew University of Jerusalem Libraries established in 1892 Libraries in Jerusalem National libraries Organizations based in Jerusalem Public libraries World Digital Library partners Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 07:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Library of Israel 79 languages Add topic

