Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical development 2 Fireplaces and stoves 3 1970s 4 1980s 5 Today 6 Measurement of firewood 7 Energy content 8 Environmental impacts Toggle Environmental impacts subsection 8.1 Combustion by-products 8.1.1 Combustion by-product effects on human health 8.2 Harvesting operations 8.3 Greenhouse gases 8.4 Regulation and Legislation 9 Potential use in renewable energy technologies 10 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 10.1 Australia 10.2 Europe 10.3 Asia 10.4 North America 11 Sources 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Wood fuel 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Jawa 日本語 Simple English Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wood used as fuel for combustion This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wood fuel" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Wood burning Wood fuel (or fuelwood ) is a fuel such as firewood , charcoal , chips , sheets, pellets , and sawdust . The particular form used depends upon factors such as source, quantity, quality and application. In many areas, wood is the most easily available form of fuel, requiring no tools in the case of picking up dead wood, or few tools, although as in any industry, specialized tools, such as skidders and hydraulic wood splitters, have been developed to mechanize production.

Sawmill waste and construction industry by-products also include various forms of lumber tailings. About half of wood extracted from forests worldwide is used as fuelwood.

[ 1 ] The discovery of how to make fire for the purpose of burning wood is regarded as one of humanity's most important advances. The use of wood as a fuel source for heating is much older than civilization and is assumed to have been used by Neanderthals . Today, burning of wood is the largest use of energy derived from a solid fuel biomass . Wood fuel can be used for cooking and heating , and occasionally for fueling steam engines and steam turbines that generate electricity . Wood may be used indoors in a furnace, stove , or fireplace , or outdoors in furnace, campfire , or bonfire .

Historical development [ edit ] Further information: Firewood Campfires have been used for ages: fires are integral to humanity.

Charcoal , a derivative of wood, was traditionally an important fuel in ironmaking and other processes Wood has been used as fuel for millennia. Historically, it was limited in use only by the distribution of technology required to make a spark. Heat derived from wood is still common throughout much of the world. Early examples included a fire constructed inside a tent. Fires were constructed on the ground, and a smoke hole in the top of the tent allowed the smoke to escape by convection.

In permanent structures and in caves, hearths were constructed or established—surfaces of stone or another noncombustible material upon which a fire could be built.  Smoke escaped through a smoke hole in the roof.

In contrast to civilizations in relatively arid regions (such as Mesopotamia and Egypt), the Greeks, Romans, Celts, Britons, and Gauls all had access to forests suitable for using as fuel. Over the centuries there was a partial deforestation of climax forests and the evolution of the remainder to coppice with standards woodland as the primary source of wood fuel. These woodlands involved a continuous cycle of new stems harvested from old stumps, on rotations between seven and thirty years.

One of the earliest printed books on woodland management, in English, was John Evelyn 's "Sylva, or a discourse on forest trees" (1664) advising landowners on the proper management of forest estates. H. L. Edlin, in "Woodland Crafts in Britain", 1949 outlines the extraordinary techniques employed, and range of wood products that have been produced from these managed forests since pre-Roman times. And throughout this time the preferred form of wood fuel was the branches of cut coppice stems bundled into faggots . Larger, bent or deformed stems that were of no other use to the woodland craftsmen were converted to charcoal .

As with most of Europe, these managed woodlands continued to supply their markets right up to the end of World War Two. Since then much of these woodlands have been converted to broadscale agriculture. Total demand for fuel increased considerably with the Industrial Revolution but most of this increased demand was met by the new fuel source coal , which was more compact and more suited to the larger scale of the new industries.

During the Edo period of Japan, wood was used for many purposes, and the consumption of wood led Japan to develop a forest management policy during that era.

[ 2 ] Demand for timber resources was on the rise not only for fuel, but also for construction of ships and buildings, and consequently deforestation was widespread. As a result, forest fires occurred, along with floods and soil erosion. Around 1666, the shōgun made it a policy to reduce logging and increase the planting of trees. This policy decreed that only the shōgun, or a daimyō ,  could authorize the use of wood. By the 18th century, Japan had developed detailed scientific knowledge about silviculture and plantation forestry .

Fireplaces and stoves [ edit ] Ceramic stoves are traditional in Northern Europe: an 18th-century faience stove at Łańcut Castle, Poland The development of the chimney and the fireplace allowed for more effective exhaustion of the smoke.

Masonry heaters or stoves went a step further by capturing much of the heat of the fire and exhaust in a large thermal mass, becoming much more efficient than a fireplace alone.

The metal stove was a technological development concurrent with the Industrial Revolution .  Stoves were manufactured or constructed pieces of equipment that contained the fire on all sides and provided a means for controlling the draft—the amount of air allowed to reach the fire. Stoves have been made of a variety of materials.  Cast iron is among the more common.  Soapstone ( talc ), tile , and steel have all been used.  Metal stoves are often lined with refractory materials such as firebrick , since the hottest part of a woodburning fire will burn away steel over the course of several years' use.

The Franklin stove was developed in the United States by Benjamin Franklin .  More a manufactured fireplace than a stove, it had an open front and a heat exchanger in the back that was designed to draw air from the cellar and heat it before releasing it out the sides.  The heat exchanger was never a popular feature and was omitted in later versions.  So-called "Franklin" stoves today are made in a great variety of styles, though none resembles the original design.

Potbelly stove at the Museum of Appalachia The 1800s became the high point of the cast iron stove.  Each local foundry would make their own design, and stoves were built for myriads of purposes—parlour stoves, box stoves, camp stoves, railroad stoves, portable stoves, cooking stoves and so on.  Elaborate nickel and
chrome edged models took designs to the edge, with cast ornaments, feet and doors.  Wood or coal could be burnt in the stoves and
thus they were popular for over one hundred years.  The action of the fire, combined with the causticity of the ash, ensured that the stove would eventually disintegrate or crack over time. Thus a steady supply of stoves was needed.  The maintenance of stoves, needing to be blacked, their smokiness, and the need to split wood meant that oil or electric heat found favour.

The airtight stove , originally made of steel, allowed greater control of combustion, being more tightly fitted than other stoves of the day. Airtight stoves became common in the 19th century.

Use of wood heat declined in popularity with the growing availability of other, less labor-intensive fuels. Wood heat was gradually replaced by coal and later by fuel oil , natural gas and propane heating except in rural areas with available forests.

After the 1967 Oil Embargo , many people in the United States used wood as fuel for the first time. The EPA provided information on clean stoves, which burned much more efficiently.

[ 3 ] 1970s [ edit ] A woman uses wood in a fireplace for heat. A newspaper headline before her tells of the community's lack of heating oil in 1973.

A brief resurgence in popularity occurred during and after the 1973 energy crisis , when some believed that fossil fuels would become so expensive as to preclude their use.  A period of innovation followed, with many small manufacturers producing stoves based on designs old and new.   Notable innovations from that era include the Ashley heater , a thermostatically controlled stove with an optional perforated steel enclosure that prevented accidental contact with hot surfaces. The decade also saw a number of dual-fuel furnaces and boilers made, which utilized ductwork and piping to deliver heat throughout a house or other building.

1980s [ edit ] The growth in popularity of wood heat also led to the development and marketing of a greater variety of equipment for cutting, splitting and processing firewood. Consumer grade hydraulic log splitters were developed to be powered by electricity, gasoline, or PTO of farm tractors. In 1987 the US Department of Agriculture published a method for producing kiln dried firewood, on the basis that better heat output and increased combustion efficiency can be achieved with logs containing lower moisture content.

[ 4 ] The magazine "Wood Burning Quarterly" was published for several years before changing its name to "Home Energy Digest" and, subsequently, disappearing.

Today [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on Talk:Wood fuel . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "sustainble forestry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A wood pellet stove A pellet stove is an appliance that burns compressed wood or biomass pellets .
Wood heat continues to be used in areas where firewood is abundant. For serious attempts at heating, rather than mere ambience (open fireplaces), stoves, fireplace inserts, and furnaces are most commonly used today. In rural, forested parts of the U.S., freestanding boilers are increasingly common. They are installed outdoors, some distance from the house, and connected to a heat exchanger in the house using underground piping.

The mess of wood, bark, smoke, and ashes is kept outside and the risk of fire is reduced. The boilers are large enough to hold a fire all night and can burn larger pieces of wood, thus less cutting and splitting is required. There is no need to retrofit a chimney in the house. However, outdoor wood boilers emit more wood smoke and associated pollutants than other wood-burning appliances. This is due to design characteristics such as the water-filled jacket surrounding the firebox, which acts to cool the fire and leads to incomplete combustion. Outdoor wood boilers also typically have short stack heights in comparison to other wood-burning appliances, contributing to ambient levels of particulates at ground level. An increasingly popular alternative is the wood gasification boiler, which burns wood at very high efficiencies (85-91%) and can be placed indoors or in an outbuilding.

There are numerous ways to process wood fuel, and wood is still used today for cooking in many places, either in a stove or an open fire. It is also used as a fuel in many industrial processes, including smoking meat and making maple syrup . As a sustainable energy source, wood fuel also remains viable for generating electricity in areas with easy access to forest products and by-products.

Measurement of firewood [ edit ] Stapled birch wood In the metric system , firewood is normally sold by the cubic metre or stere (1 m 3 ≈ 0.276 cords ).

In the United States and Canada, firewood is usually sold by the cord , 128 ft 3 (3.62 m 3 ), corresponding to a woodpile 8 ft wide × 4 ft high of 4 ft-long logs. The cord is legally defined by statute in most U.S. states. A "thrown cord" is firewood that has not been stacked and is defined as 4 ft wide × 4 ft tall × 10 ft long. The additional volume is to make it equivalent to a standard stacked cord, where there is less void space. It is also common to see wood sold by the "face cord", which is usually not legally defined, and varies from one area to another. For example, in one state a pile of wood 8 feet wide × 4 feet high of 16 inch-long logs will often be sold as a "face cord", though its volume is only one-third of a cord. In another state, or even another area of the same state, the volume of a face cord may be considerably different. Hence, it is risky to buy wood sold in this manner, as the transaction is not based on a legally enforceable unit of measure.

In Australia, firewood is normally sold by the tonne , but is commonly advertised as sold by the barrowload (wheelbarrow), bucket ( 1 ⁄ 3 of a 1 m 3 bucket of a typical skid-steer ), ute -load or bag (roughly 15–20 kg).

Energy content [ edit ] A common hardwood, red oak, has an energy content ( heat value ) of 14.9 mega joules per kilogram (6,388 BTU per pound), and 10.4 mega joules recoverable if burned at 70% efficiency.

[ 5 ] The Sustainable Energy Development Office (SEDO), part of the Government of Western Australia states that the energy content of wood is 16.2 megajoules per kilogram (4.5 kWh/kg).

[ 6 ] According to The Bioenergy Knowledge Centre , the energy content of wood is more closely related to its moisture content than its species. The energy content improves as moisture content decreases.

[ 7 ] In 2008, wood for fuel cost $15.15 per 1 million BTUs (0.041 EUR per kWh).

[ 8 ] [ unreliable source?

] Environmental impacts [ edit ] Combustion by-products [ edit ] Fireplace and chimney after a wildfire, Witch Fire , California As with any fire , burning wood fuel creates numerous by-products, some of which may be useful (heat and steam), and others that are undesirable, irritating or dangerous.

One by-product of wood burning is wood ash , which in moderate amounts is a fertilizer (mainly potash ), contributing minerals, but is strongly alkaline as it contains potassium hydroxide [ 9 ] (lye). Wood ash can also be used to manufacture soap .

Smoke , containing water vapor , carbon dioxide and other chemicals and aerosol particulates, including caustic alkali fly ash , which can be an irritating (and potentially dangerous) by-product of partially burnt wood fuel. A major component of wood smoke is fine particles that may account for a large portion of particulate air pollution in some regions. During cooler months, wood heating accounts for as much as 60% of fine particles in Melbourne , Australia .

[ 10 ] The burning of fuel wood releases organic components over a wide volatility range. Here the organic components emitted from the combustion of fuel wood are measured with a range of state-of-the art analytical techniques including proton-transfer-reaction time-of-flight mass spectrometry , two-dimensional gas chromatography and two-dimensional gas chromatography coupled to time-of-flight mass spectrometry .

[ 11 ] Significant quantities of volatile organic compounds are released from the combustion of fuel wood . Large quantities of smaller oxygenate species are released during the combustion process, as well as organics formed from the depolymerisation reaction of lignin such as phenolics, furans and furanones.

[ 12 ] The combustion of fuel wood has also been shown to release many organic compounds into the aerosol phase.

[ 13 ] The burning of fuel woods has been shown to release organic components over a range of volatilities, over effective saturation concentrations, C *, from 10 1 -10 11 μg m −3 .  The emissions from fuel wood samples collected from the Delhi area of India were shown to be 30 times more reactive with the hydroxyl radical than emissions from liquefied petroleum gas . Furthermore, when comparing 21 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons emitted from the same fuel wood samples from Delhi , emissions from fuel wood were around 20 times more toxic than emissions from liquefied petroleum gas .

[ 11 ] In some of the most efficient burners, the temperature of the smoke is hot enough to burn itself (e.g. 609 °C (1,128 °F) [ 14 ] for igniting carbon monoxide gas). This may significantly reduce smoke hazards while also providing additional heat from the process. By using a catalytic converter , the temperature for obtaining cleaner smoke can be reduced. Some U.S. jurisdictions prohibit sale or installation of stoves that do not incorporate catalytic converters.

[ citation needed ] Combustion by-product effects on human health [ edit ] Wood-burning fireplace with burning log Depending on population density, topography, climatic conditions and combustion equipment used, wood heating may substantially contribute to air pollution , particularly particulates . The conditions in which wood is burnt will greatly influence the content of the emission.

[ citation needed ] Particulate air pollution can contribute to human health problems and increased hospital admissions for asthma & heart diseases.

[ 10 ] The technique of compressing wood pulp into pellets or artificial logs can reduce emissions. The combustion is cleaner, and the increased wood density and reduced water content can eliminate some of the transport bulk. The fossil energy consumed in transport is reduced and represents a small fraction of the fossil fuel consumed in producing and distributing heating oil or gas.

[ 15 ] Harvesting operations [ edit ] Much wood fuel comes from native forests around the world.

Plantation wood is rarely used for firewood, as it is more valuable as timber or wood pulp , however, some wood fuel is gathered from trees planted amongst crops, also known as agroforestry .

[ 16 ] The collection or harvesting of this wood can have serious environmental implications for the collection area. The concerns are often specific to the particular area, but can include all the problems that regular logging create. The heavy removal of wood from forests can cause habitat destruction and soil erosion .
However, in many countries, for example in Europe and Canada, the forest residues are being collected and turned into useful wood fuels with minimal impact on the environment. Consideration is given to soil nutrition as well as erosion.
The environmental impact of using wood as a fuel depends on how it is burnt.  Higher temperatures result in more complete combustion and less noxious gases as a result of pyrolysis. Some may regard the burning of wood from a sustainable source as carbon-neutral . A tree, over the course of its lifetime, absorbs as much carbon (or carbon dioxide) as it releases when burnt.

Some firewood is harvested in " woodlots " managed for that purpose, but in heavily wooded areas it is more often harvested as a byproduct of natural forests . Deadfall that has not started to rot is preferred, since it is already partly seasoned . Standing dead timber is considered better still, as it is both seasoned, and has less rot. Harvesting this form of timber reduces the speed and intensity of bushfires . Harvesting timber for firewood is normally carried out by hand with chainsaws . Thus, longer pieces - requiring less manual labor, and less chainsaw fuel - are  less expensive and only limited by the size of their firebox. Prices also vary considerably with the distance from wood lots, and quality of the wood.
Firewood usually relates to timber or trees unsuitable for building or construction . Firewood is a renewable resource provided the consumption rate is controlled to sustainable levels. The shortage of suitable firewood in some places has seen local populations damaging huge tracts of bush possibly leading to further desertification .

Greenhouse gases [ edit ] Wood burning creates more atmospheric CO 2 than biodegradation of wood in a forest (in a given period) because by the time the bark of a dead tree has rotted, the log has already been occupied by other plants and micro-organisms which continue to sequester the CO 2 by integrating the hydrocarbons of the wood into their life cycle. Wood harvesting and transport operations produce varying degrees of greenhouse gas pollution. Inefficient and incomplete combustion of wood can result in elevated levels of greenhouse gases other than  CO 2 , which may result in positive emissions where the byproducts have greater Carbon dioxide equivalent values.

[ 17 ] In an attempt to provide quantitative information about the relative output of CO 2 to produce electricity or domestic heating, the United Kingdom Department of Energy and Climate Change ( DECC ) has published a comprehensive model comparing the burning of wood (wood chip) and other fuels, based on 33 scenarios.

[ 18 ] The model's output is kilogram of CO 2 produced per megawatt-hour (MWh) of delivered energy. Scenario 33 for example, which concerns the production of heat from wood chips produced from UK small roundwood produced from bringing neglected broadleaf forests back into production, shows that burning oil releases 377 kg (831 lb) of CO 2 while burning woodchips releases 1,501 kg (3,309 lb) of CO 2 per MWh of delivered energy. However, in scenario 32 of that same reference, which concerns the production of heat from wood chips that would otherwise be made into particleboard, showed that only 239 kg (527 lb) of CO 2 per MWh was released. Therefore, the relative greenhouse effects of biomass energy production are dependent on the usage model.

The intentional and controlled charring of wood and its incorporation into the soil is an effective method for carbon sequestration as well as an important technique to improve soil conditions for agriculture, particularly in heavily forested regions.  It forms the basis of the rich soils known as Terra preta .

Regulation and Legislation [ edit ] The environmental impact of burning wood fuel is debatable. Several cities have moved towards setting standards of use and/or bans of wood burning fireplaces. For example, the city of Montréal, Québec passed a resolution to ban wood fireplace installation in new construction.

Wood burning advocates claim [ weasel words ] that properly harvested wood is carbon-neutral, therefore off-setting the negative impact of by-product particles given off during the burning process. In the context of forest wildfires, wood removed from the forest setting for use as wood fuel can reduce overall emissions by decreasing the quantity of open burned wood and the severity of the burn while combusting the remaining material under regulated conditions. On March 7, 2018, the United States House of Representatives passed a bill that would delay for three years the
implementation of more stringent emission standards for new residential wood heaters.

[ 19 ] Potential use in renewable energy technologies [ edit ] Sawmills create and burn sawdust : it can be pelletized and used at home.

Efficient stove for developing nations Pellet stove Sawdust can be pelletized Wood pellets Usage [ edit ] World production of roundwood by type, comparison of wood fuel to other types Some European countries produce a significant fraction of their electricity needs from wood or wood wastes. In Scandinavian countries the costs of manual labor to process firewood is very high. Therefore, it is common to import firewood from countries with cheap labor and natural resources.

[ citation needed ] The main exporters to Scandinavia are the Baltic countries (Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia). In Finland , there is a growing interest in using wood waste as fuel for home and industrial heating, in the form of compacted pellets .

Many lower- and middle-income countries rely on wood for energy purposes (notably cooking). The largest producers are all in these income groups and have large populations with a high reliance on wood for energy: in 2021, India ranked first with 300 million m ³ (15 percent of total production), followed by China with 156 million m3 and Brazil with 129 million m ³ (8 percent and 7 percent of global production).

[ 20 ] In the United States, wood fuel is the second-leading form of renewable energy (behind hydro-electric ).

[ 21 ] Australia [ edit ] A pile of firewood logged from the Barmah Forest in Victoria About 1.5 million households in Australia use firewood as the main form of domestic heating.

[ 22 ] As of 1995, approximately 1.85 million cubic metres of firewood (1m³ equals approximately one car trailer load) was used in Victoria annually, with half being consumed in Melbourne .

[ 23 ] This amount is comparable to the wood consumed by all of Victoria's sawlog and pulplog forestry operations (1.9 million m³).

[ citation needed ] Species used as sources of firewood include: Red Gum , from forests along the Murray River (the Mid-Murray Forest Management Area, including the Barmah and Gunbower forests, provides about 80% of Victoria's red gum timber).

[ 24 ] Box and Messmate Stringybark , in southern Australia.

Sugar gum , a wood with high thermal efficiency that usually comes from small plantations.

[ 25 ] Jarrah , in the Southwest of Western Australia. It generates a greater heat than most other available woods and is usually sold by the tonne.

Europe [ edit ] In 2014, the construction of the biggest pellet plant in the Baltic region was started in Võrumaa , Sõmerpalu , Estonia, with an expected output of 110,000 tons of pellet / year. Different types of wood will be used in the process of pellet making (firewood, woodchips, shavings). The Warmeston OÜ plant started its activity by the end of 2014.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In 2013, the main pellet consumers in Europe were the UK, Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden, Germany and Belgium, as U.E.'s annual report on biofuels states. In Denmark and Sweden, pellets are used by power plants, households and medium scale consumers for district heating, compared to Austria and Italy, where pellets are mainly used as small - scale private residential and industrial boilers for heating.

[ 28 ] The UK is the single largest consuming market for industrial wood pellets, in large part due to its major biomass-fueled power stations such as Drax , MGT and Lynemouth .

[ 29 ] Asia [ edit ] Japan and South Korea are both growing markets for industrial wood pellets, and as of 2017, were expected to become the second and third largest global markets for wood pellets due to government policies favoring the use of biomass in power generation.

[ 29 ] North America [ edit ] Demand for wood fuel in the United States is principally driven by residential and commercial heating customers.

Canada was not a major consumer of industrial wood pellets as of 2017, but has relatively aggressive de-carbonization policies and may become a significant consumer of industrial wood pellets by the 2020s.

[ 29 ] Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023​ , FAO, FAO.

See also [ edit ] Biofuel Biomass Forestry Outdoor wood furnace Renewable heat Woodchips Wood-fired oven Wood gas References [ edit ] ^ Haag, Volker; Zemke, Valentina Theresia; Lewandrowski, Tim; Zahnen, Johannes; Hirschberger, Peter; Bick, Ulrich; Koch, Gerald (2020-09-11).

"The European charcoal trade" .

IAWA Journal .

41 (4): 463– 477.

doi : 10.1163/22941932-bja10017 .

ISSN 0928-1541 .

^ Diamond, Jared. 2005 Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. Penguin Books. New York. 294–304 pp.

ISBN 0-14-303655-6 ^ "Clean Burning Wood Stoves and Fireplaces" . epa.gov. Archived from the original on 2008-05-15.

^ Simpson, William T.; Boone, R. Sidney; Chern, Joseph; Mace, Terry (August 1987).

"Kiln-Drying Time of Split Oak Firewood" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-12-22 . Retrieved 2014-06-09 .

^ "Wood heat value (BTU)" . daviddarling.info.

^ Weihe, Wilfred.

"Electric Fireplace Costs Secrets" .

electricfireplaceheater.org .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2018 . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ "Bioenergy Knowledge Centre's Calculators" . bkc.co.nz.

Archived from the original on 2009-07-11.

(includes a range of calculators, including one for calculating the energy content of wood, taking into account the moisture content) ^ Ryan, Matt (June 20, 2008).

Homeowners seek cheaper winter heat . Burlington Free Press.

^ "Wood ash composition as a function of furnace temperature" (PDF) . Pergamon Press. 1993.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 .

^ a b Environment Protection Authority (2002) Wood heaters, open fires and air quality. Publication 851 EPA Victoria .

^ a b Stewart, Gareth J.; Nelson, Beth S.; Acton, W. Joe F.; Vaughan, Adam R.; Hopkins, James R.; Yunus, Siti S. M.; Hewitt, C. Nicholas; Nemitz, Eiko; Mandal, Tuhin K.; Gadi, Ranu; Sahu, Lokesh K. (2021-02-25).

"Comprehensive organic emission profiles, secondary organic aerosol production potential, and OH reactivity of domestic fuel combustion in Delhi, India" .

Environmental Science: Atmospheres .

1 (2): 104– 117.

Bibcode : 2021ESAt....1..104S .

doi : 10.1039/D0EA00009D .

ISSN 2634-3606 .

^ Stewart, Gareth J.; Acton, W. Joe F.; Nelson, Beth S.; Vaughan, Adam R.; Hopkins, James R.; Arya, Rahul; Mondal, Arnab; Jangirh, Ritu; Ahlawat, Sakshi; Yadav, Lokesh; Sharma, Sudhir K. (2021-02-18).

"Emissions of non-methane volatile organic compounds from combustion of domestic fuels in Delhi, India" .

Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics .

21 (4): 2383– 2406.

Bibcode : 2021ACP....21.2383S .

doi : 10.5194/acp-21-2383-2021 .

ISSN 1680-7316 .

^ Stewart, Gareth J.; Nelson, Beth S.; Acton, W. Joe F.; Vaughan, Adam R.; Farren, Naomi J.; Hopkins, James R.; Ward, Martyn W.; Swift, Stefan J.; Arya, Rahul; Mondal, Arnab; Jangirh, Ritu (2021-02-18).

"Emissions of intermediate-volatility and semi-volatile organic compounds from domestic fuels used in Delhi, India" .

Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics .

21 (4): 2407– 2426.

Bibcode : 2021ACP....21.2407S .

doi : 10.5194/acp-21-2407-2021 .

ISSN 1680-7316 .

^ "Fuel Ignition Temperatures" . Engineering Toolbox.

Archived from the original on 2015-05-04.

^ Manomet Center for Conservation Science. 2010. Biomass sustainability and Carbon Policy Study: Report to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Energy Resources.

[1] Archived 2018-01-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ray, James, "Wood Usage in Rural Tanzania: An Investigation into the Sources and Accessibility of Fuelwood and Polewood for the Residents of Kizanda Village, West Usambara Mountains" (2011). ISP Collection. Paper 984.

http://digitalcollections.sit.edu/isp_collection/984 ^ Smith, K.R.; Khalil, M.A.K.; Rasmussen, R.A.; Thorneloe, S.A.; Manegdeg, F.; Apte, M. (1993). "Greenhouse gases from biomass and fossil fuel stoves in developing countries: A Manila pilot study".

Chemosphere .

26 ( 1– 4): 479– 505.

Bibcode : 1993Chmsp..26..479S .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.558.9180 .

doi : 10.1016/0045-6535(93)90440-g .

^ "Biomass Emission and Counterfactual Model" (spreadsheet) . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ McCarthy, James E.; Shouse, Kate C. (December 18, 2018).

EPA's Wood Stove / Wood Heater Regulations: Frequently Asked Questions (PDF) . Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service . Retrieved 6 January 2019 .

^ World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023 . FAO. 2023-11-29.

doi : 10.4060/cc8166en .

ISBN 978-92-5-138262-2 .

^ "Renewables and CO2 Emissions" .

Short-Term Energy Outlook . US Dept of Energy.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2012 . Retrieved 24 December 2011 .

^ Matthew (26 December 2009).

"The Truth about the Australian Home Heating Association" . Clean Air Society of Kapiti Coast.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 November 2010 .

^ "Firewood" . birdsaustralia.com.

Archived from the original on 2012-12-31.

^ NRE 2002 Forest Management Plan for the Mid-Murray Forest Management Area ^ "The Regional Institute - The Sugar Gum Story: the Marketing Success of a Humble Shelter Tree" .

www.regional.org.au . 2012 . Retrieved 2023-04-21 .

^ "Largest pellet plant in the Baltic region to be build [ sic ] in Estonia" .

IHB . Fordaq S.A. 13 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2014.

^ "Warmeston" .

www.warmeston.ee . Retrieved 7 May 2018 .

^ "Main pellet consumers in Europe" .

IHB . Fordaq S.A. 3 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2014.

^ a b c "Global pellet market outlook in 2017 | Wood Pellet Association of Canada" .

www.pellet.org . Retrieved 2018-07-19 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wood fuel .

Firewood Facts Himalayas. Unique way to store firewood Toxic Woods List A comprehensive and fully referenced list of potentially toxic woods.

BurningIssues All about the health effects of biomass burning Fuels for heating Heating oil Wood pellet Kerosene Propane Natural gas Wood Coal v t e Bioenergy Biofuels Alcohol Algae Babassu oil Bagasse Biobutanol Biodiesel Biogas Biogasoline Bioliquids Biomass Cooking oil vegetable oil Ethanol cellulosic mixtures Methanol Stover corn Straw Water hyacinth Wood gas Energy from foodstock Camelina sativa Cassava Coconut oil Grape Hemp Maize Oat Palm oil Potato Rapeseed Rice Sorghum Soybean Sugar beet Sugarcane Sunflower Wheat Yam Non-food energy crops Arundo Big bluestem Camelina Chinese tallow Duckweed Jatropha curcas Miscanthus × giganteus Pongamia pinnata Salicornia Switchgrass Wood Technology Bioconversion of biomass to mixed alcohol fuels Bioenergy with carbon capture and storage Biomass heating systems Biorefinery Fischer–Tropsch process Industrial biotechnology Pellet fuel mill stove Sabatier reaction Thermal depolymerization Concepts Agflation Cellulosic ethanol commercialization Energy content of biofuel Energy crop Energy forestry Energy return on investment Food vs. fuel Issues relating to biofuels Sustainable biofuel Category v t e Firelighting Campfire Bonfire Glossary Components Ember Fire triangle Firewood Spark Tinder Wood ash Wood fuel Topics Autoignition temperature Combustion Friction fire Minimum ignition energy Smouldering Early starters Burning glass Solar Spark Lighter Fire drill Bow drill Hand drill Pump drill Fire piston Fire plough Fire-saw Fire striker Flint Modern starters Blowtorch Ferrocerium Flame holder Lighter Match Black Electric Piezo ignition Other equipment Char cloth Chuckmuck Feather stick Fire pan Fire pit Fire ring Matchbook Matchbox Punk Tinderbox Torch Related articles Arson Control of fire by early humans Firem'n Chit Native American use of fire in ecosystems Outdoor cooking Pyrolysis Pyromania Survival skills v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Wood products Lumber / timber Batten Beam Bressummer CLS Cruck Flitch beam Flooring Joist Lath Log building Log cabin Log house Molding Panelling Plank Plate Post Purlin Rafter Railroad ties Reclaimed Shingle Siding Sill Stud Timber truss Treenail Truss Utility pole Engineered wood Cross-laminated timber Glued laminated timber veneer LVL parallel strand I-joist Fiberboard hardboard Masonite MDF Oriented strand board Oriented structural straw board Particle board Plywood Structural insulated panel Wood–plastic composite lumber Fuelwood Charcoal biochar Firelog Firewood Pellet fuel Wood fuel Fibers Cardboard Corrugated fiberboard Paper Paperboard Pulp Pulpwood Rayon Derivatives Birch-tar Cellulose nano Hemicellulose Cellulosic ethanol Dyes Lignin Liquid smoke Lye Methanol Pyroligneous acid Pine tar Pitch Sandalwood oil Tannin Wood gas By-products Barkdust Black liquor Ramial chipped wood Sawdust Tall oil Wood flour Wood wool Woodchips Historical Axe ties Bavin (wood) Billet (wood) Clapboard Dugout canoe Potash Sawdust brandy Split-rail fence Tanbark Timber framing Wooden masts See also Biomass Certified wood Destructive distillation Dry distillation Engineered bamboo Forestry Green building and wood List of woods Mulch Non-timber forest products Natural building Papermaking Reclaimed lumber Timber recycling Wood drying Wood preservation Wood processing Woodworking Yakisugi Category Commons WikiProject Forestry NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qxx58
Cached time: 20250812022437
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.646 seconds
Real time usage: 0.778 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3784/1000000
Revision size: 40506/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151446/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5067/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 132924/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.357/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10006544/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  582.364      1 -total
 39.62%  230.714      1 Template:Reflist
 17.97%  104.654      5 Template:Cite_journal
 16.47%   95.907      4 Template:Navbox
 11.52%   67.091      1 Template:Bioenergy
 10.85%   63.200     14 Template:Cite_web
  8.65%   50.369      2 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.16%   47.531      1 Template:Short_description
  8.03%   46.777      2 Template:Ambox
  7.84%   45.652      1 Template:Commonscat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:580277:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022437 and revision id 1299014366. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wood_fuel&oldid=1299014366 " Categories : Wood fuel Firewood Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2007 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2007 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 02:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wood fuel 11 languages Add topic

