Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Academic interests 3 Pangle's conception of philosophy 4 Yale tenure controversy 5 Noted lectures 6 Bibliography 7 See also 8 Notes Toggle the table of contents Thomas Pangle 2 languages Deutsch 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1944) Thomas Pangle FRSC Born Thomas Lee Pangle 1944 (age 80–81) Gouverneur, New York , U.S.

Education Cornell University ( BA ) University of Chicago ( PhD ) Occupation Political scientist Spouse Lorraine Smith Pangle Thomas Lee Pangle , FRSC (born 1944) is an American political scientist . He holds the Joe R. Long Chair in Democratic Studies in the Department of Government and is Co-Director of the Thomas Jefferson Center for Core Texts and Ideas at the University of Texas at Austin .  He has also taught at the University of Toronto and Yale University .  He was a student of Leo Strauss .

Education and career [ edit ] Pangle was born and grew up in Gouverneur, New York .

[ 1 ] He graduated from Cornell University with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1966, "with distinction in all subjects" and ranked fifth in class, having studied political philosophy under Allan Bloom . Pangle received his Ph.D.

in political science in 1972 from the University of Chicago . His dissertation was "Montesquieu and the Moral Basis of Liberal Democracy," completed under the supervision of Joseph Cropsey , Herbert Storing , and Richard E. Flathman .

From 1971 to 1979 he taught at Yale University , first as a lecturer and then as an assistant professor and associate professor . In 1979 he was appointed to Graduate School at the University of Toronto as an Associate Professor and was awarded tenure . He became a professor in 1983 and was named University Professor in 2001. During his tenure at the University of Toronto Pangle was first a fellow at Victoria College from 1979 to 1984 and then at St. Michael's College from 1985 to 2004. Pangle left the University of Toronto after 25 years to accept the position of Joe R. Long Chair in Democratic Studies in the Department of Government at the University of Texas at Austin, citing concerns about mandatory retirement .

Pangle was a visiting professor at the University of Chicago in 1984 and at the École des Hautes Études en Sciences Sociales in 1987.

Pangle is married to fellow professor Lorraine Smith Pangle , who was also a faculty member at the University of Toronto and is a professor in the Department of Government at the University of Texas.

Academic interests [ edit ] Pangle's writings on ancient political philosophy attempt to show how Socratic arguments for the supremacy of the philosophic life shape, enrich, and ground the classical republican teaching on civic and moral virtue and on the spiritual goals of self-government. His studies of medieval and biblical political thought seek to revive the mutually challenging dialogue between the competing Socratic and scriptural notions of wisdom and of the cultivation of wisdom in civic life.

His interpretations of the thought of the American Founding, and of its philosophic foundations in Locke and Montesquieu , prepares the ground for his exposition of Nietzsche as the most radical critic of modern rationalism. These studies argue for the significance, within modernity, of a continued if eclipsed commitment to the life of understanding pursued for its own sake.  At the same time, Pangle diagnoses the costs and the benefits—for civic virtue as well as for the life of the mind—of the diminished public or civic status of the moral and intellectual virtues in modern republicanism.

Pangle is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada , and has won Guggenheim , Killam-Canada Council , Carl Friedrich von Siemens , and four National Endowment for the Humanities fellowships. He has been awarded The Benton Bowl at Yale University (for contribution to education in politics) and the Robert Foster Cherry Great Teacher of the World Prize , Baylor University . In 2007 he delivered, at the invitation of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences , the Werner Heisenberg Lecture. A Festschrift in his honor was published as: Recovering Reason: Essays in Honor of Thomas L. Pangle. Edited by Timothy Burns. Lexington Books, 2010.

Pangle's conception of philosophy [ edit ] Inspired and guided by Leo Strauss 's revival of Platonic political philosophy, Pangle's work has as its unifying aim the clarification and defense of the original Socratic conception of political philosophy. In the manner that Pangle understands it, the Socratic conception is controversial.

What the Socratic conception of political theory amounts to, Pangle contends, is a lifelong vindication, through conversational refutations that purify common sense notions of justice and nobility, of self-knowledge and of inquiry into the nature of things as the highest and supremely fulfilling dimension of human existence. This notion of the true human good, as the good that makes all relativistic and egalitarian outlooks appear impoverished, obviously contradicts or directly clashes with what most people today are told and believe is the life they ought to lead.  Pangle asserts that the awakened philosophic life is the only truly human life.

Yale tenure controversy [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Pangle was denied tenure at Yale University, in a scandal, during which a senior colleague explained, in a  pronouncement (which became the theme of a protest panel at the annual convention of the American Political Science Association ): "academic freedom is one thing, but there are two types who will never be permitted tenure at Yale: Leninists and Straussians." The Wall Street Journal ("Dry Rot at College," Editorial Aug. 31, 1979, p. 6), Commentary ("God and Man at Yale—Again," by Robert Kagan, February, 1982; Letters exchange, August, 1982) and other journals ( The New York Review of Books , May 12, 1983, pp. 56–57, "Saving the Free World: An Exchange," statement by Eugene Genovese; Yale Political Monthly , Dec. 1979, pp. 2–11, "Academic Freedom at Yale: the Pangle Case"), published editorials, columns, and articles attacking Yale 's denial of academic freedom. Yale or its spokespersons denied the imputations.

Yale set up a judiciary panel, led by the  historian Edmund Morgan , to hear the case—amid campus-wide protests and marches on Pangle's behalf ( Yale Daily News , Sept. 10, 1979, p. 1, "2,300 Students Protest Tenure Policy"); the panel decided in Pangle's favor and rescinded the decision denying tenure by the Department of Political Science, on the basis of testimony from graduate students about what Political Science faculty had declared in public about the grounds on which Pangle was being denied tenure.

Yale instituted a new procedure that took the decision out of the hands of the department and lodged it in a board, specially designed for Pangle's tenure review, that was composed of five scholars, two not from Yale (led by Peter Gay ): Yale University News Release, Monday afternoon, Oct. 15, 1979; Yale Weekly Bulletin and Calendar , Oct. 22–29, 1979, p. 1; Yale Daily News , Extra Edition, Oct. 16, 1979, "Pangle Wins New Tenure Review: Original Decision Overruled; Professor says he is 'gratified'". At that point, Pangle resigned, having been offered a tenured position at the University of Toronto (see entries on C. B. Macpherson and Allan Bloom )—and because, as he declared, he no longer felt he could comfortably live with his colleagues in the Yale Political Science Department.

Noted lectures [ edit ] Speaker at the National Endowment for the Humanities Inaugural Colloquium on the Bicentennial of the Constitution, Wake Forest University , 1984.

Exxon Distinguished Lectures in Humane Approaches to the Social Sciences, at the University of Chicago , 1987.

Thomas J. White Lecture, at Notre Dame , 1988.

The Plenary Address, Association of American Law Schools Annual Meeting, 1989.

Feaver MacMinn Visiting Scholar at the University of Oklahoma , 1990.

The Ronald J. Fiscus Lecture, Skidmore College (2001).

Werner Heisenberg Memorial Lecture at the Carl Friedrich von Siemens Foundation, Bavarian Academy of Sciences , Munich, Germany, 2007.

Herbert W. Vaughan Lecture on America's Founding Principles, Princeton University, 2007.

On Liberal Education at the Jack Miller Center, 2011.

Bibliography [ edit ] Montesquieu 's Philosophy of Liberalism: A Commentary on The Spirit of the Laws . University of Chicago Press, 1973. —Chinese translation (Shanghai: Huaxia, Hermes, Classici et Commentarii, East China Normal University Press, 2017).

The Laws of Plato: translated with notes and an interpretive essay by Thomas L. Pangle . Basic Books, 1980.   —Chinese translation (by Ying Zhu) of interpretive essay (Shanghai: Huaxia, Hermes, Classici et Commentarii, East China Normal University Press, 2012).

The Roots of Political Philosophy: Ten Forgotten Socratic Dialogues, translated, with interpretive studies . (Editor) Cornell University Press, 1987. —Chinese translation forthcoming: Beijing, The Commercial Press (Bardon-Chinese Media Agency).

The Spirit of Modern Republicanism: The Moral Vision of the American Founders and the Philosophy of Locke . University of Chicago Press, 1988. —Chinese translation forthcoming from East China Normal University Press, with new author's Preface.

The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism : An Introduction to the Thought of Leo Strauss: Essays and Lectures by Leo Strauss, selected and introduced by T. L. Pangle. University of Chicago Press, 1989. —French translation, Editions Gallimard, Bibliothèque de Philosophie 1993. Japanese translation, The English Agency Ltd., 1998. Chinese translation, Shanghai: Huaxia, Hermes, Classici et Commentarii, 2009 and revised 2011.

The Ennobling of Democracy: The Challenge of the Postmodern Age . Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.   — Uszlachetnianie demokracji: Wyzwanie epoki postmodernistycznej (Krakow: Wydawnictwo Znak, Library of Political Thought of the Center for Political Thought, 1994), 318 pages. (Polish translation by Marek Klimowicz.)—Chinese translation forthcoming from East China Normal University Press, with new author's Preface.

The Learning of Liberty: The Educational Ideas of the American Founders (with Lorraine Smith Pangle). University Press of Kansas, 1993 Political Philosophy and the Human Soul: Essays in Memory of Allan Bloom . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 1995. Co-editor with Michael Palmer, and author of “The Hebrew Bible’s Challenge to Political Philosophy: Some Introductory Reflections,” 67–82.—Chinese translation of essay, in Classici et Commentarii 39: Laws and Political Philosophy, ed. Lei Peng (Shanghai: Huaxia, Hermes, Classici et Commentarii, 2013), pp. 2–21.

Justice Among Nations: On the Moral Basis of  Power and Peace , (with Peter J. Ahrensdorf). U. Press of Kansas, 1999.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Political Philosophy and the God of Abraham . Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.

Leo Strauss : An Introduction to His Thought and Intellectual Legacy . Johns Hopkins U. Press, 2006 The Great Debate: Advocates and Opponents of the American Constitution. The Teaching Company, 2007.

The Theological Basis of Liberal Modernity in Montesquieu 's " Spirit of the Laws " . University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Political Philosophy Cross-Examined: Perennial Challenges to the Philosophic Life (Palgrave-Macmillan, 2013). Co-editor with J. Harvey Lomax, and author of “Aristotle’s Politics Book 7 On the Best Way of Life.” Birds, Peace, Wealth: Aristophanes ’ Critique of the Gods . Ed. and Trans. with Wayne Ambler. Paul Dry Books, 2013.

Political Philosophy Cross-Examined: Perennial Challenges to the Philosophic Life . Ed. with J. Harvey Lomax. Palgrave-Macmillan, 2013.

Sophocles: The Theban Plays. Oedipus the Tyrant, Oedipus at Colonus, Antigone . Translated with Introductions. With Peter J. Ahrensdorf. Cornell University Press, 2013.

Aristotle ’s Teaching in the POLITICS . University of Chicago Press, 2013.   —Chinese translation, Shanghai: Huaxia, Hermes, Classici et Commentarii, East China Normal University Press, 2017.

"On Heisenberg’s Key Statement Concerning Ontology," Review of Metaphysics 67 (June 2014), 835-59.

The Key Texts of Political Philosophy: An Introduction , co-authored with Timothy Burns (Cambridge: Cambridge U. Press, 2014). —Chinese translation forthcoming from Beijing United Publishing Co.

The Socratic Way of Life: Xenophon's MEMORABILIA (Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 2018).

The Socratic Founding of Political Philosophy: Xenophon's ECONOMIST, SYMPOSIUM, AND APOLOGY (Chicago: U. of Chicago Press, 2020).

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Notes [ edit ] ^ Alphonso, Caroline. "Law feeding brain drain: U of T loses leading professor to U.S. over Ontario's mandatory retirement." Globe and Mail : 20 Feb. 2004.

^ Tinder, Glenn (February 2000). "JUSTICE AMONG NATIONS: ON THE MORAL BASIS OF POWER AND PEACE".

First Things .

^ Drydyk, Jay (2000-10-01).

"Thomas L. Pangle and Peter J. Ahrensdorf, "Justice Among Nations: On the Moral Basis of Power and Peace." " .

Philosophy in Review .

20 (5): 320– 324.

ISSN 1920-8936 .

^ Bagby, Laurie M. Johnson (2000).

"Defense of a Life Worth Living - Thomas L. Pangle and Peter J. Ahrensdorf: Justice Among Nations: On the Moral Basis of Power and Peace. (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1999. Pp. 362. $45.00.)" .

The Review of Politics .

62 (3): 636– 640.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500041875 .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

^ Beres, Louis Rene (2000-09-01).

"Justice, the State, and International Relations. By Leo McCarthy. New York: St. Martin's, 1998. 277p. $65.00. - Justice among Nations: On the Moral Basis of Power and Peace. By Thomas L. Pangle and Peter J. Ahrensdorf. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1999. 362p. $45.00" .

American Political Science Review .

94 (3): 771– 772.

doi : 10.2307/2585914 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Pangle&oldid=1295572970 " Categories : 1944 births Living people People from Gouverneur, New York Cornell University alumni University of Chicago alumni American Episcopalians American political philosophers Historians of political thought 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Academic staff of the University of Toronto University of Texas at Austin faculty Fellows of the Royal Society of Canada Political scientists who studied under Leo Strauss Historians from New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Pangle 2 languages Add topic

