Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Apex removal 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Apical dominance 26 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Phenomenon where the central stem grows stronger than other stems This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Many conifers show particularly strong apical dominance, strongest of all being in the family Araucariaceae , showing a single erect central trunk with strongly differentiated horizontal branching. Cuttings of Araucariaceae species taken from a side branch will not develop erect growth.

Araucaria heterophylla , New Zealand.

In botany , apical dominance is the phenomenon whereby the main, central stem of the plant is dominant over (i.e., grows more strongly than) other side stems; on a branch the main stem of the branch is further dominant over its own side twigs.

Plant physiology describes apical dominance as the control exerted by the terminal bud (and shoot apex ) over the outgrowth of lateral buds .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Apical dominance occurs when the shoot apex inhibits the growth of lateral buds so that the plant may grow vertically. It is important for the plant to devote energy to growing upward so that it can get more light to undergo photosynthesis . If the plant utilizes available energy for growing upward, it may be able to outcompete other individuals in the vicinity. Plants that were capable of outcompeting neighboring plants likely had higher fitness . Apical dominance is therefore most likely adaptive .

Typically, the end of a shoot contains an apical bud, which is the location where shoot growth occurs.  The apical bud produces a plant hormone , auxin ( IAA ), that inhibits growth of the lateral buds further down on the stem towards the axillary bud. Auxin is predominantly produced in the growing shoot apex and is transported throughout the plant via the phloem and diffuses into lateral buds which prevents elongation.

[ 2 ] That auxin likely regulates apical dominance was first discovered in 1934.

[ 3 ] When the apical bud is removed, the lowered IAA concentration allows the lateral buds to grow and produce new shoots, which compete to become the lead growth.

Weeping larch showing growth habit lacking apical dominance Apex removal [ edit ] Plant physiologists have identified four different stages the plant goes through after the apex is removed (Stages I-IV). The four stages are referred to as lateral bud formation , "imposition of inhibition" (apical dominance), initiation of lateral bud outgrowth following decapitation, and elongation and development of the lateral bud into a branch.

These stages can also be defined by the hormones that are regulating the process which are as follows: Stage I, cytokinin promoted, causing the lateral bud to form since cytokinin plays a role in cell division ; Stage II, auxin is promoted, resulting in apical dominance ("imposition of inhibition"); Stage III, cytokinin released resulting in outward growth of the lateral bud; and Stage IV, auxin is decreased and gibberellic acid is promoted which results in cell division, enabling the bud or branch to continue outward growth.

[ 1 ] More simply stated, lateral bud formation is inhibited by the shoot apical meristem (SAM). The lateral bud primordium (from which the lateral bud develops) is located below SAM. The shoot tip rising from the SAM inhibits the growth of the lateral bud by repressing auxin. When the shoot is cut off, the lateral bud begins to lengthen which is mediated by a release of cytokinin. Once the apical dominance has been lifted from the plant, elongation and lateral growth is promoted and the lateral buds grow into new branches. When lateral bud formation prevents the plant from growing upward, it is undergoing lateral dominance. Often, lateral dominance can be triggered by decapitating the SAM or artificially decreasing the concentration of auxin in plant tissues.

Applications [ edit ] When apical meristems (apical buds) are continually removed, the shape of a tree or shrub can be manipulated remarkably, because newer, uninhibited, branches grow en masse almost anywhere on the tree or shrub.

Topiary garden, Beckley Park manor, UK When the apical bud is removed, the lowered IAA concentration allows the lateral buds to grow and produce new shoots, which compete to become the lead growth.

Pruning techniques such as coppicing and pollarding make use of this natural response to curtail direct plant growth and produce a desired shape, size, and/or productivity level for the plant. The principle of apical dominance is manipulated for espalier creation, hedge building, or artistic sculptures called topiary . If the SAM is removed, it stimulates growth in the lateral direction. By careful pruning, it is possible to create remarkable designs or patterns.

Some fruit trees have strong apical dominance, and young trees can become "leggy", with poor side limb development. Apical dominance can be reduced in this case, or in cases where limbs are broken off by accident, by cutting off the auxin flow above side buds that one wishes to stimulate. This is often done by orchardists for young trees.

Occasionally, strong apical dominance is advantageous, as in the "Ballerina" apple trees. These trees are intended to be grown in small gardens, and their strong apical dominance combined with a dwarfing rootstock gives a compact narrow tree with very short fruiting side branches.

See also [ edit ] Meristem Fruit tree pruning References [ edit ] ^ a b Cline, M (1994). "The role of hormones in apical dominance. New approaches to an old problem in plant development".

Physiologia Plantarum .

90 (1): 230– 237.

Bibcode : 1994PPlan..90..230C .

doi : 10.1111/j.1399-3054.1994.tb02216.x .

^ Booker, Jonathon; Steven Chatfield; Ottoline Leyser (February 2003).

"Auxin acts in xylem-associated or Medullary cells to mediate apical dominance" .

Plant Cell .

15 (2): 495– 507.

Bibcode : 2003PlanC..15..495B .

doi : 10.1105/tpc.007542 .

PMC 141216 .

PMID 12566587 .

^ Thimann, K.V.; F. Skoog (1934).

"On the inhibition of bud development and other functions of growth substance in Vicia faba" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society B .

114 (789): 317– 339.

Bibcode : 1934RSPSB.114..317T .

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1934.0010 .

Thimann, Kenneth V.; Skoog, Folke (1933).

"Studies on the growth hormone of plants: III. The inhibiting action of the growth hormone on bud development" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

19 (7): 714– 716.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.19.7.714 .

PMC 1086139 .

PMID 16577553 .

Dun, Elizabeth Ann; Ferguson, Brett James; Beveridge, Christine Anne (2006).

"Apical Dominance and Shoot Branching. Divergent Opinions or Divergent Mechanisms?" .

Plant Physiology .

142 (3): 812– 819.

doi : 10.1104/pp.106.086868 .

PMC 1630731 .

PMID 17093134 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apical_dominance&oldid=1293339707 " Categories : Plant physiology Auxin action Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 04:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apical dominance 26 languages Add topic

