Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Founding and history Toggle Founding and history subsection 1.1 Name 2 Notable cases Toggle Notable cases subsection 2.1 Intelligent design 2.2 Christian religious freedom issues 2.3 Abortion & euthanasia issues 2.4 Sexual orientation and gender identity 2.5 Islam issues 2.6 Military and national security issues 2.7 Free speech 2.8 Ten Commandments monuments 2.9 Christmas 2.10 Other 3 Evaluations 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Thomas More Law Center 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian conservative law firm in Michigan, US This article is about the law center in Ann Arbor, Michigan. For the law center in Chicago Illinois, see Thomas More Society .

Thomas More Law Center Headquarters Ann Arbor Charter Township, Michigan Region served United States President and Chief Counsel Richard Thompson Budget US$1,378,329 (2012) [ 1 ] Website www .thomasmore .org Thomas More Law Center offices lobby, Domino's Farms The Thomas More Law Center is a Christian , conservative , nonprofit , public interest law firm based in Ann Arbor Charter Township, Michigan , and active throughout the United States.

[ 2 ] According to the Thomas More Law Center website, its goals are to "preserve America's Judeo-Christian heritage, defend the religious freedom of Christians, restore time-honored moral and family values , protect the sanctity of human life , and promote a strong national defense and a free and sovereign United States of America".

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Thomas More Law Center is active in social issues such as opposing same-sex marriage, [ 5 ] abortion, [ 6 ] provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act [ 7 ] and the HHS Mandate .

[ 8 ] The Law Center has been involved, often unsuccessfully, in high-profile cases including the litigation of the Dover, Pennsylvania intelligent design case, [ 9 ] the defense of Lt. Col.

Jeffrey Chessani against misconduct allegations stemming from the November 2005 Haditha incident , [ 10 ] and the Law Center's federal lawsuit against the US Government regarding the constitutionality of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the Individual Mandate .

[ 7 ] The Law Center also litigates cases related to the defense of Christians and anti-abortion activists.

[ 11 ] Founding and history [ edit ] The center was founded in 1999 by Domino's Pizza founder Tom Monaghan [ 12 ] and the center's current President and Chief Counsel Richard Thompson, a former Oakland County, Michigan prosecutor known for his role in the prosecution of Jack Kevorkian .

[ 13 ] Among those who have sat on the center's advisory board are former Senators Rick Santorum [ 14 ] and retired Rear Admiral Jeremiah Denton , [ 15 ] former Major League Baseball commissioner Bowie Kuhn , [ 16 ] Catholic academic Charles Rice , [ citation needed ] Mary Cunningham Agee , and Ambassador Alan Keyes .

[ 17 ] The center's Citizens' Advisory Board also includes Representative Michele Bachmann and Lieutenant Colonel Allen West .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The center is primarily financed by contributions from individuals, foundations, and corporations and is recognized by the IRS as a 501(c)(3) organization .

[ 20 ] Name [ edit ] The center is named after Thomas More , an English lawyer, social philosopher , author, statesman and Renaissance humanist . He was an important councilor to Henry VIII and was Lord Chancellor .

[ 21 ] More opposed the Protestant Reformation , in particular, the theology of Martin Luther and William Tyndale , whose books he burned.  More later opposed the King's separation from the Catholic Church and refused to accept him as Supreme Head of the Church of England because it disparaged papal authority. He was tried for treason, convicted, and beheaded. Thomas More is the patron saint of lawyers in the Catholic Church .

Notable cases [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Thomas More Law Center" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Intelligent design [ edit ] In 2005, the Thomas More Law Center represented the defendants in one of the country's first intelligent design cases, Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District .

Prior to taking on this particular case, the lawyers of the Thomas More Law Center traveled the country seeking a school board willing to withstand a lawsuit as a test case for the teaching of intelligent design in public schools, forcing the first test case for intelligent design in the courts.

[ 22 ] In the summer of 2004, the Dover, Pennsylvania , school board, after receiving legal advice from the Discovery Institute , accepted the center's offer of advice and possible representation as they worked to change their science curriculum.

[ 22 ] On November 19, 2004, the Dover Area School District announced that commencing in January 2005, teachers would be required to read a statement to students in the ninth-grade biology class at Dover High School:
"The Pennsylvania Academic Standards require students to learn about Darwin's Theory of Evolution and eventually to take a standardized test of which evolution is a part. Because Darwin's Theory is a theory, it continues to be tested as new evidence is discovered. The Theory is not a fact. Gaps in the Theory exist for which there is no evidence. A theory is defined as a well-tested explanation that unifies a broad range of observations. Intelligent Design is an explanation of the origin of life that differs from Darwin's view. The reference book, Of Pandas and People , is available for students who might be interested in gaining an understanding of what Intelligent Design actually involves. With respect to any theory, students are encouraged to keep an open mind. The school leaves the discussion of the Origins of Life to individual students and their families. As a Standards-driven district, class instruction focuses upon preparing students to achieve proficiency on Standards-based assessments." [ 23 ] A large number of copies of Of Pandas and People had been donated to the school by a member of the school board who purchased them using money he had given to his father, Donald Bonsell, and said they were donations solicited from his church.

[ 24 ] A month later, on December 14, 2004, the ACLU and Americans United for Separation of Church and State filed suit on behalf of eleven Dover parents, claiming that the statement was a violation of the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment .

The Center defended the school district in the trial, which lasted from September 26 through November 4.

The case was decided on December 20, 2005. Judge John E. Jones III delivered a 139-page decision in favor of the plaintiffs, ruling that Intelligent Design is not science but essentially religious in nature and consequently inappropriate for a biology class. Members of the board that had originally enacted the policy were not re-elected, preventing an appeal.

The judge was scathing about the conduct of the defendants, saying, "It is ironic that several of these individuals, who so staunchly and proudly touted their religious convictions in public, would time and again lie to cover their tracks and disguise the real purpose behind the ID Policy" and "The students, parents, and teachers of the Dover Area School District deserved better than to be dragged into this legal maelstrom, with its resulting utter waste of monetary and personal resources." [ 25 ] Christian religious freedom issues [ edit ] Travis Leach In 2001, the Law Center faxed a letter in defense of Traverse City, Michigan , police veteran Travis Leach, after he raised a religious objection to the city's newly adopted diversity measure which put rainbow flag bumper stickers on city vehicles, including police cruisers. Leach, a devout Christian, objected to the stickers as promoting "the homosexual lifestyle", which he considered a sin. The city's Human Rights Commission requested that Leach's fitness as a police officer be investigated. On the same day the letter was faxed, Police Chief Ralph Soffredine announced Leach had been cleared.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Hansen et al., v Ann Arbor Public Schools et al.

In July 2002, the Thomas More Law Center sued the Ann Arbor Public School system for violating a student's constitutional right to freedom of speech and right to equal protection, as well as the Establishment Clause. The Center won the case, with the judge ruling that the district had violated the student's rights by not allowing her to participate in a "Diversity Week" panel discussion concerning homosexuality and religion because she wished to discuss her Catholic faith.

[ 28 ] Skoros v. City of New York The Thomas More Law Center sued New York's school district in December 2002, saying a school policy was discriminatory against Roman Catholics by not allowing Nativity displays at Christmas but allowing the display of the Jewish menorah and the Islamic Star and Crescent during certain religious holidays and observances.

[ 29 ] Judge Charles P. Sifton of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York rejected the Center's constitutional claims. The 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the lower court's decision in February 2006.

[ 30 ] Johnson v. Poway Unified School District The Center filed a federal lawsuit against a Southern California school district on behalf of a teacher who was ordered to remove several banners from his classroom because school officials claimed the banners promoted an impermissible Judeo-Christian viewpoint.  The banners contained slogans such as "In God We Trust" and "One Nation Under God".  On September 13, 2011, the 9th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals overturned the summary judgment and ruled that the school district did not violate Johnson's free speech rights.  The unanimous decision of the federal appeals court relied on U.S. Supreme Court rulings that said governments can limit the free speech rights of public employees in the workplace.

[ 31 ] On behalf of Catholic priest Ray Leonard, the Center sued the federal government for not allowing him to conduct services on a military base during a government shutdown.

[ 32 ] Abortion & euthanasia issues [ edit ] Bernardo v. Planned Parenthood Federation of America In August 2001, the Thomas More Law Center filed a lawsuit against Planned Parenthood Federation of America and its affiliate Planned Parenthood of San Diego and Riverside Counties on behalf of three California women.

[ citation needed ] The lawsuit accused Planned Parenthood of misleading women about the safety of abortion. The Center demanded that Planned Parenthood inform women of a link between abortion and breast cancer . Although Planned Parenthood and medical experts denied any such link, a Center lawyer claimed that a "preponderance of medical evidence" did establish a link.

[ 33 ] The judge dismissed the case and said there was little likelihood the lawsuit would succeed.

[ 34 ] This particular case was dismissed on appeal on a procedural issue under California's anti- SLAPP statute as the information concerning the link between abortion and breast cancer provided by Planned Parenthood on its website "did not concern any product or service within the meaning of the UCL, nor did it concern or advertise any product or service within the meaning of the FAL, and thus did not fall within the ambit of these consumer protection statutes".

[ 35 ] Martin v. Larsen In 2001, the Law Center filed a lawsuit against Great Falls, Montana , Assistant City Attorney Kory Larsen, and two other city officials, claiming they violated the rights of abortion protesters with an already-removed one-week ban on graphic signs depicting aborted fetuses. Larsen said the signs were creating a public nuisance and were a risk to public safety.

[ 36 ] Schiavo et al. v Schiavo The Thomas More Law Center also got involved in the Terri Schiavo case in Florida in October 2003, sending Governor Jeb Bush a legal analysis stating that he could order a criminal investigation into whether or not Michael Schiavo had abused his wife.

[ 37 ] The Florida legislature passed "Terri's Law", giving Bush the authority to intervene in Schiavo's case and have her life-sustaining measures reconnected. The law was later deemed unconstitutional by Judge W. Douglas Baird, a Circuit Judge in the Florida Sixth Circuit.

[ 38 ] Fitzgerald v. City of Portland In February 2014, the Law Center sued the City of Portland, Maine , on behalf of several anti-abortion activists concerning Portland City Ordinance § 17-108-111, which creates a Prohibited Zone where "[n]o person shall knowingly enter or remain on a public way or sidewalk adjacent to a reproductive health care facility with a radius of 39 feet of any portion of an entrance, exit, or driveway of a reproductive health care facility." [ 39 ] The United States Supreme Court in June 2014 declared a similar 35-foot prohibited zone in Massachusetts to be unconstitutional. In July, the Portland City Council voluntarily repealed the ordinance. Most of the lawsuit was then dismissed as moot. Still, as of October 2014, a portion of the lawsuit seeking nominal damages of one dollar in recognition of past constitutional harm remained.

[ 40 ] Sexual orientation and gender identity [ edit ] In RE: The Estate of Marshall M. Gardiner In 2002, the Law Center filed an amicus brief opposing the notion that a sex change operation changes a person's sex for the purpose of marriage.

[ 41 ] At issue was whether Marshall Gardiner's wife, J'Noel Ball, was eligible to receive one-half of his sizable estate after he died without a will. J'Noel was designated male at birth, had sex reassignment therapy , and had her Wisconsin birth certificate changed to reflect that she was a woman and not a man. The Kansas Supreme Court determined that "J'Noel remains a transsexual and a male for purposes of marriage under K.S.A.2001 Supp. 23-101." [ 42 ] Rohde v Ann Arbor Public Schools MEA NEA In September 2003, the Thomas More Law Center filed a lawsuit against the Ann Arbor Public School District on behalf of 17 individual taxpayers who had sent the school district letters requesting they stop using the public funds for employee domestic partnership benefits.

[ 43 ] The Center argued that the use of taxpayer funds to provide insurance benefits to same-sex domestic partners circumvented the 1996 Michigan Defense of Marriage Act, which defines marriage as "inherently a unique relationship between a man and a woman".

[ 44 ] On July 25, 2007, the Michigan Supreme Court ruled that the individuals did not have the constitutional standing to sue the Ann Arbor Public School District.

[ 43 ] The case was eventually dismissed due to lack of standing.

[ 45 ] American Family Association v Michigan State University The Thomas More Law Center filed a similar lawsuit against Michigan State University in July 2006 after Michigan passed the Marriage Protection Amendment to the Michigan Constitution in 2004. The constitutional amendment defined "the union between a man and a woman" as "the only agreement recognized as a marriage or similar union for any purpose". The Michigan Supreme Court ruled that the amendment banning same-sex marriages also blocks Michigan governments and state universities from offering "domestic partnership" benefits for homosexual couples.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] The ruling, however, had little effect since most public employers relaxed their eligibility criteria to avoid violating the amendment's restrictions.

[ 48 ] Charter Amendment One (Gainesville, Florida) The City Council of Gainesville, Florida , voted to enact protection for sexual preference and gender identity in January 2008. The Thomas More Law Center wrote an amendment to repeal the protection that went to popular vote on March 24, 2009, losing with 42% of the vote in favor of repeal and 58% against repeal.

[ 49 ] Michigan Marriage Amendment The Law Center substantially influenced the drafting of Michigan's Marriage Amendment , which voters enacted in November 2004.

[ 50 ] The amendment made it unconstitutional for the state to recognize or perform same-sex marriages or civil unions .

National Black Pastors and Christian Leaders Coalition In May 2014, the Law Center announced a partnership with the National Coalition of Black Pastors and Christian Leaders to oppose the legalization of same-sex marriage through the filing of amicus briefs filed on behalf of the pastors in what the Law Center deemed "key cases" around the country.

[ 5 ] [ 51 ] The Law Center filed amicus briefs before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, [ 52 ] Sixth Circuit, [ 53 ] the Supreme Court.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Islam issues [ edit ] Eklund v. Byron Union School District In July 2002, the Thomas More Law Center filed a lawsuit against Contra Costa County 's Byron Union School District on behalf of the parents of four students.

[ citation needed ] The suit argued that the curriculum required that "students pretend to be Muslims, wear robes, simulate jihads via a dice game, learn the Five Pillars of Faith and memorize verses from the Koran in classroom exercises as part of a World History and Geography class" and thus violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment .

[ 58 ] The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals found that the curriculum did not amount to an unconstitutional school sponsorship of a specific religion.

[ 59 ] The U.S. Supreme Court declined review of the case.

[ 60 ] Kevin Murray v. U.S. Treasury Sec. Timothy Geithner, et al.

The Law Center filed a federal lawsuit against the Department of Treasury and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve , challenging a portion of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 that appropriated $40 billion in taxpayer money to fund the federal government's majority ownership interest in AIG. The lawsuit claimed that the federal government, through its ownership of AIG, engages in Sharia -based Islamic religious activities. The Center claimed the use of taxpayer dollars to fund Shariah-based Islamic religious activities violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.

[ 61 ] While federal Judge Lawrence P. Zatkoff was requested by the Department of Justice to dismiss the lawsuit in 2009, [ 62 ] he reached a summary judgment in January, 2011, noting that the religious involvement did not achieve the "excessive entanglement" required under a precedential ruling.

[ 63 ] Olmsted Falls, Ohio In October 2013, the Law Center threatened the Olmsted Falls City School District to remove what the center described as an "Islamic proselytizing video" from the 7th-grade world history curriculum. The School District felt it could not spare the funds to defend itself in court.

[ 64 ] The film in question comes from the FX television network's 30 Days series. The specific episode, "Muslims and America", followed a Christian man who is transported to Dearborn, Michigan where he lives with a Muslim family, attends prayer services and religious instruction in a mosque and otherwise lives as a Muslim.

[ 65 ] Military and national security issues [ edit ] LtCol Jeffrey Chessani Jeffrey R. Chessani was a United States Marine Corps Lieutenant Colonel and the commanding officer of 3rd Battalion, 1st Marines during the time of the November 19, 2005, urban combat in Haditha, Iraq , where Marines in his battalion were accused of having killed 15 civilians while pursuing insurgents . The Thomas More Law Center defended Chessani against the charge that he failed to investigate the killings. The center also defended him before an administrative Board of Inquiry, wherein the Board found that there was no misconduct. Chessani retired from the US Marine Corps on July 16, 2010.

[ 66 ] On June 17, 2008, Military Judge Colonel Steven Folsom dismissed all charges against Chessani because General James Mattis , who approved the filing of charges against Chessani, was improperly influenced by an investigator probing the incident. The ruling was without prejudice, which allows the prosecution to refile.

[ 67 ] Downey v. United States Department of the Army In November 2014, the Law Center filed a federal lawsuit against the United States Department of the Army and the Secretary of the Army John M. McHugh on behalf of Lt. Col. Christopher Downey.

[ 68 ] Downey was administratively convicted in an Article 15 procedure of assaulting a soldier who was attempting to videotape two lesbian officers engaged in a public display of affection during a full-dress formal military ball at Ft. Drum , New York, as well as violating the repeal of Don't Ask, Don't Tell .

[ 69 ] The lawsuit disputes these administrative convictions, saying that the soldier was never assaulted, but may have been accidentally hit as Downey sought to lower the camera being used to film the officers. The lawsuit claims that Downey was seeking to stop the women's behavior out of concern for their reputations and the reputation of the Army.

[ 68 ] A special three-officer "show cause" board, convened after the Article 15 conviction, [ 70 ] which reviewed the punishment, unanimously ruled that the evidence showed Downey did not violate Army rules; the board also voted to retain Lt. Col. Downey.

[ 71 ] The lawsuit accuses the Army of violating Downey's constitutional rights by preventing him from adequately defending himself and asks a federal judge to overturn the convictions.

Free speech [ edit ] Anti-abortion T-shirts During the early 2000s, the Law Center was involved in disputes involving anti-abortion T-shirts including those distributed by Rock for Life for National Pro-Life T-shirt Day.

[ 72 ] These black T-shirts and sweatshirts emblazoned with "Abortion is Homicide" were deemed inappropriate by administrators of schools in Virginia, California, Texas, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, New York, Ohio, and Maine.

[ 73 ] The Law Center distributed a copy of a similar legal memo to students participated in National Pro-Life T-shirt Day.

[ 73 ] The Law Center also successfully defended Samantha Gallardo's anti-abortion T-shirts in California in 2002.

[ 74 ] Savage v Napolitano In 2009, American radio talk show Michael Savage was banned from entry into the United Kingdom as he was "considered to be engaging in unacceptable behavior by seeking to provoke others to serious criminal acts and fostering hatred which might lead to inter-community violence" [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] by the United Kingdom's Home Secretary. Savage and lawyers from Thomas More Law Center appealed to then Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, asking that Savage's name be removed from the list of individuals barred from entering the UK.

[ 78 ] As of 2017, Savage remains banned from the UK.

[ 79 ] Terry Jones Since 2011, the Law Center has represented pastor Terry Jones in lawsuits against him and against the City of Dearborn. The lawsuits stem from Jones's anti-Islamic activities, including protests and the staged burning of the Quran . In April 2011, Jones planned to protest outside the Islamic Center of America . On the day he was to attend the protest, local authorities questioned him in Court and required him to post a $45,000 "peace bond" to cover Dearborn's potential security costs. Jones contested that requirement, and the jury voted on April 22 to require the posting of a $1 "peace bond", but Jones and his co-pastor Wayne Sapp initially to refuse to pay. They were held briefly in jail, while claiming violation of First Amendment rights. That night Jones was released by the court after paying the reduced bond amount.

[ 80 ] On November 11, 2011, Wayne County Circuit Court Judge Robert Ziolkowski vacated the "breach of peace" ruling against Jones and Wayne Sapp on the grounds that they were denied due process.

[ 81 ] Glowacki v. Howell Public School District In 2011, the Law Center filed a lawsuit against Howell public school and one of its teachers on behalf of a student who was removed from the classroom on October 20, 2010 after expressing religious beliefs against the acceptance of homosexuality. According to the lawsuit, on the day that the district was observing the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD) supported anti-homosexual-bullying Spirit Day , the student reacted to a fellow student being asked to remove a Confederate flag belt buckle by asking why it was permissible to display the gay pride flag . The suit further says that the teacher asked him "if he supported gays", and that when the student said his Catholic religion prohibited him from doing so, the student and another student who shared his views were told to leave the class or face suspension.

[ 82 ] In reference to the case, Richard Thompson, the Law Center's president and chief counsel said, "The purpose of our lawsuit was to protect students' constitutional rights to free speech, defend religious liberty and stop public schools from becoming indoctrination centers for the homosexual agenda." [ 83 ] In June 2013, the claims against Howell Schools were dismissed. However, the claims that the teacher involved violated the student's First Amendment right to free speech were granted, and the teacher was ordered to pay $1 for the violation.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Ten Commandments monuments [ edit ] Summum v. Duchesne City In 2003, the Law Center took up the defense of a Ten Commandments monument in Duchesne City, Utah . The Ten Commandments went up in Roy Park in Duchesne City in 1979, a donation by the family of the late Irvin Cole. After Summum filed suit, the city deeded the monolith and its 10-by-11-foot plot to the local Lions Club for $10 and 10,000 hours of already performed beautification services. After U.S. District Judge Dee Benson expressed concern about how the transfer was carried out, the city undid the transaction and sold the monument and land to three Cole daughters for $250.

[ 85 ] Benson deemed in her summary judgement that the city's "efforts to disassociate itself from further involvement with the Ten Commandments monument are sufficient..." [ citation needed ] This case is a companion case to Pleasant Grove City v. Summum . The lawsuits made their way to the 10th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals , where a panel said the municipalities must allow Summum to put up its monuments. Both municipalities then asked the U.S. Supreme Court to overturn the 10th Circuit ruling. In the Pleasant Grove case, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in February 2009 that the city did not violate Summum's free-speech rights when it refused permission to place a Seven Aphorisms monument in a public park. The high court never ruled on the Duchesne suit, which was sent back to U.S. District Judge Dale Kimball in Salt Lake City for a decision based on the Pleasant Grove ruling.

[ 86 ] However unlike in Pleasant Grove, whose park includes several other donated monuments or displays, Duchesne's park only had the Ten Commandments monument. Eventually, Duchesne officials decided to move the Ten Commandments monument from Roy Park to the city cemetery to avoid continued litigation.

[ 87 ] Society of Separationists v. Pleasant Grove City et al.

In 2004, the Law Center defended a Ten Commandments monument that has stood since 1971 in a public park in Pleasant Grove City, Utah. The suit filed by the Society of Separationists against the city was initially dismissed by Judge Bruce S. Jenkins .

[ 88 ] However, in 2005, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit reversed the lower court's grant of judgment on the pleadings and remanded the case back to the district court for further proceedings.

[ 89 ] In 2006, after the Supreme Court's ruling in Van Orden v. Perry , which described the constitutionality of a Ten Commandments monument in at the Texas State Capitol in Austin, Texas , the Society of Separationists asked that the lawsuit be dismissed.

[ 90 ] Christmas [ edit ] Donnell v. Palm Beach Town Council In 2003, the Law Center filed a lawsuit on behalf of two Palm Beach residents against the town for not allowing them to put a nativity scene next to the town's two menorah displays. The lawsuit alleged that for the past two years the town had permitted the public display of menorahs at various prominent public locations, and that town officials had repeatedly refused to review requests to have nativity scenes displayed alongside them.

[ 91 ] On December 16, 2003 U.S. District Judge Daniel T.K. Hurley gave town officials 48 hours to respond to the request. Hurley said the town's inaction on the request may be a constitutional violation because the women were entitled to a timely answer.

[ 92 ] The town council eventually denied the request.

[ 93 ] After a consent judgement was entered in favor of the nativity display, the city of Palm Beach was forced to pay attorney's fees and publicly apologize to the women.

[ 94 ] Snowden v. Town of Bay Harbor Islands In 2004, the Law Center filed a lawsuit on behalf of Sandra Snowden against the Town of Bay Harbor Islands after Snowden was denied permission to display a nativity on public property.

[ 95 ] Judge Cecilia Altonaga for the United States District Court for the Southern District of Florida ruled in favor of Snowdon, requiring the city to describe in writing how it would allow the nativity display.

[ 96 ] Stratechuk v. Board of Education, South Orange-Maplewood School District et al.

In 2004, the Law Center filed a lawsuit on behalf of Michael Stratechuk challenging New Jersey 's Maplewood Public School District's ban on traditional Christmas music, including instrumentals. Richard Thompson, the Law Center's chief counsel described the ban as "another example of the anti-Christmas, anti-religion policy infecting our public school system".

[ 97 ] In a statement, school Superintendent Brian Osborne said the policy "was adopted to promote an inclusive environment for all students in our school community".

[ 98 ] U.S. District Judge William H. Walls held that the school's policy has a valid secular purpose, does not convey a message of disapproval of religion, and does not foster an excessive entanglement with religion.

[ 99 ] John Satawa v. Mcomb County Road Commission In 2009, the Law Center filed a lawsuit on behalf of John Satawa in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan , Southern Division claiming Satawa's constitutional rights were violated when he was ordered to remove a nativity scene from the median of a public road. The suit sought for Satawa to be allowed to put back the 8- by 8-foot nativity scene.

After receiving a complaint by the Wisconsin-based Freedom From Religion Foundation , the Road Commission of Macomb County told Satawa to remove the holiday display, citing incomplete permits. Satawa's permit application was later denied because it "clearly displays a religious message" and violated "separation of church and state", according to Macomb County highway engineer Robert Hoepfner.

[ 100 ] After a four year court battle, the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled in favor of the display and the roads commission opted not to appeal the ruling, granting Satawa a permit for the display.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Other [ edit ] Vasquez v. Los Angeles County In 2006, the center's West Coast office filed a federal lawsuit against Los Angeles County officials for their decision to remove a small cross from the county seal after they were threatened with a lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union and spent an estimated $700,000 to replace the seal on thousands of government buildings, vehicles and uniforms. The Law Center argued that the same Constitutional clause that prevents the establishment of a state religion also forbids the government from taking actions that convey a message of hostility toward religion.

[ 103 ] The lawsuit was rejected at the district, federal appeals, and Supreme court levels.

[ 104 ] The center also provided legal supervision [ citation needed ] for a ballot initiative to keep the cross on the seal, which did not generate enough signatures for placement on the ballot.

[ 105 ] Trunk v. City of San Diego The center's West Coast office intervened on behalf of the Citizens for the Mt. Soledad National War Memorial, to prevent the city of San Diego from removing a 29 ft cross from the existing Mt. Soledad war memorial . In December 2013, U.S. District Judge Larry Burns ruled that the cross must be removed. However, he issued a stay on the ruling allowing for the Law Center to appeal to the United States Supreme Court , asking for a stay in destruction of the memorial. In June 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court refused to intervene in the two-decade-old battle until the appellate court rules on the issue.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] The case was dismissed by the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 2016 after a group called the Mt. Soledad Memorial Association bought the land under the cross in 2015.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Thomas More Law Center et al. v. Barack H. Obama et al.

The Thomas More Law Center filed a federal lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act . The purpose of the lawsuit was to permanently enjoin enforcement of the new health care legislation.

[ 110 ] The lawsuit was filed on behalf of the Center itself, and four individuals from the Southeastern Michigan area, none of whom had private health care insurance. On October 7, 2010, U.S. District Court Judge George Caram Steeh dismissed two out of six of their claims, [ 111 ] upholding these provisions under Congress's interstate commerce clause powers. The court eventually ruled that the minimum coverage portion of the Act which was in question was Constitutionally sound, a ruling that was confirmed by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in June, 2011.

[ 112 ] In July 2011, the Center petitioned the Supreme Court to review the case; that petition was denied in July 2012.

[ 113 ] Brinsdon v. McAllen Independent School District In 2013, the Law Center filed a lawsuit against McAllen Independent School District, stating that a student enrolled in a high school Spanish class had been punished for refusing to recite the Mexican Pledge of Allegiance and Mexican National Anthem complete with arm outstretched in the appropriate posture. In January 2015, U.S. District Judge Micaela Alvarez of the Southern District of Texas dismissed the case, ruling that the student's attorneys provided no evidence of a school board policy that required students to recite the Mexican Pledge of Allegiance or sing the Mexican National Anthem, adding that teaching multiculturalism in public school is not inherently unconstitutional and that there was no evidence that the student's rights were violated.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Evaluations [ edit ] Charity evaluator Charity Navigator rated the center with three stars out of a possible four overall, based on their filings for the fiscal year ending December 2013. This overall rating reflects the combination of a three-star financial rating and a three-star accountability and transparency rating.

[ 116 ] For the fiscal year ending December 2011, the organization had a one-star overall, reflecting one star each for financial and accountability and transparency.

[ 117 ] Those same ratings repeated for the year ending December 2012.

[ 118 ] The Southern Poverty Law Center designated the center as an anti-Muslim hate group as of 2019.

[ 119 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Thomas More Law Center" .

www.guidestar.org .

GuideStar . Retrieved 2017-08-09 .

^ "TEA Party Sues City of Coldwater, Michigan Over Free Speech Rights" .

canadafreepress.com .

^ "About the Thomas More Law Center - Thomas More Law Center" .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Former Army ranger raises awareness, funds at Law Center - Washtenaw County Legal News" .

legalnews.com .

^ a b "Conservative Christian groups join legal fight to keep Michigan's gay marriage ban" .

Detroit Free Press .

^ "Anti-abortion protesters to push ahead with lawsuit, despite repeal of Portland buffer zone" .

Bangor Daily News . 8 July 2014.

^ a b "Thomas More Law Center v. Obama" .

SCOTUS Blog .

^ "Organic Eden Foods' quiet right-wing agenda" .

Salon . 11 April 2013.

^ Goodstein, Laurie (21 December 2005).

"Judge Rejects Teaching Intelligent Design" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2018-09-30 .

^ "Court upholds dismissal of charges in Haditha case" .

Los Angeles Times . 18 March 2009.

^ "Pro-Life Group Denied Recognition By Johns Hopkins University Student Government Turns To The Thomas More Law Center" .

The Desert Review .

^ "Domino's Pizza Founder Thomas Monaghan Sues: Obamacare's Birth Control A 'Grave Sin' " .

jobs.aol.com .

^ "Prosecutor of Kevorkian Loses Re-election Bid" .

New York Times . 8 August 1996.

^ "Santorum Breaks With Christian-Rights Law Center" .

Washington Post .

^ "Thomas More Law Center Fights for Mt. Soledad Cross" .

LegalNews.com .

^ "Law Center Fights Calif. AG Over Donor Lists" .

Courthouse News Service .

^ "Allen West Joins Far-Right Thomas More Law Center" .

People for the American Way . 3 May 2012.

^ "Michele Bachmann joins board of Ann Arbor-based Christian activists" .

Detroit Free Press .

^ "Citizens Advisory Board | Thomas More Law Center" . Archived from the original on 2013-10-04 . Retrieved 2013-10-01 .

^ "Thomas More Law Center Guidestar Report" .

Guidestar .

^ Linder, Douglas O.

The Trial of Sir Thomas More: A Chronology at University Of Missouri-Kansas City (UMKC) School Of Law ^ a b Goodstein, Laurie (2005-11-04).

"In Intelligent Design Case, a Cause in Search of a Lawsuit" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2017-08-09 .

^ "Kitzmiller v Dover Area School District Memorandum Opinion" (PDF) .

District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania .

^ Lebo, Laura (2005).

"Judge grills Dover official in ID trial" .

York Daily Record . Retrieved 2008-03-20 .

^ "Judge rules against 'intelligent design' " .

msnbc.com . 2005-12-21 . Retrieved 2018-09-30 .

^ "Town Finds a Dark Side to Rainbows" .

Los Angeles Times . Associated Press. 24 February 2001.

^ "City to drop investigation into officer's views on homosexuality" .

Baptist Press . 16 January 2001.

^ "Judge: Ann Arbor schools violated student's rights" Associated Press, 8 December 2003 ^ Daniel J. Wakin (December 11, 2002).

"Lawsuit Attacks Schools' Ban on Nativity Scenes" .

New York Times .

^ "Skoros v. City of New York - Leagle.com" .

leagle.com .

^ Greg Moran.

"Court: Teacher can't refer to 'God' in class banners" .

U-T San Diego .

^ Mueller, Mark (November 24, 2013).

"TNJ priest fights to protect service members' rights" .

The Star-Ledger .

^ "Planned Parenthood sued over abortion's risk" San Diego Union-Tribune , August 16, 2001.

^ "Suit alleging abortion-cancer link dismissed" San Diego Union-Tribune , March 21, 2002.

^ "Bernardo v. Planned Parenthood Federation of America" .

Leagle.com .

^ "Abortion foes sue Great Falls" .

Billings Gazette, Associated Press . 22 August 2001.

^ WJXT.

"Conservatives Urge Governor To Intervene In Schiavo Case" .

News4Jax . Archived from the original on May 12, 2014.

^ Baird, W. Douglas, Circuit Judge. (2005-05-05).

"Michael Schiavo, as Guardian of the person of Theresa Marie Schiavo, Petitioner, v. Jeb Bush, Governor of the State of Florida, and Charlie Crist, Attorney General of the State of Florida, Respondents, Case No. 03-008212-CI-20" . Florida Sixth Judicial Circuit . Retrieved 2006-02-03 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Fitzgerald v City of Portland Complaint" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Judge dismisses most of lawsuit over since-repealed abortion clinic buffer zone" .

Bangor Daily News . 27 October 2014.

^ Saletan, William (March 20, 2002).

"The Trying Game" . Slate.

^ 85,030 (Supreme Court of Kansas March 15, 2002) ("J'Noel remains a transsexual, and a male for purposes of marriage under K.S.A.2001 Supp. 23-101").

^ a b "Rohde v. Ann Arbor Public Schools - Leagle.com" .

leagle.com .

^ "Public universities go to battle in favor of same-sex benefits" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ "Rohde v. Ann Arbor Public Schools - Leagle.com" .

leagle.com .

^ "FOXNews.com - Group Sues to Halt to Same-Sex Benefits" .

Fox News .

^ "Michigan State sued over benefits for same-sex partners" .

USA Today . July 6, 2006.

^ "Ruling on same-sex benefits weighed" . Mlive.com. May 8, 2008. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014 . Retrieved November 2, 2013 .

^ Voters say no to Amend. 1 , The Gainesville Sun , March 25, 2009. Retrieved on March 25, 2009.

^ "Six words of separation" .

Detroit Metro Times .

^ "Coalition Of Black Pastors Speaks Out Against Gay Marriage" .

Huffington Post . 15 May 2014.

^ "Brief Of The National Coalition Of Black Pastors And Christian Leaders As Amici Curiae In Support Of Defendants-Appellees" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Brief Of The Coalition Of Black Pastors From Detroit, Outstate Michigan, And Ohio As Amici Curiae Supporting Defendants-Appellants" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Brief For The National Coalition Of Black Pastors And Christian Leaders As Amici Curiae In Support Of Respondents" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Brief For The National Coalition Of Black Pastors And Christian Leaders As Amici Curiae In Support Of Respondents" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Brief For The National Coalition Of Black Pastors And Christian Leaders As Amici Curiae In Support Of Petitioners" .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "Brief For The National Coalition Of Black Pastors And Christian Leaders As Amici Curiae In Support Of Petitioners" .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ "California school sued over Islamic drills" .

The Washington Times .

^ Locke, Michelle (December 12, 2003).

"Federal judge finds no fault with Berkeley school's lessons on Islam" .

Santa Cruz Sentinel . p. 8.

^ "End of the Line for Four Cases" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . October 3, 2006. p. A6.

^ "Kevin Murray v. U.S. Treasury Sec. Timothy Geithner, et al. Complaint" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center U.S. District Court Southern District of Michigan .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-28 . Retrieved 2012-01-28 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Shrestha, Bibeka (2011-01-14).

"Judge Nixes Catholic Man's Suit Over AIG Bailout" . Law360 . Retrieved 2011-09-19 .

^ "Olmsted Falls school district pulls video on Islam after conservative group raises possible legal challenge" .

Cleveland Plain Dealer . 4 October 2013.

^ "30 Days - "Muslims and America" " .

IMDB .

^ "Report of the Subcommittee on Military Justice in Combat Zones" (PDF) .

Defense Legal Policy Board .

^ "Marine Cleared In Haditha Massacre" .

CBS News . 2008-07-17 . Retrieved 2008-06-18 .

^ a b "Downey v. United States Department of the Army - Filed Complaint" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center .

^ Scarborough, Rowan (November 12, 2014).

"Combat pilot who tried to halt lesbian kissing episode faces discharge" .

Washington Times . Washington D.C . Retrieved June 15, 2015 .

^ "Notification to Appear Before and Officer Board of Inquiry" .

Captain Alan Wehbé .

^ "Report of Proceedings by Investigating Board of Officers" .

Col. Todd E. Key .

^ "Teen allowed to wear shirt" .

Amarillo Globe News .

^ a b "Students Take Pro-Life Message Into Public Schools Today" .

Christian News Service .

^ "California Teen Wins Fight with High School Over Pro-Life T-shirt" .

National Catholic Register . Archived from the original on June 14, 2015.

^ "UK 'least wanted' list published" .

BBC . 2009-05-05 . Retrieved 2009-05-05 .

^ " 'Who is on UK least wanted list' " .

BBC . 2009-05-05 . Retrieved 2009-05-05 .

^ US talkshow host Michael Savage to sue Jacqui Smith over ban from Britain Alex Spillius, telegraph.co.uk, 06 May 2009.

^ "Radio host Savage always up for a fight" .

The Washington Times .

^ Chasmar, Jessica (May 3, 2017).

"Michael Savage, still banned from U.K., petitions Donald Trump to step in" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ "Jones Released from Jail After Paying 'Peace Bond' " .

WJBK . Dearborn. 2011-04-22. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2012 .

^ Wattrick, Jeff (November 11, 2011).

"Judge vacates 'breach of peace' judgement against Terry Jones" .

MLive.com . Retrieved November 3, 2012 .

^ "Religious beliefs allegedly get boy booted from class" .

USA Today . Archived from the original on August 25, 2013.

^ a b "Student Wins Free-Speech Lawsuit Against Teacher" .

CBS Detroit . 22 June 2013.

^ Glowacki v. Howell Public School District , 2:11-CV-15481 (United States District Court, E.D. Michigan, Southern Division June 19, 2013.) ("It is further ordered that Plaintiffs' Motion for Summary Judgment, (ECF No. 24), is GRANTED IN PART and DENIED IN PART. Plaintiffs' Motion is granted with respect to Daniel's free speech claim against Defendant McDowell but denied as to all other claims. It is further ordered that Defendant McDowell's Motion for Summary Judgment, (ECF No. 21), is granted in part and denied in part. McDowell's Motion is denied only as to Daniel's free speech claim against him but is granted as to all other claims. It is further ordered that Defendant School District's Motion for Summary Judgment, (ECF No. 23), is granted.").

^ "Judge nixes religious group's planned display" .

Salt Lake Tribune .

^ "Move of Ten Commandments monument ends lawsuit against Duchesne" .

Salt Lake Tribune . Archived from the original on 2011-06-04.

^ "Summum wants lawsuit against Duchesne dismissed" .

Desert News . 3 June 2009. Archived from the original on February 2, 2011.

^ "Judge rules in favor of keeping Ten Commandments monument in Utah Park" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ Society of Separationists v. Pleasant Grove City et al.

, 04-4136 (United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit August 1, 2005) ("We therefore REVERSE the lower court's grant of judgment on the pleadings and REMAND for further proceedings.").

^ "Separationists quit Commandments suit" .

Salt Lake Tribune .

^ "Florida town sued for not allowing display of Christian Nativity" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ "Judge Enters Nativity Dispute" .

Sun Sentinel . Archived from the original on March 3, 2016.

^ "Palm Beach council rejects request to put Nativity near menorah" .

The St. Augustine Record .

^ "Christmas in July—Palm Beach Apologizes for Refusing Nativity Scene" .

Christianity Today . June 2004.

^ "Federal judge rules in favor of Nativity" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ Schwartz, Noaki (December 17, 2004).

"Court rejects Nativity ban" .

The Orlando Sentinel . p. B5.

^ "More Center Fights Bans on Christmas Music and Symbolism" .

Christian Post .

^ "Ban On School Christmas Carols Upheld" .

Huffington Post . 6 October 2010.

^ "Stratechuk v. Board of Education, South Orange-Maplewood School District et al" .

New Jersey Law Journal .

^ "Michigan Man Sues for Right to Put Back Family's Nativity Scene on Public Median" .

Fox News . 25 March 2015.

^ John Satawa v. Mcomb County Road Commission et al.

, 11-1612 (United States Court of Appeals
for the Sixth Circuit August 1, 2012) ("The crèche, as discussed above, is private religious expression, "fully protected
under the Free Speech Clause."").

^ "Court Rules in Favor of Public Nativity Scene" .

Fox News .

^ "L.A. County seal has its day in court" .

LA Daily News . 18 October 2006.

^ Rohit, Parimal M. (December 4, 2007).

"Supreme Court Rejects Challenge of Seal" .

The Signal .

^ "The Claremont Institute - The L.A. County Seal Case" . Claremont.org. Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved 2011-09-19 .

^ "Mt. Soledad cross stays — for a while, at least" .

SCOTUS Blog . 30 June 2014.

^ "U.S. Supreme Court declines to take up Mt. Soledad cross case" .

L.A. Times . 30 June 2014.

^ Richardson, Valerie.

"Mt. Soledad cross to stand as veterans group buys land from Defense Department" . The Washington Times . Retrieved 27 June 2017 .

^ Moran, Greg (September 8, 2016).

"Soledad cross case concludes, leaving memorial in place" .

San Diego Union-Tribune . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ "Thomas More Law Center v. Barack Obama, et al" (PDF) .

Thomas More Law Center Filed Complaint .

^ Pelofsky, Jeremy (October 7, 2010).

"US judge upholds key part of Obama healthcare law" .

Reuters .

^ "Thomas More Law Center v. Barack Hussein Obama, in his official capacity as President of the United States" (PDF) .

United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit .

^ "Search - Supreme Court of the United States" .

supremecourt.gov .

^ "Judge dismisses First Amendment suit over Mexican pledge, flag" .

San Antonio Express News . 7 January 2015.

^ "McAllen student who sued over Mexican pledge and flag loses lawsuit" .

San Antonio Express News . 7 January 2015.

^ "Charity Navigator Rating - Thomas More Law Center" .

Charity Navigator .

^ "Charity Navigator - Rating for Thomas More Law Center" . Archived from the original on 2014-01-03.

^ "Charity Navigator - Rating for Thomas More Law Center" . Archived from the original on 2014-04-12.

^ "Anti-Muslim" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved June 18, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_More_Law_Center&oldid=1280861122 " Categories : Religion and politics Intelligent design advocates Political organizations based in the United States Legal advocacy organizations in the United States Intelligent design organizations Organizations established in 1999 Organizations based in Ann Arbor, Michigan Anti-abortion organizations in the United States Conservative organizations in the United States 1999 establishments in Michigan Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Pages using cite court with unknown parameters CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with a promotional tone from July 2015 All articles with a promotional tone Articles lacking reliable references from July 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from July 2015 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2015 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas More Law Center 2 languages Add topic

