Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Use of statistics 3 Measurement 4 Relationship with qualitative methods 5 Examples 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Quantitative research 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Quantitative data ) All procedures for the numerical representation of empirical facts For applications in social science, see Quantitative social research .

Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Quantitative research is a research strategy that focuses on quantifying the collection and analysis of data.

[ 1 ] It is formed from a deductive approach where emphasis is placed on the testing of theory, shaped by empiricist and positivist philosophies.

[ 1 ] Associated with the natural , applied , formal , and social sciences this research strategy promotes the objective empirical investigation of observable phenomena to test and understand relationships. This is done through a range of quantifying methods and techniques, reflecting on its broad utilization as a research strategy across differing academic disciplines .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] There are several situations where quantitative research may not be the most appropriate or effective method to use: 1. When exploring in-depth or complex topics.

2. When studying subjective experiences and personal opinions.

3. When conducting exploratory research.

4. When studying sensitive or controversial topics The objective of quantitative research is to develop and employ mathematical models , theories , and hypotheses pertaining to phenomena. The process of measurement is central to quantitative research because it provides the fundamental connection between empirical observation and mathematical expression of quantitative relationships.

Quantitative data is any data that is in numerical form such as statistics, percentages, etc.

[ 4 ] The researcher analyses the data with the help of statistics and hopes the numbers will yield an unbiased result that can be generalized to some larger population.

Qualitative research , on the other hand, inquires deeply into specific experiences, with the intention of describing and exploring meaning through text, narrative, or visual-based data, by developing themes exclusive to that set of participants.

[ 5 ] Quantitative research is widely used in psychology , economics , demography , sociology , marketing , community health, health & human development, gender studies, and political science ; and less frequently in anthropology and history . Research in mathematical sciences, such as physics , is also "quantitative" by definition, though this use of the term differs in context. In the social sciences, the term relates to empirical methods originating in both philosophical positivism and the history of statistics , in contrast with qualitative research methods.

Qualitative research produces information only on the particular cases studied, and any more general conclusions are only hypotheses. Quantitative methods can be used to verify which of such hypotheses are true. A comprehensive analysis of 1274 articles published in the top two American sociology journals between 1935 and 2005 found that roughly two-thirds of these articles used quantitative method .

[ 6 ] Overview [ edit ] Quantitative research is generally closely affiliated with ideas from 'the scientific method' , which can include: The generation of models, theories and hypotheses The development of instruments and methods for measurement Experimental control and manipulation of variables Collection of empirical data Modeling and analysis of data Quantitative research is often contrasted with qualitative research , which purports to be focused more on discovering underlying meanings and patterns of relationships, including classifications of types of phenomena and entities, in a manner that does not involve mathematical models.

[ 7 ] Approaches to quantitative psychology were first modeled on quantitative approaches in the physical sciences by Gustav Fechner in his work on psychophysics , which built on the work of Ernst Heinrich Weber . Although a distinction is commonly drawn between qualitative and quantitative aspects of scientific investigation, it has been argued that the two go hand in hand. For example, based on analysis of the history of science, Kuhn concludes that "large amounts of qualitative work have usually been prerequisite to fruitful quantification in the physical sciences".

[ 8 ] Qualitative research is often used to gain a general sense of phenomena and to form theories that can be tested using further quantitative research. For instance, in the social sciences qualitative research methods are often used to gain better understanding of such things as intentionality (from the speech response of the researchee) and meaning (why did this person/group say something and what did it mean to them?) (Kieron Yeoman).

Although quantitative investigation of the world has existed since people first began to record events or objects that had been counted, the modern idea of quantitative processes have their roots in Auguste Comte 's positivist framework.

[ 9 ] Positivism emphasized the use of the scientific method through observation to empirically test hypotheses explaining and predicting what, where, why, how, and when phenomena occurred. Positivist scholars like Comte believed only scientific methods rather than previous spiritual explanations 
for human behavior could advance.

Quantitative methods are an integral component of the five angles of analysis fostered by the data percolation methodology, [ 10 ] which also includes qualitative methods, 
reviews of the literature (including scholarly), interviews with experts and computer simulation, and which forms an extension of data triangulation.

Quantitative methods have limitations. These studies do not provide reasoning behind participants' responses, they often do not reach underrepresented populations, and they may span long periods in order to collect the data.

[ 11 ] Use of statistics [ edit ] Statistics is the most widely used branch of mathematics in quantitative research outside of the physical sciences, and also finds applications within the physical sciences, such as in statistical mechanics . Statistical methods are used extensively within fields such as economics, social sciences and biology. Quantitative research using statistical methods starts with the collection of data, based on the hypothesis or theory. Usually a big sample of data is collected – this would require verification, validation and recording before the analysis can take place. Software packages such as SPSS and R are typically used for this purpose. Causal relationships are studied by manipulating factors thought to influence the phenomena of interest while controlling other variables relevant to the experimental outcomes. In the field of health, for example, researchers might measure and study the relationship between dietary intake and measurable physiological effects such as weight loss, controlling for other key variables such as exercise. Quantitatively based opinion surveys are widely used in the media, with statistics such as the proportion of respondents in favor of a position commonly reported. In opinion surveys, respondents are asked a set of structured questions and their responses are tabulated. In the field of climate science, researchers compile and compare statistics such as temperature or atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide.

Empirical relationships and associations are also frequently studied by using some form of general linear model , non-linear model, or by using factor analysis . A fundamental principle in quantitative research is that correlation does not imply causation , although some such as Clive Granger suggest that a series of correlations can imply a degree of causality . This principle follows from the fact that it is always possible a spurious relationship exists for variables between which covariance is found in some degree. Associations may be examined between any combination of continuous and categorical variables using methods of statistics. Other data analytical approaches for studying causal relations can be performed with Necessary Condition Analysis (NCA), which outlines must-have conditions for the studied outcome variable.

Measurement [ edit ] Views regarding the role of measurement in quantitative research are somewhat divergent. Measurement is often regarded as being only a means by which observations are expressed numerically in order to investigate causal relations or associations. However, it has been argued that measurement often plays a more important role in quantitative research.

[ 12 ] For example, Kuhn argued that within quantitative research, the results that are shown can prove to be strange. This is because accepting a theory based on results of quantitative data could prove to be a natural phenomenon. He argued that such abnormalities are interesting when done during the process of obtaining data, as seen below: When measurement departs from theory, it is likely to yield mere numbers, and their very neutrality makes them particularly sterile as a source of remedial suggestions. But numbers register the departure from theory with an authority and finesse that no qualitative technique can duplicate, and that departure is often enough to start a search (Kuhn, 1961, p. 180).

In classical physics, the theory and definitions which underpin measurement are generally deterministic in nature. In contrast, probabilistic measurement models known as the Rasch model and Item response theory models are generally employed in the social sciences.

Psychometrics is the field of study concerned with the theory and technique for measuring social and psychological attributes and phenomena. This field is central to much quantitative research that is undertaken within the social sciences.

Quantitative research may involve the use of proxies as stand-ins for other quantities that cannot be directly measured. Tree-ring width, for example, is considered a reliable proxy of ambient environmental conditions such as the warmth of growing seasons or amount of rainfall. Although scientists cannot directly measure the temperature of past years, tree-ring width and other climate proxies have been used to provide a semi-quantitative record of average temperature in the Northern Hemisphere back to 1000 A.D.

When used in this way, the proxy record (tree ring width, say) only reconstructs a certain amount of the variance of the original record. The proxy may be calibrated (for example, during the period of the instrumental record) to determine how much variation is captured, including whether both short and long term variation is revealed. In the case of tree-ring width, different species in different places may show more or less sensitivity to, say, rainfall or temperature: when reconstructing a temperature record there is considerable skill in selecting proxies that are well correlated with the desired variable.

[ 13 ] Relationship with qualitative methods [ edit ] Further information: Qualitative research In most physical and biological sciences , the use of either quantitative or qualitative methods is uncontroversial, and each is used when appropriate. In the social sciences, particularly in sociology , social anthropology and psychology , the use of one or other type of method can be a matter of controversy and even ideology, with particular schools of thought within each discipline favouring one type of method and pouring scorn on to the other. The majority tendency throughout the history of social science, however, is to use eclectic approaches-by combining both methods. Qualitative methods might be used to understand the meaning of the conclusions produced by quantitative methods. Using quantitative methods, it is possible to give precise and testable expression to qualitative ideas. This combination of quantitative and qualitative data gathering is often referred to as mixed-methods research .

[ 14 ] Examples [ edit ] Research that consists of the percentage amounts of all the elements that make up Earth's atmosphere.

Survey that concludes that the average patient has to wait two hours in the waiting room of a certain doctor before being selected.

An experiment in which group x was given two tablets of aspirin a day and group y was given two tablets of a placebo a day where each participant is randomly assigned to one or other of the groups. The numerical factors such as two tablets, percent of elements and the time of waiting make the situations and results quantitative.

In economics , quantitative research is used to analyze business enterprises and the factors contributing to the diversity of organizational structures and the relationships of firms with labour, capital and product markets.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Antipositivism Case study research Econometrics Falsifiability Market research Positivism Qualitative research Quantitative marketing research Quantitative psychology Quantification (science) Observational study Sociological positivism Statistical survey Statistics References [ edit ] Library resources about Quantitative research Resources in your library Resources in other libraries ^ a b Bryman, Alan (2012).

Social research methods (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-958805-3 .

OCLC 751832004 .

^ Babbie, Earl R. (2010).

The practice of social research (12th ed.). Belmont, Calif: Wadsworth Cengage.

ISBN 978-0-495-59841-1 .

OCLC 317075477 .

^ Muijs, Daniel (29 December 2010).

Doing quantitative research in education with SPSS (2nd ed.). Los Angeles.

ISBN 978-1-84920-323-4 .

OCLC 656776067 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Given, Lisa M. (2008).

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research Methods . Los Angeles: SAGE Publications .

ISBN 978-1-4129-4163-1 .

^ Corrine, Glesne (2011).

Becoming Qualitative Researchers: An Introduction (4th ed.). Boston: Pearson .

ISBN 978-0137047970 .

OCLC 464594493 .

^ Hunter, Laura; Leahey, Erin (2008). "Collaborative Research in Sociology: Trends and Contributing Factors".

The American Sociologist .

39 (4): 290– 306.

doi : 10.1007/s12108-008-9042-1 .

^ Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MIT OpenCourseWare. 11.201 Gateway to the Profession of Planning, Fall 2010. p. 4.

^ Kuhn, Thomas S. (1961). "The Function of Measurement in Modern Physical Science".

Isis .

52 (2): 161–193 (162).

doi : 10.1086/349468 .

JSTOR 228678 .

^ Kasim, R.; Alexander, K.; Hudson, J. (2010).

A choice of research strategy for identifying community-based action skill requirements in the process of delivering housing market renewal (masters). Research Institute for the Built and Human Environment, University of Salford, UK. Archived from the original on 2017-06-18 . Retrieved 2013-10-03 .

^ Mesly, Olivier 
(2015).

Creating Models in Psychological Research.

United States: Springer Psychology: 126 pages.

ISBN 978-3-319-15752-8 ^ Goertzen, Melissa J. (2017).

"Introduction to Quantitative Research and Data" .

Library Technology Reports .

53 (4): 12– 18.

ISSN 0024-2586 .

^ Moballeghi, M. & Moghaddam, G.G. (2008).

"How Do We Measure Use of Scientific Journals? A Note on Research Methodologies" .

Scientometrics .

76 (1): 125– 133.

doi : 10.1007/s11192-007-1901-y .

^ Briffa, Keith R.; Osborn, Timothy J.; Schweingruber, Fritz H.; Harris, Ian C.; Jones, Philip D.; Shiyatov, Stepan G.; Vaganov, Eugene A. (2001).

"Low-frequency temperature variations from a northern tree ring density network" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

106 (D3): 2929– 2941.

Bibcode : 2001JGR...106.2929B .

doi : 10.1029/2000JD900617 .

^ Diriwächter, R. & Valsiner, J. (January 2006) Qualitative Developmental Research Methods in Their Historical and Epistemological Contexts . FQS. Vol 7, No. 1, Art. 8 ^ Moschandreas, Maria (2000).

Business Economics , 2nd Edition, Thompson Learning, Description and chapter-preview links .

Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐6dmv4
Cached time: 20250811235638
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.428 seconds
Real time usage: 0.532 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1405/1000000
Revision size: 17877/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 46848/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1179/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62194/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.297/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5909612/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  465.212      1 -total
 38.04%  176.987      1 Template:Reflist
 23.46%  109.120      5 Template:Cite_book
 20.69%   96.236      1 Template:Research
 19.94%   92.773      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.75%   68.632      1 Template:Short_description
 13.56%   63.077      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.62%   40.116      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.98%   32.449      5 Template:Cite_journal
  4.18%   19.456      1 Template:Library_resources_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:389564:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235638 and revision id 1302687103. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quantitative_research&oldid=1302687103 " Category : Quantitative research Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quantitative research 42 languages Add topic

