Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historic cases from ancient times to the 1960s Toggle Historic cases from ancient times to the 1960s subsection 1.1 Imperial China 1.1.1 Tang dynasty 1.1.2 Qing dynasty 1.2 Colonial societies 1.2.1 Belgian Congo 1.2.2 French Algeria 1.2.3 Rhodesia 1.2.4 Uganda 1.3 Religious and racial antisemitism 1.3.1 Fascist Italy 1.3.2 Nazi Germany 1.4 Other countries 1.4.1 Canada 1.4.2 South Africa 1.4.3 United States 2 Historic cases (1970s to present) Toggle Historic cases (1970s to present) subsection 2.1 Bahrain 2.2 Canada 2.3 Fiji 2.4 Hungary 2.5 Israel 2.6 Kenya 2.7 Liberia 2.8 Malaysia 2.9 Mauritania 2.10 United Kingdom 2.11 United States 2.12 Yemen 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Racial segregation 53 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Systemic separation of people into racial or other ethnic groups in daily lives "Color bar" and "Segregationist" redirect here. For the TV test pattern, see SMPTE color bars . For the short story, see Segregationist (short story) .

African-American man drinking from a "Colored" water cooler in streetcar terminal, Oklahoma City , July 1939 Part of a series on Racial segregation Jim Crow sign, anti-Hispanic Overview Anti-miscegenation laws Crime of apartheid Allegations Caste Xenophobia Environmental / Institutional racism Ethnic nationalism Forced displacement Housing discrimination Exclusionary zoning Redlining Historical examples Australia Canada Pass system Separate schools Indian hospitals Fascist Italy French colonial empire Code Noir Indigénat Greek–Turkish population exchange Jewish ghettos in Europe Pale of Settlement Partition of India Portugal & Spain Nazi Germany Nuremberg Laws Rhodesia South Africa Bantustans Pass laws United Kingdom United States Black Codes Jim Crow laws Separate but equal Contemporary examples Anti-Romanyism Italy Romania Slovenia Roma walls Bosnia–Herzegovina Schools Cyprus Gulf states Saudi Arabia UAE South Asian labourers India Uthapuram Muslims Israel Palestinian enclaves Hafrada West Bank settlement law / barriers Malaysia Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Northern Ireland Sudan United States Academies Housing Schools Residential Xinjiang Yemen Related Citizenship Statelessness Forced assimilation Gender apartheid Income inequality One-drop rule Race Ethnicity Racial discrimination Category Commons v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Racial segregation is the separation of people into racial or other ethnic groups in daily life. Segregation can involve the spatial separation of the races, and mandatory use of different institutions, such as schools and hospitals by people of different races. Specifically, it may be applied to activities such as eating in restaurants, drinking from water fountains, using public toilets, attending schools, going to movie theaters, riding buses, renting or purchasing homes, renting hotel rooms, going to supermarkets, or attending places of worship.

[ 1 ] In addition, segregation often allows close contact between members of different racial or ethnic groups in hierarchical situations, such as allowing a person of one race to work as a servant for a member of another race. Racial segregation has generally been outlawed worldwide.

Segregation is defined by the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance as "the act by which a (natural or legal) person separates other persons on the basis of one of the enumerated grounds without an objective and reasonable justification, in conformity with the proposed definition of discrimination. As a result, the voluntary act of separating oneself from other people on the basis of one of the enumerated grounds does not constitute segregation".

[ 2 ] According to the UN Forum on Minority Issues, "The creation and development of classes and schools providing education in minority languages should not be considered impermissible segregation if the assignment to such classes and schools is of a voluntary nature." [ 3 ] Racial segregation can amount to the international crime of apartheid and a crime against humanity under the 2002 Rome Declaration of Statute of the International Criminal Court .

Historic cases from ancient times to the 1960s [ edit ] Racial segregation was often used to secure the advantages enjoyed by a certain dominant group, e.g. "various conquerors—among them Asian Mongols, African Bantu, and American Aztecs". In recent times, it was mostly imposed by white groups .

[ 4 ] Imperial China [ edit ] Tang dynasty [ edit ] Ethnic Han were banned from forming relationships with Sogdians, depicted here on the Anyang funerary bed , circa 567/573.

Several laws which enforced racial segregation of foreigners from Chinese were passed by the Han Chinese during the Tang dynasty .

[ citation needed ] In 779, the Tang dynasty issued an edict which forced Uyghurs to wear their ethnic dress, stopped them from marrying Han Chinese females, and banned them from pretending to be Han Chinese.

[ 5 ] In 836, when Lu Chun was appointed as governor of Canton , he was disgusted to find Chinese living with foreigners and intermarriage between Chinese and foreigners. Lu enforced separation, banning interracial marriages, and made it illegal for foreigners to own property. Lu Chun believed his principles were just and upright.

[ 5 ] The 836 law specifically banned Chinese from forming relationships with "Dark peoples" or "People of colour", which was used to describe foreigners, such as " Iranians , Sogdians , Arabs , Indians , Malays , Sumatrans ", among others.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Qing dynasty [ edit ] Main article: Eight Banners Han and Manchu people depicted together in separate styles of clothing The Qing dynasty was founded not by Han Chinese, who form the majority of the Chinese population, but by Manchus , who are today an ethnic minority of China. The Manchus were keenly aware of their minority status, however, it was only later in the dynasty that they banned intermarriage.

Han defectors played a massive role in the Qing conquest of China. Han Chinese Generals of the Ming Dynasty who defected to the Manchu were often given women from the Imperial Aisin Gioro family in marriage while the ordinary soldiers who defected were given non-royal Manchu women as wives. The Manchu leader Nurhaci married one of his granddaughters to the Ming General Li Yongfang after he surrendered Fushun in Liaoning to the Manchu in 1618.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Jurchen (Manchu) women married most of the Han Chinese defectors in Liaodong.

[ 10 ] Aisin Gioro women were married to the sons of the Han Chinese Generals Sun Sike (Sun Ssu-k'o), Geng Jimao (Keng Chi-mao), Shang Kexi (Shang K'o-hsi), and Wu Sangui (Wu San-kuei).

[ 11 ] A mass marriage of Han Chinese officers and officials to Manchu women numbering 1,000 couples was arranged by Prince Yoto and Hongtaiji in 1632 to promote harmony between the two ethnic groups.

[ 8 ] Geng Zhongming , a Han bannerman, was awarded the title of Prince Jingnan, and his son Geng Jingmao managed to have both his sons Geng Jingzhong and Geng Zhaozhong become court attendants under Shunzhi and marry Aisin Gioro women, with Haoge's (a son of Hong Taiji) daughter marrying Geng Jingzhong and Prince Abatai's (Hong Taiji) granddaughter marrying Geng Zhaozhong.

[ 12 ] The Qing differentiated between Han Bannermen and ordinary Han civilians. Han Bannermen were made out of Han Chinese who defected to the Qing up to 1644 and joined the Eight Banners, giving them social and legal privileges in addition to being acculturated to Manchu culture. So many Han defected to the Qing and swelled the ranks of the Eight Banners that ethnic Manchus became a minority within the Banners, making up only 16% in 1648, with Han Bannermen dominating at 75%.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] It was this multi-ethnic force in which Manchus were only a minority, which conquered China for the Qing.

[ 16 ] It was Han Chinese Bannermen who were responsible for the successful Qing conquest of China, they made up the majority of governors in the early Qing and were the ones who governed and administered China after the conquest, stabilizing Qing rule.

[ 17 ] Han Bannermen dominated the post of governor-general in the time of the Shunzhi and Kangxi Emperors , and also the post of governors, largely excluding ordinary Han civilians from the posts.

[ 18 ] To promote ethnic harmony, a 1648 decree from the Manchu Shunzhi Emperor allowed Han Chinese civilian men to marry Manchu women from the Banners with the permission of the Board of Revenue if they were registered daughters of officials or commoners or the permission of their banner company captain if they were unregistered commoners, it was only later in the dynasty that these policies allowing intermarriage were done away with.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The Qing implemented a policy of segregation between the Bannermen of the Eight Banners (Manchu Bannermen, Mongol Bannermen, Han Bannermen) and Han Chinese civilians [ when?

] . This ethnic segregation had cultural and economic reasons: intermarriage was forbidden to keep up the Manchu heritage and minimize sinicization . Han Chinese civilians and Mongol civilians were banned from settling in Manchuria.

[ 21 ] Han civilians and Mongol civilians were banned from crossing into each other's lands. Ordinary Mongol civilians in Inner Mongolia were banned from even crossing into other Mongol Banners (a banner in Inner Mongolia was an administrative division and not related to the Mongol Bannermen in the Eight Banners).

These restrictions did not apply to Han Bannermen , who were settled in Manchuria by the Qing. Han bannermen were differentiated from Han civilians by the Qing and treated differently.

The Qing Dynasty started colonizing Manchuria with Han Chinese later on in the dynasty's rule, but the Manchu area was still separated from modern-day Inner Mongolia by the Outer Willow Palisade , which kept the Manchu and the Mongols in the area separate.

The policy of segregation applied directly to the banner garrisons, most of which occupied a separate walled zone within the cities in which they were stationed. Manchu Bannermen, Han Bannermen, and Mongol Bannermen were separated from the Han civilian population. While the Manchus followed the governmental structure of the preceding Ming dynasty , their ethnic policy dictated that appointments were split between Manchu noblemen and Han Chinese civilian officials who had passed the highest levels of the state examinations , and because of the small number of Manchus, this insured that a large fraction of them would be government officials.

Colonial societies [ edit ] Belgian Congo [ edit ] Main article: Belgian Congo § Social inequality and racial discrimination From 1952, and even more so after the triumphant visit of King Baudouin to the colony in 1955, Governor-General Léon Pétillon (1952–1958) worked to create a "Belgian-Congolese community", in which Black and White people were to be treated as equals.

[ 22 ] Regardless, anti-miscegenation laws remained in place, and between 1959 and 1962 thousands of mixed-race Congolese children were forcibly deported from the Congo by the Belgian government and the Catholic Church and taken to Belgium.

[ 23 ] French Algeria [ edit ] Main article: French Algeria § Discrimination See also: Indigénat and Assimilation (French colonialism) Following its conquest of Ottoman controlled Algeria in 1830, for well over a century, France maintained colonial rule in the territory which has been described as "quasi- apartheid ".

[ 24 ] The colonial law of 1865 allowed Arab and Berber Algerians to apply for French citizenship only if they abandoned their Muslim identity; Azzedine Haddour argues that this established "the formal structures of a political apartheid".

[ 25 ] Camille Bonora-Waisman writes that "in contrast with the Moroccan and Tunisian protectorates", this "colonial apartheid society" was unique to Algeria.

[ 26 ] This "internal system of apartheid" met with considerable resistance from the Muslims affected by it, and is cited as one of the causes of the 1954 insurrection and ensuing independence war .

[ 27 ] Rhodesia [ edit ] Further information: South Rhodesia Land Apportionment Act Land apportionment in Rhodesia in 1965 The Land Apportionment Act of 1930 passed in Southern Rhodesia (now known as Zimbabwe ) was a segregationist measure that governed land allocation and acquisition in rural areas, making distinctions between Blacks and Whites.

[ 28 ] One highly publicised legal battle occurred in 1960 involving the opening of a new theatre that was to be open to all races; the proposed unsegregated public toilets at the newly built Reps Theatre in 1959 caused an argument called "The Battle of the Toilets" .

Uganda [ edit ] Further information: Expulsion of Asians from Uganda Idi Amin, pictured shortly after the expulsion After the end of British rule in 1962, Indian people living in Uganda existed in segregated ethnic communities with their own schools and healthcare.

[ 29 ] Indians constituted 1% of the population but earned a fifth of the national income and controlled 90% of the country's businesses.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In 1972, the President of Uganda Idi Amin ordered the expulsion of the country's Indian minority with disastrous consequences for the local economy. The government confiscated some 5,655 firms, ranches, farms, and agricultural estates, along with cars, homes and other household goods.

[ 32 ] Religious and racial antisemitism [ edit ] Main articles: Antisemitism , History of antisemitism , Religious antisemitism , Antisemitism in Christianity , History of European Jews in the Middle Ages , History of the Jews in Europe , Jewish ghettos in Europe , Antisemitism in Islam , History of the Jews under Muslim rule , Mellah , and Racial antisemitism Jews in Europe were generally forced, by decree or by informal pressure, to live in highly segregated ghettos and shtetls .

[ 33 ] In 1204, the papacy required Jews to segregate themselves from Christians and it also required them to wear distinctive clothing.

[ 34 ] Forced segregation of Jews spread throughout Europe during the 14th and 15th centuries.

[ 35 ] In the Russian Empire , Jews were restricted to the so-called Pale of Settlement , the Western frontier of the Russian Empire which roughly corresponds to the modern-day countries of Poland, Lithuania , Belarus , Moldova and Ukraine.

[ 36 ] By the early 20th century, the majority of Europe's Jews lived in the Pale of Settlement.

From the beginning of the 15th century, Jewish populations in Morocco were confined to mellahs . In cities, a mellah was surrounded by a wall with a fortified gateway. In contrast, rural mellahs were separate villages whose sole inhabitants were Jews.

[ 37 ] In the middle of the 19th century, J. J. Benjamin wrote about the lives of Persian Jews : …they are obliged to live in a separate part of town…; for they are considered as unclean creatures… Under the pretext of their being unclean, they are treated with the greatest severity, and should they enter a street, inhabited by Mussulmans, they are pelted by the boys and mobs with stones and dirt… For the same reason, they are prohibited to go out when it rains; for it is said the rain would wash dirt off them, which would sully the feet of the Mussulmans… If a Jew is recognized as such in the streets, he is subjected to the greatest insults. The passers-by spit in his face, and sometimes beat him… unmercifully… If a Jew enters a shop for anything, he is forbidden to inspect the goods… Should his hand incautiously touch the goods, he must take them at any price the seller chooses to ask for them... Sometimes the Persians intrude into the dwellings of the Jews and take possession of whatever please them. Should the owner make the least opposition in defense of his property, he incurs the danger of atoning for it with his life... If... a Jew shows himself in the street during the three days of the Katel (Muharram)…, he is sure to be murdered.

[ 38 ] On 16 May 1940 in Norway, the Administrasjonsrådet asked the Rikskommisariatet why radio receivers had been confiscated from Jews in Norway.

[ 39 ] That Administrasjonsrådet thereafter "quietly" accepted [ 39 ] racial segregation between Norwegian citizens, has been claimed by Tor Bomann-Larsen . Furthermore, he claimed that this segregation "created a precedent . 2 years later (with NS-styret in the ministries of Norway) Norwegian police arrested citizens at the addresses where radios had previously been confiscated from Jews.

[ 39 ] Fascist Italy [ edit ] Main articles: Italian fascism and Italian fascism and racism In 1938, under pressure from the Nazis, the fascist regime , which was led by Benito Mussolini , passed a series of racial laws which instituted an official segregationist policy in the Italian Empire , this policy was especially directed against Italian Jews . This policy enforced various segregationist norms, like the laws which banned Jews from teaching or studying in ordinary schools and universities, banned Jews from owning industries that were reputed to be very important to the nation, banned Jews from working as journalists, banned Jews from joining the military, and banned Jews from marrying non-Jews.
As an immediate consequence of the introduction of the 'provvedimenti per la difesa della razza' (norms for the defence of the race), many of the best Italian scientists quit their jobs, and some of them also left Italy. Amongst these scientists were the internationally-known physicists Emilio Segrè , Enrico Fermi (whose wife was Jewish), Bruno Pontecorvo , Bruno Rossi , Tullio Levi-Civita , mathematicians Federigo Enriques and Guido Fubini and even the fascist propaganda director, art critic and journalist Margherita Sarfatti , who was one of Mussolini's mistresses.

Rita Levi-Montalcini , who would successively win the Nobel Prize for Medicine , was forbidden to work at the university. Upon the passage of the racial law, Albert Einstein cancelled his honorary membership in the Accademia dei Lincei .

After 1943, when Northern Italy was occupied by the Nazis , Italian Jews were rounded up and became victims of the Holocaust .

Nazi Germany [ edit ] Main articles: Nazism , Nazi racial theories , and Racial policy of Nazi Germany See also: Anti-Jewish legislation in pre-war Nazi Germany and Nur für Deutsche "Nur für deutsche Fahrgäste" ("Only for German passengers") on the tram number 8 in German-occupied Kraków , Poland German praise for America's system of institutional racism , which was expressed in Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf , was continuous throughout the early 1930s.

[ 40 ] The U.S. was the global leader of codified racism, and its race laws fascinated the Germans.

[ 40 ] The National Socialist Handbook for Law and Legislation of 1934–35, edited by Hitler's lawyer Hans Frank , contains a pivotal essay by Herbert Kier on the recommendations for race legislation which devoted a quarter of its pages to U.S. legislation—from segregation, race-based citizenship, immigration regulations, and anti-miscegenation .

[ 40 ] This directly inspired the two principal Nuremberg Laws —the Citizenship Law and the Blood Law.

[ 40 ] The ban on interracial marriage (anti-miscegenation) prohibited sexual relations and marriages between people classified as " Aryan " and "non-Aryan". Such relationships were called Rassenschande (race defilement). At first the laws were aimed primarily at Jews but were later extended to " Gypsies , Negroes ".

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Aryans found guilty could face incarceration in a Nazi concentration camp , while non-Aryans could face the death penalty.

[ 44 ] To preserve the so-called purity of the German blood, after the war began, the Nazis extended the race defilement law to include all foreigners (non-Germans).

[ 45 ] Under the General Government of occupied Poland in 1940, the Nazis divided the population into different groups, each with different rights, food rations, allowed housing strips in the cities, public transportation, etc. In an effort to split the Polish people's identity, they attempted to establish ethnic divisions of Kashubians and Gorals ( Goralenvolk ), based on these groups' alleged "Germanic component".

During the 1930s and 1940s, Jews in Nazi-controlled states were forced to wear something that identified them as Jewish, such as a yellow ribbon or a star of David , and along with Romas (Gypsies), they were subjected to discrimination by the racial laws. Jewish doctors were not allowed to treat Aryan patients and Jewish professors were not permitted to teach Aryan pupils. In addition, Jews were not allowed to use any form of public transportation, besides the ferry, and they were only allowed to shop in Jewish stores from 3–5 pm. After Kristallnacht ("The Night of Broken Glass"), the Jews were fined 1,000,000,000 ℛ︁ℳ︁ for the damage which was done by Nazi troops and SS members.

Women behind the barbed wire fence of the Lwów Ghetto in occupied Poland, Spring 1942 Jews , Poles , and Roma were subjected to genocide as "undesirable" racial groups in The Holocaust . The Nazis established ghettos in order to confine Jews and sometimes, they confined Romas in tightly packed areas of the cities of Eastern Europe , turning them into de facto concentration camps . The Warsaw Ghetto was the largest of these ghettos, with 400,000 people. The Łódź Ghetto was the second largest, holding about 160,000.

[ 46 ] Between 1939 and 1945, at least 1.5 million Polish citizens were transported to the Reich for forced labour (in all, about 12 million forced laborers were employed in the German war economy inside Nazi Germany ).

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Although Nazi Germany also used forced laborers from Western Europe, Poles , along with other Eastern Europeans viewed as racially inferior, [ 49 ] were subject to deeper discriminatory measures. They were forced to wear a yellow with purple border and letter " P " (for Polen/Polish) cloth identifying tag sewn to their clothing, subjected to a curfew , and banned from public transportation .

While the treatment of factory workers or farm hands often varied depending on the individual employer, Polish laborers, as a rule, were compelled to work longer hours for lower wages than Western Europeans – in many cities, they were forced to live in segregated barracks behind barbed wire. Social relations with Germans outside work were forbidden, and sexual relations ( Rassenschande or "racial defilement") were punishable by death.

[ 50 ] Other countries [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Racial segregation in Canada Racial segregation was widespread and deeply imbedded into the fabric of Canadian society prior to the Canadian constitution of 1982. Multiple court decisions, including one from the Supreme Court of Canada in 1939, upheld racial segregation as valid. The last black specifically segregated school closed in Ontario in 1965, while the last black specifically segregated school closed in Nova Scotia in 1983. The last racially segregated Indigenous school closed in 1996 in Saskatchewan.

[ 51 ] Canada has had multiple white only neighbourhoods and cities, white only public spaces, stores, universities, hospitals, employment, restaurants, theatres, sports arenas and universities. Though the black population in Canada was significantly less than the black population in the United States, severe restrictions on black people existed in all forms, particularly in immigration, employment access and mobility. Unlike in the United States, racial segregation in Canada applied to all non-whites and was historically enforced through laws, court decisions and social norms with a closed immigration system that barred virtually all non-whites from immigrating until 1962. Section 38 of the 1910 Immigration Act permitted the government to prohibit the entry of immigrants "belonging to any race deemed unsuited to the climate or requirements of Canada, or of immigrants of any specified class, occupation or character." [ 51 ] Racial segregation practices extended to many areas of employment in Canada. Black men and women in Quebec were historically relegated to the service sector regardless of their educational attainment. White business owners and even provincial and federal government agencies often did not hire black people, with explicit rules preventing their employment. When the labour movement took hold in Canada near the end of the 19th century, workers began organizing and forming trade unions with the aim of improving the working conditions and quality of life for employees. However, black workers were systematically denied membership to these unions, and worker's protection was reserved exclusively for whites.

[ 51 ] South Africa [ edit ] Main article: Apartheid " Apartheid ": sign on Durban beach in English, Afrikaans and Zulu , 1989 The apartheid system carried out by Afrikaner minority rule enacted a nationwide social policy "separate development" with the National Party victory in the 1948 general election , following the "colour bar"-discriminatory legislation dating back to the beginning of the Union of South Africa and the Boer republics before which, while repressive to Black South Africans along with other minorities, had not gone nearly so far.

Apartheid laws can be generally divided into following acts. Firstly, the Population Registration Act in 1950 classified residents in South Africa into four racial groups: "black", "white", " Coloured ", and "Indian" and noted their racial identities on their identifications. Secondly, the Group Areas Act in 1950 assigned different regions according to different races. People were forced to live in their corresponding regions and the action of passing the boundaries without a permit was made illegal, extending pass laws that had already curtailed black movement. Thirdly, under the Reservation of Separate Amenities Act in 1953, amenities in public areas, like hospitals, universities and parks, were labeled separately according to particular races. In addition, the Bantu Education Act in 1953 segregated national education in South Africa as well. Additionally, the government of the time enforced the pass laws , which deprived Black South Africans of their right to travel freely within their own country. Under this system Black South Africans were severely restricted from urban areas, requiring authorisation from a white employer to enter.

Uprisings and protests against apartheid appeared immediately when apartheid arose. As early as 1949, the Youth League of the African National Congress (ANC) advocated the ending of apartheid and suggested fighting against racial segregation by various methods. During the following decades, hundreds of anti-apartheid actions occurred, including those of the Black Consciousness Movement , students' protests, labor strikes, and church group activism etc. In 1991, the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act was passed, repealing laws enforcing racial segregation, including the Group Areas Act.

[ 52 ] In 1994, Nelson Mandela won in the first multiracial democratic election in South Africa. His success fulfilled the ending of apartheid in South African history.
Despite this, the legacy of apartheid and segregationism is still ongoing to this day in South Africa with high racial inequality in post-apartheid South Africa .

United States [ edit ] Further information: African-American history , Racism against African Americans , Racism in the United States , Slavery in the United States , Reconstruction Era , Gilded Age , Black Codes (United States) , Nadir of American race relations , and Civil rights movement In the United States, racial segregation was mandated by law in some states and enforced along with anti-miscegenation laws (prohibitions against interracial marriage ), until the U.S. Supreme Court led by Chief Justice Earl Warren struck down racial segregation.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] After the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing Slavery in the United States , Jim Crow laws were introduced to codify racial discrimination . The laws mandated strict segregation of the races. Though many of these laws were passed shortly after the Civil War ended, they only became formalized after the end of the Reconstruction era in 1877. The period that followed the Reconstruction era is known as the nadir of American race relations .

Colored Sailors room in World War I While the U.S. Supreme Court majority in the 1896 Plessy v. Ferguson case explicitly permitted " separate but equal " facilities (specifically, transportation facilities), Justice John Marshall Harlan , in his dissent , protested that the decision would "stimulate aggressions ... upon the admitted rights of colored citizens", "arouse race hate", and "perpetuate a feeling of distrust between [the] races. Feelings between Whites and Blacks were so tense, even the jails were segregated." [ 58 ] Elected in 1912, President Woodrow Wilson tolerated the extension of segregation throughout the federal government that was already underway.

[ 59 ] In World War I , Blacks were drafted and served in the United States Army in segregated units .

[ 60 ] The U.S. military was still heavily segregated in World War II. The air force and the marines had no Blacks enlisted in their ranks. There were Blacks in the Navy Seabees . The army had only five African-American officers.

[ 61 ] In addition, no African-American would receive the Medal of Honor during the war, and their tasks in the war were largely reserved to noncombat units. Black soldiers had to sometimes give up their seats in trains to the Nazi prisoners of war .

[ 61 ] A club which was central to the Harlem Renaissance in the 1920s, the Cotton Club in Harlem , New York City was a whites-only establishment, where Blacks (such as Duke Ellington ) were allowed to perform, but they were only allowed to perform in front of a white audience.

[ 62 ] In the reception to honor his success at the 1936 Summer Olympics , Jesse Owens was not permitted to enter through the main doors of the Waldorf Astoria New York and instead forced to travel up to the event in a freight elevator .

[ 63 ] The first black Academy Award recipient, actress Hattie McDaniel , was not permitted to attend the premiere of Gone with the Wind at Loew's Grand Theatre in Atlanta because of Georgia's segregation laws. During the 12th Academy Awards ceremony at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles, McDaniel was required to sit at a segregated table at the far wall of the room; the hotel had a no-blacks policy, but allowed McDaniel in as a favor.

[ 64 ] Her final wish to be buried in Hollywood Forever Cemetery was denied because the graveyard was restricted to Whites only.

[ 64 ] On 11 September 1964, John Lennon announced the Beatles would not play to a segregated audience in Jacksonville , Florida .

[ 65 ] City officials relented following this announcement.

[ 65 ] A contract for a 1965 Beatles concert at the Cow Palace in California specifies that the band "not be required to perform in front of a segregated audience".

[ 65 ] American sports were racially segregated until the mid-twentieth century. In baseball , the " Negro leagues " were established by Rube Foster for non-white players, such as Negro league baseball, which ran through the early 1950s.

[ 66 ] In basketball , the Black Fives (all-black teams) were established in 1904, and emerged in New York City , Washington, D.C.

, Chicago , Pittsburgh , Philadelphia , and other cities. Racial segregation in basketball lasted until 1950 when the NBA became racially integrated.

[ 67 ] White tenants seeking to prevent Blacks from moving into the housing project erected this sign.

Detroit , 1942.

Many U.S. states banned interracial marriage , with Maryland passing the first anti-miscegenation law in 1691.

[ 68 ] Though opposed to slavery in the U.S., Abraham Lincoln stated during the Lincoln-Douglas Debates in 1858: "I am not, nor ever have been in favor of bringing about in any way the social and political equality of the white and black races, that I am not, nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people. I as much as any man am in favor of the superior position assigned to the white race".

[ 69 ] Likewise, when former president Harry S. Truman was asked by a reporter in 1963 if interracial marriage would become widespread in the U.S., he responded, "I hope not; I don’t believe in it", before asking a question often aimed at anyone advocating racial integration: "Would you want your daughter to marry a Negro? She won't love someone who isn't her color." [ 70 ] In 1958, Mildred Loving, a black woman, and Richard Loving, a white man , were prosecuted in Virginia because their marriage violated the state's anti-miscegenation statute, the Racial Integrity Act of 1924 , which prohibited marriage between people classified as white and people classified as " colored " (persons of non-white ancestry).

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Although their one-year prison sentence was suspended, in 1963 they sought the assistance of the American Civil Liberties Union , which filed an appeal on their behalf that eventually found its way to the United States Supreme Court . In 1967 the court issued a historic ruling in Loving v. Virginia that invalidated all laws prohibiting interracial marriage in the U.S.

[ 73 ] Rosa Parks being fingerprinted after being arrested for not giving up her seat on the bus to a white person Institutionalized racial segregation was ended as an official practice during the civil rights movement by the efforts of such civil rights activists as Clarence M. Mitchell Jr.

, Rosa Parks , Martin Luther King Jr.

and James Farmer working for social and political freedom during the period from the end of World War II through the Interstate Commerce Commission desegregation order of 1961, the passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1964 and the Voting Rights Act in 1965 supported by President Lyndon B. Johnson . Many of their efforts were acts of non-violent civil disobedience aimed at disrupting the enforcement of racial segregation rules and laws, such as refusing to give up a seat in the black part of the bus to a white person (Rosa Parks), or holding sit-ins at all-white diners .

By 1968, all forms of segregation had been declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court under Chief Justice Earl Warren , and by 1970 support for formal legal segregation had dissolved.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The Warren Court 's decision on landmark case Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas in 1954 outlawed segregation in public schools, and its decision on Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States in 1964 prohibits racial segregation and discrimination in public institutions and public accommodations .

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] The Fair Housing Act of 1968, administered and enforced by the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity , prohibited discrimination in the sale and rental of housing on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, familial status, and disability. Formal racial discrimination became illegal in school systems, businesses, the American military, other civil services and the government. However, implicit racism continues to this day through avenues like occupational segregation .

[ 79 ] In recent years, there has been a trend that reverses those efforts to desegregate schools made by those mandatory school desegregation orders.

[ 80 ] Historic cases (1970s to present) [ edit ] Bahrain [ edit ] See also: Human rights in Bahrain On 28 April 2007, the lower house of Bahraini Parliament passed a law banning unmarried migrant workers from living in residential areas. To justify the law, Nasser Fadhala, MP , a close ally of the government, said "bachelors also use these houses to make alcohol, run prostitute rings or to rape children and housemaids".

[ 81 ] Sadiq Rahma, technical committee head, who is a member of Al Wefaq , said: "The rules we are drawing up are designed to protect the rights of both the families and the Asian bachelors (..) these labourers often have habits which are difficult for families living nearby to tolerate (..) they come out of their homes half dressed, brew alcohol illegally in their homes, use prostitutes and make the neighbourhood dirty (..) these are poor people who often live in groups of 50 or more, crammed into one house or apartment," said Mr Rahma. "The rules also state that there must be at least one bathroom for every five people (..) there have also been cases in which young children have been sexually molested." [ 82 ] Bahrain Centre for Human Rights issued a press release condemning this decision as discriminatory and promoting negative racist attitudes towards migrant workers.

[ 81 ] [ 83 ] Nabeel Rajab , then BCHR vice president, said: "It is appalling that Bahrain is willing to rest on the benefits of these people's hard work, and often their suffering, but that they refuse to live with them in equality and dignity. The solution is not to force migrant workers into ghettos, but to urge companies to improve living conditions for workers – and not to accommodate large numbers of workers in inadequate space, and to improve the standard of living for them." [ 81 ] [ 83 ] Canada [ edit ] Until 1965, racial segregation in schools, stores and most aspects of public life existed legally in Ontario , Quebec and Nova Scotia , and informally in other provinces such as British Columbia .

[ 84 ] Since the 1970s, there has been a concern expressed by some academics that major Canadian cities are becoming more segregated on income and ethnic lines. Reports have indicated that the inner suburbs of post-merger Toronto [ 85 ] and the southern bedroom communities of Greater Vancouver [ 85 ] have become steadily more immigrant and visible minority dominated communities and have lagged behind other neighbourhoods in average income. A CBC panel in Vancouver in 2012 discussed the growing public fear that the proliferation of ethnic enclaves in Greater Vancouver (such as Han Chinese in Richmond B.C.

and Punjabis in Surrey, B.C.

) amounted to a type of self-segregation . In response to these fears, many minority activists have pointed out that most Canadian neighbourhoods remain predominately White, and yet white people are never accused of "self-segregation".

The Mohawk tribe of Kahnawake has been criticized for evicting non-Mohawks from the Mohawk reserve.

[ 86 ] Mohawks who marry outside of their tribal nation lose their right to live in their homelands.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] The Mohawk government claims that its policy of nationally exclusive membership is for the preservation of its identity, [ 89 ] but there is no exemption for those who adopt Mohawk language or culture.

[ 87 ] All interracial couples were sent eviction notices regardless of how long they have lived on the reserve.

[ 88 ] The only exemption is for mixed national couples married before the 1981 moratorium. Although some concerned Mohawk citizens contested the nationally exclusive membership policy, the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal ruled that the Mohawk government may adopt policies it deems necessary to ensure the survival of its people.

[ 89 ] A long-standing practice of national segregation has also been imposed upon the commercial salmon fishery in British Columbia since 1992 when separate commercial fisheries were created for select aboriginal groups on three B.C. river systems. Canadians of other nations who fish in the separate fisheries have been arrested, jailed and prosecuted. Although the fishermen who were prosecuted were successful at trial in R v Kapp , [ 90 ] this decision was overturned on appeal.

[ 91 ] Fiji [ edit ] Two military coups in Fiji in 1987 removed a democratically elected government led by Indo-Fijians .

[ 92 ] This coup was supported principally by the ethnic Fijian population.

A new constitution was promulgated in 1990, establishing Fiji as a republic, with the offices of President , Prime Minister , two-thirds of the Senate , and a clear majority of the House of Representatives reserved for ethnic Fijians; ethnic Fijian ownership of the land was also entrenched in the constitution.

[ 93 ] Most of these provisions were ended with the promulgation of the 1997 Constitution , although the President (and 14 of the 32 Senators) were still selected by the all-indigenous Great Council of Chiefs . The last of these distinctions were removed by the 2013 Constitution .

[ 94 ] Fiji's case is a situation of de facto racial segregation, [ 95 ] as Fiji has a long complex history of more than 3500 years as a divided tribal nation, with unification under 96 years of British rule also bringing other racial groups, particularly immigrants from the Indian subcontinent.

Hungary [ edit ] The racial segregation of Roma children in the Hungarian education system has been an ongoing issue since the 1990s. Over the past 20 years, there has been an increase in cases where Roma pupils have been placed in separate schools or classes. In a landmark strategic litigation case involving twenty-eight schools, Hungarian courts found that educational authorities had failed to intervene against discriminatory practices, thereby violating national equal treatment laws.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Similar cases have been documented across Hungary, with multiple courts ruling that schools and authorities violated equal treatment laws by creating or maintaining segregation.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] Israel [ edit ] See also: Racism in Israel A barrier gate at Bil'in , West Bank , 2006 The Israeli Declaration of Independence proclaims equal rights to all citizens regardless of ethnicity, denomination or race. Israel has a substantial list of laws that demand racial equality (such as prohibition of discrimination , equality in Employment , libel based on race or ethnicity).

[ 112 ] There is however, in practice, significant institutional, legal, and societal discrimination against the country's Arab citizens .

[ 113 ] In 2010, the Israeli Supreme Court sent a message against racial segregation in a case involving the Slonim Hassidic sect of the Ashkenazi Jews , ruling that segregation between Ashkenazi and Sephardi students in a school is illegal.

[ 114 ] They argue that they seek "to maintain an equal level of religiosity, not from racism".

[ 115 ] Responding to the charges, the Slonim Haredim invited Sephardi girls to school, and added in a statement: "All along, we said it's not about race, but the High Court went out against our rabbis , and therefore we went to prison." [ 116 ] Due to many cultural differences, and animosity towards a minority perceived to wish to annihilate Israel, a system of passively co-existing communities, segregated along ethnic lines has emerged in Israel, with Arab-Israeli minority communities being left "marooned outside the mainstream". This de facto segregation also exists between different Jewish ethnic groups (" edot ") such as Sepharadim , Ashkenazim and Beta Israel (Jews of Ethiopian descent), [ 117 ] which leads to de facto segregated schools, housing and public policy. The government has embarked on a program to shut down such schools, in order to force integration, but some in the Ethiopian community complained that not all such schools have been closed.

[ 118 ] In a 2007 poll commissioned by the Center Against Racism and conducted by the GeoCartographia Institute, 75% of Israeli Jews would not agree to live in a building with Arab residents, 60% would not accept any Arab visitors at their homes, 40% believed that Arabs should be stripped of their right to vote, and 59% believe that the culture of Arabs is primitive.

[ 119 ] In 2012, a public opinion poll showed that 53% of the polled Israeli Jews said they would not object to an Arab living in their building, while 42% said they would. Asked whether they would object to Arab children being in their child's class in school, 49% said they would not, 42% said they would.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] The secular Israeli public was found to be the most tolerant, while the religious and Haredi respondents were the most discriminatory.

Some commentators have sought to find commonalities between apartheid in South Africa and the political situation in Israel. A system of apartheid, a system of institutionalized segregation and discrimination in the Israeli-occupied Palestinian territories and to a lesser extent in Israel proper. There is near-total physical separation between the Palestinian and the Israeli settler population of the West Bank , as well as the judicial separation that governs both communities, which discriminates against the Palestinians in a wide range of ways. Israel also discriminates against its own Palestinian citizens . Palestinians in the occupied territories live under military occupation and are progressively segregated, barred from freedom of movement , and discriminated against. After institutionalized segregation, Palestinians face eventual forced displacement of their homes by Israeli settlers at which point they barred from returning home, and the Palestinian areas becomes annexed into the Israeli state.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Other commentators have sought to refute these allegations of apartheid. Palestinian citizens of Israel participate in elections (see List of Arab members of the Knesset ) and members of the judiciary include Palestinians. The Supreme Court contains at least one Palestinian person . Jewish and Palestinian Israelis both attend colleges and universities in Israel. Hospital facilities in Israel treat all Israelis, regardless of religion or creed. Lastly, Jewish Israelis are in the majority in Israel proper, comprising some 73% of the population . These characteristics are not associated with a system of Apartheid .

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] Kenya [ edit ] The end of British colonial rule in Kenya in 1964 led to an inadvertent increase in ethnic segregation. Through private purchases and government schemes, farmland previously held by European farmers was transferred to African owners. These farms were further sub-divided into smaller localities, and, due to joint migration, many adjacent localities were occupied by members of different ethnic groups.

[ 128 ] [ pages needed ] This separation along these boundaries persists today. Kimuli Kasara, in a study of recent ethnic violence in the wake of the disputed 2007-08 Kenyan elections , used these post-colonial boundaries as an instrument for the degree of ethnic segregation.

[ 129 ] Through a 2 Stage Least Squares Regression analysis , Kasara showed that increased ethnic segregation in Kenya's Rift Valley Province is associated with an increase in ethnic violence.

[ 129 ] Liberia [ edit ] The Constitution of Liberia limits Liberian nationality to Negro people [ 130 ] (see also Liberian nationality law ).

While Lebanese and Indian nationals are active in trading, as well as in the retail and service sectors, and Europeans and Americans work in the mining and agricultural sectors, these minority groups with long-tenured residence in the Republic are precluded from becoming citizens as a result of their race.

[ 131 ] Malaysia [ edit ] Main articles: Bumiputra and Ketuanan Melayu Thousands of Malaysian Malay bumiputeras protesting against the ratification of ICERD.

Malaysia has an article in its constitution which distinguishes the ethnic Malays and the non-ethnic Malays people—i.e.

bumiputra —from the non-Bumiputra such as ethnic Chinese and Indians , among others, under the social contract , of which by law would guarantee the former certain special rights and privileges. To question these rights and privileges is strictly prohibited under the Internal Security Act (ISA), legalised by the 10th Article (IV) of the Constitution of Malaysia.

[ citation needed ] In essence, non-Malays are treated as second-class citizens in Malaysia, facing many roadblocks and discrimination in matters such as economic freedom , education , healthcare and housing .

[ 132 ] Malaysia is also not a signatory of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD), one of the only few countries in the world not to do so. A possible ratification in 2018 led to an anti-ICERD mass rally by Malay supremacists at the country's capital to prevent it, threatening a racial conflict if it does happen.

[ 133 ] The privileges mentioned herein covers—few of which—the economical and education aspects of Malaysians, e.g. the Malaysian New Economic Policy ; an economic policy criticised by Thierry Rommel, who headed a European Commission's delegation to Malaysia, as an excuse for "significant protectionism" [ 134 ] [ 135 ] and a quota maintaining higher access of Malays into public universities.

Such racial segregation policies have caused significant rates of human capital flight (brain drain) from Malaysia. A study by Stanford University highlighted that among the main factors behind the Malaysian brain drain include social injustice. It stated that the high rates of emigration of non-bumiputera Malaysians from the country is driven by discriminatory policies that appear to favour Malays/Bumiputeras—such as providing exclusive additional assistance in starting businesses and educational opportunities.

[ 136 ] Mauritania [ edit ] Slavery in Mauritania was finally criminalized in August 2007.

[ 137 ] It was already abolished in 1980, although it was still affecting the black Africans. The number of slaves in the country was not known exactly, but it was estimated to be up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the population.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] For centuries, the so-called Haratin lower class, mostly poor black Africans living in rural areas, have been considered natural slaves by white Moors of Arab/Berber ancestry. Many descendants of the Arab and Berber tribes today still adhere to the supremacist ideology of their ancestors. This ideology has led to oppression, discrimination and even enslavement of other groups.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Racial segregation in the United Kingdom Although racial segregation was never made legal in the UK, pubs, workplaces, shops and other commercial premises operated a "colour bar" where non-white customers were banned from using certain rooms and facilities.

[ 142 ] Segregation also operated in the 20th century in certain professions, [ 143 ] in housing and even at Buckingham Palace.

[ 144 ] The colour bar in pubs was deemed illegal by the Race Relations Act 1965 but other institutions such as members' clubs could still bar people because of their race until a few years later.

The United Kingdom nowadays has no legally sanctioned system of racial segregation and has a substantial list of laws that demand racial equality.

[ 145 ] However, due to many cultural differences between the pre-existing system of passively co-existing communities, segregation along racial lines has emerged in parts of the United Kingdom, with minority communities being left "marooned outside the mainstream".

[ 146 ] The affected and 'ghettoised' communities are often largely representative of Pakistanis , Indians and other Sub-Continentals, and has been thought to be the basis of ethnic tensions, and a deterioration of the standard of living and levels of education and employment among ethnic minorities in poorer areas. These factors are considered by some to have been a cause of the 2001 English race riots in Bradford , Oldham and Harehills in northern England which have large Asian communities.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] There may be some indication that such segregation, particularly in residential terms, seems to be the result of the unilateral 'steering' of ethnic groups into particular areas as well as a culture of vendor discrimination and distrust of ethnic minority clients by some estate agents and other property professionals.

[ 149 ] This may be indicative of a market preference amongst the more wealthy to reside in areas of less ethnic mixture; less ethnic mixture being perceived as increasing the value and desirability of a residential area. This is likely as other theories such as "ethnic self segregation " have sometimes been shown to be baseless, and a majority of ethnic respondents to a few surveys on the matter have been in favour of wider social and residential integration.

[ 148 ] United States [ edit ] See also: Racial segregation in the United States § Contemporary De facto segregation in the United States has increased since the civil rights movement , while official segregation has been outlawed.

[ 150 ] The Supreme Court ruled in Milliken v. Bradley (1974) that de facto racial segregation was acceptable, as long as schools were not actively making policies for racial exclusion; since then, schools have been segregated due to myriad indirect factors.

[ 150 ] Redlining is part of how white communities in America maintained some level of racial segregation. It is the practice of denying or increasing the cost of services, such as mortgages, banking, insurance, access to jobs, [ 151 ] access to health care, or even supermarkets [ 152 ] to residents in certain, often racially determined, [ 153 ] areas. The most effective form of redlining, and the practice most commonly meant by the term, refers to mortgage discrimination . Over the next twenty years, a succession of further court decisions and federal laws, including the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act and measure to end mortgage discrimination in 1975, would completely invalidate de jure racial segregation and discrimination in the U.S. According to Rajiv Sethi, an economist at Columbia University , black-white segregation in housing is slowly declining for most metropolitan areas in the US.

[ 154 ] Racial segregation or separation can lead to social, economic and political tensions.

[ 155 ] Thirty years (the year 2000) after the civil rights era, the United States remained in many areas a residentially segregated society, in which Blacks, whites and Hispanics inhabit different neighborhoods of vastly different quality.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 154 ] Dan Immergluck writes that in 2002 small businesses in black neighborhoods still received fewer loans, even after accounting for businesses density, businesses size, industrial mix, neighborhood income, and the credit quality of local businesses.

[ 158 ] Gregory D. Squires wrote in 2003 that it is clear that race has long affected and continues to affect the policies and practices of the insurance industry.

[ 159 ] Workers living in American inner cities have a harder time finding jobs than suburban workers.

[ 160 ] Some academics have labeled the desire of many whites to avoid having their children attend academically inferior integrated schools as being a factor in " white flight " from the cities.

[ 161 ] A 2007 study in San Francisco showed that groups of homeowners of all races tended to self-segregate in order to be with people of the same economic status, education level and race.

[ 162 ] By 1990, the legal barriers enforcing segregation had been mostly replaced, although today many white Americans are willing to pay a premium to live in a predominantly white neighborhood.

[ 163 ] Equivalent housing in white areas commands a higher rent.

[ 164 ] These higher rents are largely attributable to exclusionary zoning policies that restrict the supply of housing. Through the 1990s, residential segregation remained at its extreme and has been called " hypersegregation " by some sociologists or "American Apartheid".

[ 165 ] In February 2005, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Johnson v. California 543 U.S.

499 (2005) that the California Department of Corrections ' unwritten practice of racially segregating prisoners in its prison reception centers—which California claimed was for inmate safety (gangs in California, as throughout the U.S., usually organize on racial lines)—is to be subject to strict scrutiny , the highest level of constitutional review .

[ 166 ] The Blaxit movement promotes the expatriation of African-American people to Africa or Europe for cultural, racial, and economic reasons, in an attempt to deal with historic segregation.

[ 167 ] Yemen [ edit ] See also: Castes in Yemen In Yemen , the Arab elite practices a form of discrimination against the lower class Al-Akhdam people based on their racial characteristics.

[ 168 ] See also [ edit ] Amity–enmity complex Anti-African sentiment Black Lives Matter Black nationalism Black power Black power movement Black separatism Black supremacy Caste Crime of apartheid Discrimination Discrimination based on skin tone Ethnic nationalism Ethnocentrism In-group and out-group Nationalism Nativism (politics) Racial discrimination Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racism Supremacism White nationalism White supremacy § White separatism Xenophobia Notes [ edit ] ^ Schill, Michael; Wachter, Susan (2001). "Principles to Guide Housing Policy at the Beginning of the Millennium".

Cityscape : 5– 19.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.536.5952 .

^ "European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) - Homepage - European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) - www.coe.int" .

European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2024 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Recommendations of the Forum on Minority Issues A/HRC/10/11/Add.1 — para. 27" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 September 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2012 .

^ "Racial segregation" .

Britannica Online Encyclopedia . 28 August 2023.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2009 .

^ a b Edward H. Schafer (1963).

The golden peaches of Samarkand: a study of Tʻang exotics . University of California Press. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-520-05462-2 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Mark Edward Lewis (2009).

China's cosmopolitan empire: the Tang dynasty . Harvard University Press. p. 170.

ISBN 978-0-674-03306-1 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 28 October 2010 .

^ Jacques Gernet (1996).

A history of Chinese civilization . Cambridge University Press. p.

294 .

ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7 . Retrieved 28 October 2010 .

836 decree chinese people of colour.

^ a b Walthall, Anne (2008).

ed. Walthall . University of California Press. p. 148.

ISBN 9780520254442 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

^ Wakeman, Frederic (1977).

Wakeman . Simon and Schuster. p. 79.

ISBN 9780029336809 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

^ Kagan, Kimberly (2010).

Crossley . Harvard University Press. p. 95.

ISBN 9780674054097 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

^ Watson, Rubie S.; Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1991).

eds. Watson, Ebrey . University of California Press. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 9780520071247 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

^ Wakeman, Frederic Jr. (1 January 1985).

The Great Enterprise: The Manchu Reconstruction of Imperial Order in Seventeenth-century China . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520048041 .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2023 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Naquin, Susan; Rawski, Evelyn Sakakida (1987).

Naquin . Yale University Press. p. 141.

ISBN 0300046022 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 17 January 2015 .

^ Fairbank, John King; Goldman, Merle (2006).

Fairbank, Goldman . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674036659 .

^ "Summing up Naquin/Rawski" .

pages.uoregon.edu .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ Watson, Rubie S.; Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1991).

eds. Watson, Ebrey . University of California Press. p. 175.

ISBN 9780520071247 .

^ Spence, Jonathan D. (1990).

Spencer . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 41.

ISBN 9780393307801 .

^ Spence, Jonathan D. (1988).

Spence . Yale University Press. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 0300042779 .

^ "Wang 2004, pp. 215–216 & 219–221" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 January 2014.

^ Walthall, Anne (1 January 2008).

Servants of the Dynasty: Palace Women in World History . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520254442 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 – via Google Books.

^ "From Ming to Qing" . Darkwing.uoregon.edu.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Pétillon, L. A. M. (1967).

Témoignage et réflexions . Brussels: Renaissance du Livre.

^ Paravicini, Giulia (4 April 2019).

"Belgium apologizes for colonial-era abduction of mixed-race children" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2019 . Retrieved 10 July 2019 .

^ Bell, David Scott (2000).

Presidential Power in Fifth Republic France . Berg Publishers. p. 36.

Algeria was in fact a colony but constitutionally was a part of France and not thought of in the 1950s (even by many on the left) as a colony. It was a society of nine million or so 'Muslim' Algerians who were dominated by the million settlers of diverse origins (but fiercely French) who maintained a quasi-apartheid regime ^ Debra Kelly (2005).

Autobiography And Independence: Selfhood and Creativity in North African Postcolonial Writing in French . Liverpool University Press. p. 43.

...[the] senatus-consulte of 1865 stipulated that all the colonised indigenous were under French jurisdiction, i.e., French nationals subjected to French laws, but it restricted citizenship only to those who renounced their Muslim religion and culture. There was an obvious split in French legal discourse: a split between nationality and citizenship which established the formal structures of political apartheid encouraging the existence of 'French subjects' disenfranchised, without any citizenship rights, treated as objects of French law and not citizens ^ Bonora-Waisman, Camille (2003).

France and the Algerian Conflict: Issues in Democracy and Political Stability, 1988–1995 . Ashgate Publishing. p. 3.

In contrast with the Moroccan and Tunisian protectorates, Algeria was made an integral part of France and became a colony of settlement for more than one million Europeans... under colonial rule, Algerians encountered France's 'civilising mission' only through the plundering of lands and colonial apartheid society...

^ Wall, Irwin M. (2001).

France, the United States, and the Algerian War . University of California Press. p. 262.

As a settler colony with an internal system of apartheid, administered under the fiction that it was part of metropolitan France, and endowed with a powerful colonial lobby that virtually determined the course of French politics with respect to its internal affairs, it experienced insurrection in 1954 on the part of its Muslim population ^ JENNINGS, A. C. (July 1935).

LAND APPORTIONMENT IN SOUTHERN RHODESIA, African Affairs . Vol. XXXIV. pp.

296– 312.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a100934 .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ Jamal 1976 .

^ "Idi Amin's expulsion of Asians in 1972 pummelled Uganda's economy" . 14 August 2022.

Archived from the original on 13 July 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ "Taking stock of Uganda's economy 55 years after independence" . 8 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ Jørgensen 1981 , pp. 285–290.

^ Wirth, Louis (1997).

The Ghetto . Transaction Publishers. pp.

29– 40.

ISBN 1-56000-983-7 .

.

^ "A Short History of the Jewish Tradition" . .kenyon.edu. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "Ghetto" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 14 March 2024.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica.

"Anti-Semitism in modern Europe" .

Britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2008 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "The Jews of Morocco, by Ralph G. Bennettett" . Sefarad.org. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Lewis (1984), pp. 181–183 ^ a b c Bomann-larsen, Tor (29 December 2011).

"Folk, fører og frifinnelse" .

Aftenposten .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ a b c d Whitman, James Q. (2017).

Hitler's American Model: The United States and the Making of Nazi Race Law . Princeton University Press. pp.

37– 43.

^ S. H. Milton (2001). " "Gypsies" as social outsiders in Nazi Germany". In Robert Gellately and Nathan Stoltzfus (ed.).

Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany . Princeton University Press. pp. 216, 231.

ISBN 9780691086842 .

^ Michael Burleigh (7 November 1991).

The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945 . Cambridge University Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 978-0-521-39802-2 .

^ "1".

The Laws for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour . 15 September 1935.

Marriages between Jews and citizens of German or kindred blood are forbidden. Marriages concluded in defiance of this law are void, even if, for the purpose of evading this law, they were concluded abroad.

^ Leila J. Rupp (1978).

Mobilizing Women for War . Princeton University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 0-691-04649-2 .

^ Diemut Majer (2003).

"Non-Germans" Under the Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939–1945 . JHU Press. p. 180.

ISBN 978-0-8018-6493-3 .

^ "Holocaust Timeline: The Ghettos" . Fcit.usf.edu. 23 November 1939.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Michael Marek.

"Final Compensation Pending for Former Nazi Forced Laborers" . Dw-world.de. Archived from the original on 10 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "Forced Labor at Ford Werke AG during the Second World War" . Summeroftruth.org. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "Hitler's Plans" . Dac.neu.edu. Archived from the original on 1 April 2010 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ "Poles: Victims of the Nazi Era" . Holocaust-trc.org.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2012 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ a b c Henry, Natasha.

"Racial segregation of Black people in Canada" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 December 2022 .

^ Zimmermann, Reinhard (1996).

Southern Cross: Civil Law and Common Law in South Africa . Clarendon Press. p. 90.

^ E.g., Virginia Racial Integrity Act , Virginia Code § 20–58 and § 20–59 ^ "The Court's Decision – Separate Is Not Equal" .

americanhistory.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 October 2019 .

^ "The Warren Court: Completion of a Constitutional Revolution" (PDF) .

William & Mary Law School Scholarship Repository . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 October 2019.

^ "Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 October 2019 .

^ "Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 October 2019 .

^ Eric Foner; Randall Kennedy (3 May 2004).

"Brown at 50" . The Nation.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ August Meier; Elliott Rudwick (1967).

"The Rise of Segregation in the Federal Bureaucracy, 1900–1930" .

Phylon .

28 (2). Clark Atlanta University: 178– 184.

doi : 10.2307/273560 .

JSTOR 273560 .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 December 2019 .

^ Mjagkij, Nina (2011).

Loyalty in time of trial: the African American experience during World War I . African American history series. ProQuest (Firm). Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. p. 106.

^ a b Foner, Eric (1 February 2012).

Give Me Liberty!: An American History (3 ed.).

W. W. Norton & Company . p. 696.

ISBN 978-0393935530 .

^ Ella Fitzgerald . Holloway House Publishing. 1989. p. 27.

^ Schwartz, Larry (2007).

"Owens pierced a myth" .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2000 . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ a b Abramovitch, Seth (19 February 2015).

"Oscar's First Black Winner Accepted Her Honor in a Segregated 'No Blacks' Hotel in L.A." The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 .

^ a b c "The Beatles banned segregated audiences, contract shows" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2017 . Retrieved 17 July 2017 .

^ Lanctot, Neil (2008).

Negro League Baseball: The Rise and Ruin of a Black Institution . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 4.

^ "How 'Black Fives' led to racial integration in basketball" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 August 2015 .

^ "Interracial Marriage and the Law" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2023 . Retrieved 12 September 2023 .

^ Abraham Lincoln (1989).

Speeches and Writings 1832–1858: Speeches, Letters, and Miscellaneous Writings : the Lincoln-Douglas Debates . Vol. 1. Library of America. p. 638.

^ Wallenstein, Peter (2004).

Tell the Court I Love My Wife: Race, Marriage, and Law--An American History . St. Martin's Publishing Group. p. 185.

^ Walker, Dionne (10 June 2007).

"Pioneer of interracial marriage looks back" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2015 .

^ Racial Integrity Act of 1924 – via Wikisource.

^ Lawing, Charles B.

" Loving v. Virginia and the Hegemony of "Race" " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2007 . Retrieved 23 August 2015 .

^ "The Court's Decision – Separate Is Not Equal" .

americanhistory.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ "Earl Warren, 83, Who Led High Court In Time of Vast Social Change, Is Dead" .

archive.nytimes.com .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 September 2019 .

^ "Brown v. Board of Education" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ Carter, Robert L. (1968).

"The Warren Court and Desegregation" .

Michigan Law Review .

67 (2): 237– 248.

doi : 10.2307/1287417 .

JSTOR 1287417 .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ "Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States" .

Oyez .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

^ ALONSO-VILLAR, OLGA; DEL RIO, CORAL; GRADIN, CARLOS (April 2012).

"The Extent of Occupational Segregation in the United States: Differences by Race, Ethnicity, and Gender" .

Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society .

51 (2): 179– 212.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-232x.2012.00674.x .

S2CID 154675302 .

^ Fiel, Jeremy; Zhang, Yongjun (2019).

"With all deliberate speed: The reversal of court-ordered school desegregation, 1970–2013" .

American Journal of Sociology .

124 (6): 1685– 1719.

doi : 10.1086/703044 .

hdl : 10150/633639 .

S2CID 195572605 .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 .

^ a b c "Parliament's law to ban migrant workers who are unmarried from living in residential areas is discriminatory attitudes" . Bahrain Centre for Human Rights. 28 April 2007. Archived from the original on 31 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 July 2011 .

^ Tariq Kkonji (23 January 2006).

" 'No go' rule for bachelor labourers" .

Gulf Daily News . Archived from the original on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 January 2012 .

^ a b "Bahraini parliament moves to segregate migrants from citizens" . Migrant rights. 28 April 2007.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2011 . Retrieved 11 July 2011 .

^ Henry, Natasha (8 September 2021).

"Racial Segregation of Black People in Canada" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 4 August 2020 .

^ a b Mendelson, Rachel (12 March 2012).

"Vancouver Income Inequality Study Shows City Segregating Along Racial, Income Lines" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 22 February 2015 .

^ "Natives only, please: A look into the eviction of non-natives from the Kahnawake reserve" .

National Post . Canada. 30 March 2010 . Retrieved 15 February 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b "Mohawk role model faces eviction over non-native fiancé" .

National Post . Canada. 30 March 2010 . Retrieved 15 February 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b Brennan, Richard (21 February 2010).

"Evicting 26 non-natives splits reserve" .

The Star . Toronto.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 September 2017 .

^ a b "Not native? Then leave reserve, Mohawks say" .

National Post . Canada. 30 March 2010 . Retrieved 15 February 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "R. v. Kapp et al – Reasons for Judgment" . Provincial Court of British Columbia. 28 July 2003. Archived from the original on 1 October 2008 . Retrieved 15 February 2011 .

^ "2004 BCSC 958 R. v. Kapp et al" . The Courts of British Columbia. 12 July 2004.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 15 February 2011 .

^ "Country profile: Fiji" .

BBC News . 22 December 2009.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Tom Cockrem.

"Fiji: History" . Lonelyplanet.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2008 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "President signs long-awaited Fiji constitution into law" .

Australia Network News . 25 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2015 .

^ "UN seminar highlights concern in Fiji over racial segregation" . Rnzi.com. 9 April 2006.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Budapest-Capital Regional Court (Hungary), judgment No. P.23.675/2015/84 of 18.04.2018, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=P.23675/2015/84 ;  

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m18042018 ^ Budapest Court of Appeal (Hungary), judgment No. 2.Pf.21.145/2018/6/I of 14.02.2019, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pf.21145/2018/6 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m14022019 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.21.568/2010/5 of 24.11.2010, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.21568/2010/5 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m24112010 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.20.085/2017/9 of 04.10.2017, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.20085/2017/9 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m24112010 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.20.097/2015/3 of 25.03.2015, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.20097/2015/3 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m24112010 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.21.556/2019/22 of 12.05.2020, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.21556/2019/22 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m12052020 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.20.068/2012/3 of 16.05.2012, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.20068/2012/3 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m16052012 ^ Curia (Hungary), judgment No. Pfv.IV.20.936/2008/4 of 19.11.2008, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pfv.20936/2008/4 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m19112008 ^ Debrecen Court of Appeal (Hungary), judgment No. Pf.I.20.123/2019/16 of 18.09.2019, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pf.20123/2019/16 MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m18092019 ^ Debrecen Court of Appeal (Hungary), judgment No. Pf.I.20.361/2007/8 of 13.12.2007, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pf.20361/2007/8 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m13122007 ^ Eger Regional Court (Hungary), judgment No. 2.P.20.351/2011/47 of 06.12.2012, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=P.20351/2011/47 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m06122012 ^ Eger Regional Court (Hungary), judgment No. 12.P.20.489/2015/402 of 16.10.2018, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=P.20489/2015/402 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m16102018 ^ Győr-Moson-Sopron County Court (Hungary), judgment No. 3.P.20.950/2008/36 of 30.09.2010, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=P.20950/2008/36 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m30092010 ^ Kaposvár Regional Court (Hungary), judgment No. 11.P.21.553/2013/70 of 11.11.2015, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=P.21553/2013/70 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m11112015 ^ Nyíregyháza Regional Court (Hungary), judgment No. 10.G.40.099/22 of 28.02.2014, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=G.40099/2013/22 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m28022014 ^ Pécs Court of Appeal (Hungary), judgment No.Pf.I.20.061/2010/7 of 20.05.2010, https://eakta.birosag.hu/anonimizalt-hatarozatok?azonosito=Pf.20061/2010/7 ; 

MINOTEE minority case law database v1, 2025, CEU, https://ir.ceu.edu/cases-table#m20052010 ^ "חוק איסור לשון הרע, תשכ"ה-1965" . הכנס השנתי של העמותה למשפט ציבורי בישראל. 14 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 January 2023 .

^ Department Of State. The Office of Electronic Information, Bureau of Public Affairs.

"Israel and the occupied territories" .

2001-2009.state.gov .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ "The Jewish Religious Conflict Tearing at Israel" .

Time . 17 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 June 2010.

^ "Discrimination claimed in Modiin Illit haredi schools" .

Israel News . Ynetnews.com. 20 June 1995.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ Mandel, Jonah (23 July 2010).

"Hassidim invite Sephardi girls to school" .

Jpost.com .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ Schwartz, Tanya (2001).

Ethiopian Jewish Immigrants in Israel: The Homeland Postponed . Psychology Press. p. 9.

ISBN 9780700712380 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2024 . Retrieved 23 November 2015 .

^ Nesher, Talila (1 September 2011).

"Ethiopian Israelis Accuse State of School Segregation" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ נחמיאס, רועי (27 March 2007).

"יותר ממחצית היהודים: נישואים לערבי הם בגידה – חדשות היום" .

Ynet . ynet.co.il.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2012 . Retrieved 12 March 2012 .

^ "Israelis Should Avoid Using Term 'Apartheid' " .

The Forward . 5 November 2012.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ Fisher, Gabe.

"Controversial survey ostensibly highlights widespread anti-Arab attitudes in Israel" .

Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2012 . Retrieved 12 December 2012 .

^ "A regime of Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is apartheid" . B'Tselem. 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

A regime that uses laws, practices and organized violence to cement the supremacy of one group over another is an apartheid regime. Israeli apartheid, which promotes the supremacy of Jews over Palestinians, was not born in one day or of a single speech. It is a process that has gradually grown more institutionalized and explicit, with mechanisms introduced over time in law and practice to promote Jewish supremacy. It is alleged that these accumulated measures, their pervasiveness in legislation and political practice, and the public and judicial support they receive – all form the basis for our conclusion that the bar for labelling the Israeli regime as apartheid has been met.

^ Sfard, Michael (9 July 2020), "The Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid: Legal Opinion" (PDF) , Yesh Din , archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2024 ^ Sfard, Michael (3 June 2021).

"Why Israeli progressives have started to talk about 'apartheid' " .

The Guardian (Opinion).

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Times of Israel, Itai Hachem.

"Refuting the lie of the Israeli "apartheid" " . Retrieved 8 February 2025 .

^ Haaretz, Alon Pinchas.

"The 'A' Word: Why Israel Is Not an Apartheid State, Despite HRW's Claims" . Retrieved 9 February 2025 .

^ Financial Times, Mehul Strivastava.

"Israel reacts to 'apartheid' label from Amnesty International" . Retrieved 9 February 2025 .

^ Oucho, John (2002).

Undercurrents of Ethnic Conflicts in Kenya . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-12459-2 .

^ a b Kasara, Kimuli (2017).

"Does Local Ethnic Segregation Lead to Violence?: Evidence from Kenya" (PDF) .

Quarterly Journal of Political Science .

11 (4): 441– 470.

doi : 10.1561/100.00014115 .

ISSN 1554-0626 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2017 . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ Tannenbaum, Jessie; Valcke, Anthony; McPherson, Andrew (1 May 2009). "Analysis of the Aliens and Nationality Law of the Republic of Liberia".

SSRN 1795122 .

^ Analysis of the Aliens and Nationality Law of the Republic of Liberia (PDF) . ABA Rule of Law Initiative. May 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 August 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 .

^ Chew, Amy (25 September 2019).

"Malaysia's dangerous racial and religious trajectory" .

Interpreter . Lowy Institute.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2021 .

^ "PAS and Umno to hold anti-Icerd rally in KL on Dec 8" .

Malaysiakini . 17 November 2018. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ "Malaysia fury at EU envoy remarks" . Asia-Pacific.

BBC News . 25 June 2007.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022.

^ John Lee Ming Keong (25 June 2007).

"Apartheid and Protectionism, Internal Issues?" . Infernal ramblings. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007 . Retrieved 22 January 2008 .

^ "Putting the Malaysian diaspora into perspective" .

cs.stanford.edu . Stanford University. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 15 April 2022 .

^ "BBC NEWS – Africa – Mauritanian MPs pass slavery law" . 9 August 2007.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2018 . Retrieved 26 December 2007 .

^ Corrigan, T. (6 September 2007).

"Mauritania made slavery illegal last month" .

The East African . Retrieved 6 June 2013 .

^ "BBC World Service | The Abolition season on BBC World Service" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2011 . Retrieved 26 December 2007 .

^ "Fair elections haunted by racial imbalance" . Irinnews.org. 5 March 2007.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ "Mauritania: The real beginning of the end of slavery?" . Irinnews.org. 7 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2009 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Waters, Rob (3 April 2017).

"The rise and fall of the drinking club" .

Black London Histories . Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ "What was behind the Bristol bus boycott?" .

BBC News . 26 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ "Buckingham Palace banned ethnic minorities from office roles, papers reveal" .

The Guardian . 2 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ "Race Relations Act 1976 (Repealed)" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ "Britons warned over 'segregation' " .

BBC News . 22 September 2005.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2006 . Retrieved 6 December 2011 .

^ "Race 'segregation' caused riots" .

BBC News . 11 December 2001.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2009 . Retrieved 6 December 2011 .

^ a b "Statistics of Racial Segregation: Measures, Evidence and Policy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2012 . Retrieved 6 December 2011 .

^ PHILLIPS, D. (2002).

Movement to opportunity? South Asian relocation in northern cities . School of Geography, University of Leeds. p. 7. End of Award report, ESRC R000238038.

^ a b Kozol, Jonathan (2005).

The Shame of the Nation . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5245-5 .

^ "Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2006 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Elizabeth Eisenhauer (February 2001).

"In poor health: Supermarket redlining and urban nutrition" .

GeoJournal .

53 (2): 125– 133.

Bibcode : 2001GeoJo..53..125E .

doi : 10.1023/A:1015772503007 .

S2CID 151164815 .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 12 February 2020 .

^ Walter Thabit (2003).

How East New York Became a Ghetto . NYU Press. p. 42.

ISBN 0-8147-8267-1 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 15 August 2015 .

^ a b Sethi, R.; Somanathan, R.

(2004).

"Inequality and Segregation" (PDF) .

Journal of Political Economy .

112 (6): 1296– 1321.

doi : 10.1086/424742 .

^ Keating, William Dennis (1994).

The Suburban Racial Dilemma: Housing and Neighborhoods . Temple University Press.

ISBN 1-56639-147-4 .

^ "Myth of the Melting Pot: America's Racial and Ethnic Divides" . Washington post.com. 22 February 1998.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ Massey, Douglas S. (2004). "Segregation and stratification: A bio-social perspective".

Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race .

1 (1). Cambridge University Press: 7– 25.

doi : 10.1017/S1742058X04040032 .

^ Immergluck, D. (2002). "Redlining Redux".

Urban Affairs Review .

38 (1): 22– 41.

doi : 10.1177/107808702401097781 .

S2CID 153818729 .

^ Squires, Gregory D. (2003). "Racial Profiling, Insurance Style: Insurance Redlining and the Uneven Development of Metropolitan Areas".

Journal of Urban Affairs .

25 (4): 391– 410.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9906.t01-1-00168 .

S2CID 10070258 .

^ Zenou, Yves; Nicolas (1999).

Racial Discrimination and Redlining in Cities .

^ VI De Facto Segregation . Archived from the original on 30 April 2007 . Retrieved 9 January 2008 .

^ Bayer, Patrick; Fernando Ferreira; Robert McMillan (August 2007).

"A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods" (PDF) .

Journal of Political Economy .

115 (4): 588– 638.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.499.9191 .

doi : 10.1086/522381 .

SSRN 466280 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2017 . Retrieved 25 October 2017 .

^ Cutler, David M.; Edward L. Glaeser; Jacob L. Vigdor (June 1999).

"The Rise and Decline of the American Ghetto" (PDF) .

Journal of Political Economy .

107 (3): 455– 506.

doi : 10.1086/250069 .

S2CID 134413201 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 April 2018 . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

^ Kiel K.A., Zabel J.E. (1996). "Housing Price Differentials in U.S. Cities: Household and Neighborhood Racial Effects".

Journal of Housing Economics .

5 (2): 143.

doi : 10.1006/jhec.1996.0008 .

^ Massey D.S., Denton N. A. (1993).

American Apartheid . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

^ "Johnson v. California, 543 U.S. 499 (2005)" .

Justia Law .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2018 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ Hjeld, Kim (26 June 2020).

" 'I'm leaving, and I'm just not coming back': Fed up with racism, Black people head overseas" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 6 February 2024 .

^ "Yemen: Akhdam people suffer history of discrimination" .

IRIN . 1 November 2005.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2008 . Retrieved 9 January 2008 .

References [ edit ] Dobratz, Betty A. and Shanks-Meile, Stephanie L, White Power, White Pride: The White Separatist Movement in the United States , Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001, 384 pages, ISBN 0-8018-6537-9 .

Jamal, Vali (June 1976), "Expulsion of a minority: essays on Ugandan Asians (Review)", The Journal of Modern African Studies , 14 (2), Cambridge University Press: 357– 361, doi : 10.1017/s0022278x00053404 , JSTOR 160072 , S2CID 155061156 Jørgensen, Jan Jelmert (1981), Uganda: a modern history , Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-85664-643-0 , retrieved 12 August 2010 Rural Face of White Supremacy: Beyond Jim Crow , by Mark Schultz. University of Illinois Press, 2005, ISBN 0-252-02960-7 .

Yin, L. 2009. "The Dynamics of Residential Segregation in Buffalo: An Agent-Based Simulation" Urban Studies 46(13), pp2749–2770.

Further reading [ edit ] Brook, Thomas (1997).

Plessy v. Ferguson: A Brief History with Documents . Boston: Bedford Books.

Chin, Gabriel J. (1996).

"The Plessy Myth: Justice Harlan and the Chinese Cases" .

Iowa Law Review .

82 : 151.

doi : 10.17077/0021-065X.4551 .

SSRN 1121505 .

Elliott, Mark (2006).

Color-Blind Justice: Albion Tourgée and the Quest for Racial Equality from the Civil War to Plessy v. Ferguson . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-518139-5 .

Fireside, Harvey (2004).

Separate and Unequal: Homer Plessy and the Supreme Court Decision That Legalized Racism . New York: Carroll & Graf.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1293-9 .

Grigoryeva, Angelina; Ruef, Martin (August 2015). "The Historical Demography of Racial Segregation".

American Sociological Review .

80 (4): 814– 842.

doi : 10.1177/0003122415589170 .

S2CID 55724945 .

Hutt, William Harold (2007).

The economics of the colour bar . Auburn, Alabama: The Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Lofgren, Charles A. (1987).

The Plessy Case: A Legal-Historical Interpretation . New York: Oxford University Press.

Medley, Keith Weldon (2003).

We As Freemen: Plessy v. Ferguson . Gretna, LA: Pelican.

ISBN 978-1-58980-120-2 .

Nightengale, Carl H. (2012).

Segregation: A Global History of Divided Cities . Chicago, London: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-58074-6 .

Raffel, Jeffrey.

Historical dictionary of school segregation and desegregation: The American experience (Bloomsbury, 1998) online Tushnet, Mark (2008).

I dissent: Great Opposing Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases . Boston: Beacon Press. pp.

69– 80.

ISBN 978-0-8070-0036-6 .

Anderson, Carol (2016). White Rage: The Unspoken Truth of Our Racial Divide. Bloomsbury USA ISBN 978-1-63286-413-0 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Racial segregation .

Review of 'We As Freeman: Plessy v. Ferguson' Encyclopædia Britannica: Article on Racial Segregation A study of segregation South Africa's District Six Museum which examines forced segregation v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racial_segregation&oldid=1306351968 " Categories : Racial segregation Human rights abuses Jewish ghettos Political theories Politics and race Social inequality Urban decay Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2015 Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 08:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Racial segregation 53 languages Add topic

