Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Revisions 3 Criticisms 4 Falsifiability 5 Legacy 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Verificationism 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical doctrine Verificationism , also known as the verification principle or the verifiability criterion of meaning , is a doctrine in philosophy which asserts that a statement is meaningful only if it is either empirically verifiable (can be confirmed through the senses ) or a tautology (true by virtue of its own meaning or its own logical form ). Verificationism rejects statements of metaphysics , theology , ethics and aesthetics as  meaningless in conveying truth value or factual content, though they may be meaningful in influencing emotions or behavior.

[ 1 ] Verificationism was a central thesis of logical positivism , a movement in analytic philosophy that emerged in the 1920s by philosophers who sought to unify philosophy and science under a common naturalistic theory of knowledge .

[ 2 ] The verifiability criterion underwent various revisions throughout the 1920s to 1950s. However, by the 1960s, it was deemed to be irreparably untenable.

[ 3 ] Its abandonment would eventually precipitate the collapse of the broader logical positivist movement.

[ 4 ] Origins [ edit ] The roots of verificationism may be traced to at least the 19th century, in philosophical principles that aim to ground scientific theory in verifiable experience , such as C.S. Peirce 's pragmatism and the work of conventionalist Pierre Duhem , [ 3 ] who fostered instrumentalism .

[ 5 ] According to Gilbert Ryle , William James ' pragmatism was "one minor source of the Principle of Verifiability".

[ 6 ] Verificationism , as principle, would be conceived in the 1920s by the logical positivists of the Vienna Circle , who sought an epistemology whereby philosophical discourse would be, in their perception, as authoritative and meaningful as empirical science .

[ 7 ] The movement established grounding in the empiricism of David Hume , [ 8 ] Auguste Comte and Ernst Mach , and the positivism of the latter two, borrowing perspectives from Immanuel Kant and defining their exemplar of science in Einstein 's general theory of relativity .

[ 9 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein 's Tractatus , published in 1921, established the theoretical foundations for the verifiability criterion of meaning.

[ 10 ] Building upon Gottlob Frege 's work, the analytic–synthetic distinction was also reformulated, reducing logic and mathematics to semantical conventions. This would render logical truths (being unverifiable by the senses ) tenable under verificationism, as tautologies .

[ 11 ] Revisions [ edit ] Logical positivists within the Vienna Circle recognized quickly that the verifiability criterion was too stringent. Specifically, universal generalizations were noted to be empirically unverifiable, rendering vital domains of science and reason , including scientific hypothesis , meaningless under verificationism, absent revisions to its criterion of meaning.

[ 12 ] Rudolf Carnap , Otto Neurath , Hans Hahn and Philipp Frank led a faction seeking to make the verifiability criterion more inclusive, beginning a movement they referred to as the "liberalization of empiricism".

Moritz Schlick and Friedrich Waismann led a "conservative wing" that maintained a strict verificationism. Whereas Schlick sought to redefine universal generalizations as tautological rules, thereby to reconcile them with the existing criterion, Hahn argued that the criterion itself should be weakened to accommodate non-conclusive verification.

[ 13 ] Neurath, within the liberal wing, proposed the adoption of coherentism , though challenged by Schlick's foundationalism . However, his physicalism would eventually be adopted over Mach 's phenomenalism by most members of the Vienna Circle.

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] With the publication of the Logical Syntax of Language in 1934, Carnap defined ‘analytic’ in a new way to account for Gödel 's incompleteness theorem , who ultimately "thought that Carnap’s approach to mathematics could be refuted." [ 15 ] This method allowed Carnap to distinguish between a derivative relation between premises that can be obtained in a finite number of steps and a semantic consequence relation that has on all valuations the same truth value for the premise as the consequent. It follows that all sentences of pure mathematics individually, or their negation, are "a consequence of the null set of premises. This leaves Gödel’s results completely intact as they concerned what is provable, that is, derivable from the null set of premises or from any one consistent axiomatization of mathematical truths." [ 15 ] In 1936, Carnap sought a switch from verification to confirmation .

[ 12 ] Carnap's confirmability criterion ( confirmationism ) would not require conclusive verification (thus accommodating for universal generalizations) but allow for partial testability to establish degrees of confirmation on a probabilistic basis. Carnap never succeeded in finalising his thesis despite employing abundant logical and mathematical tools for this purpose. In all of Carnap's formulations, a universal law's degree of confirmation was zero.

[ 16 ] In Language, Truth and Logic , published that year, A. J. Ayer distinguished between strong and weak verification. This system espoused conclusive verification, yet allowed for probabilistic inclusion where verifiability is inconclusive. He also distinguished theoretical from practical verifiability, proposing that statements that are verifiable in principle should be meaningful, even if unverifiable in practice.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Philosopher Karl Popper , a graduate of the University of Vienna , though not a member within the ranks of the Vienna Circle , was among the foremost critics of verificationism. He identified three fundamental deficiencies in verifiability as a criterion of meaning: [ 19 ] Verificationism rejects universal generalizations , such as "all swans are white," as meaningless. Popper argues that while universal statements cannot be verified, they can be proven false, a foundation on which he was to propose his criterion of falsifiability .

Verificationism allows existential statements, such as  “unicorns exist”, to be classified as scientifically meaningful, despite the absence of any definitive method to show that they are false (one could possibly find a unicorn somewhere not yet examined).

Verificationism is meaningless by virtue of its own criterion because it cannot be empirically verified. Thus the concept is self-defeating .

Popper regarded scientific hypotheses to never be completely verifiable, as well as not confirmable under Carnap 's thesis.

[ 10 ] [ 20 ] He also considered metaphysical , ethical and aesthetic statements often rich in meaning and important in the origination of scientific theories.

[ 10 ] Other philosophers also voiced their own criticisms of verificationism: The 1951 article " Two Dogmas of Empiricism ", by Willard Van Orman Quine , found no suitable explanations for the concept of analyticity in that they reduced ultimately to circular reasoning . This served to uproot the analytic/synthetic division pivotal to verificationism.

[ 21 ] Carl Hempel (1950, 1951) demonstrated that the verifiability criterion was not justifiable in that it was too strong to accommodate key proceedings within science, such as general laws and limits in infinite sequences .

[ 22 ] In 1958, Norwood Hanson explained that even direct observations are never truly neutral in that they are laden with theory . ie. Influenced by a system of presuppositions that act as an interpretative framework for those observations. This served to destabilize the foundations of empiricism by challenging the infallibility and objectivity of empirical observation.

[ 23 ] Thomas Kuhn 's landmark book of 1962, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions —which discussed paradigm shifts in fundamental physics —critically undermined confidence in scientific foundationalism , [ 24 ] a theory commonly, if erroneously, attributed to verificationism.

[ 25 ] Falsifiability [ edit ] Main article: Falsifiability In The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1959) , Popper proposed falsifiability , or falsificationism . Though formulated in the context of what he perceived were intractable problems in both verifiability and confirmability, Popper intended falsifiability, not as a criterion of meaning like verificationism (as commonly misunderstood), [ 26 ] but as a criterion to demarcate scientific statements from non-scientific statements .

[ 10 ] Notably, the falsifiability criterion would allow for scientific hypotheses (expressed as universal generalizations ) to be held as provisionally true until proven false by observation, whereas under verificationism, they would be disqualified immediately as meaningless.

[ 10 ] In formulating his criterion, Popper was informed by the contrasting methodologies of Albert Einstein and Sigmund Freud . Appealing to the general theory of relativity and its predicted effects on gravitational lensing , it was evident to Popper that Einstein's theories carried significantly greater predictive risk than Freud's of being falsified by observation . Though Freud found ample confirmation of his theories in observations, Popper would note that this method of justification was vulnerable to confirmation bias , leading in some cases to contradictory outcomes. He would therefore conclude that predictive risk, or falsifiability , should serve as the criterion to demarcate the boundaries of science.

[ 27 ] Though falsificationism has been criticized extensively by philosophers for methodological shortcomings in its intended demarcation of science, [ 19 ] it would receive acclamatory adoption among scientists.

[ 20 ] Logical positivists too adopted the criterion, even as their movement ran its course, catapulting Popper, initially a contentious misfit, to carry the richest philosophy out of interwar Vienna.

[ 26 ] Legacy [ edit ] In 1967, John Passmore , a leading historian of 20th-century philosophy, wrote, "Logical positivism is dead, or as dead as a philosophical movement ever becomes".

[ 4 ] Logical positivism's fall heralded postpositivism , where Popper's view of human knowledge as hypothetical, continually growing and open to change ascended [ 26 ] and verificationism, in academic circles, became mostly maligned.

[ 3 ] In a 1976 TV interview, A. J. Ayer, who had introduced logical positivism to the English-speaking world in the 1930s [ 28 ] was asked what he saw as its main defects, and answered that "nearly all of it was false".

[ 4 ] However, he soon said that he still held "the same general approach", referring to empiricism and reductionism , whereby mental phenomena resolve to the material or physical and philosophical questions largely resolve to ones of language and meaning.

[ 4 ] In 1977, Ayer had noted: [ 3 ] "The verification principle is seldom mentioned and when it is mentioned it is usually scorned; it continues, however, to be put to work. The attitude of many philosophers reminds me of the relationship between Pip and Magwitch in Dickens 's Great Expectations . They have lived on the money, but are ashamed to acknowledge its source." In the late 20th and early 21st centuries, the general concept of verification criteria—in forms that differed from those of the logical positivists—was defended by Bas van Fraassen , Michael Dummett , Crispin Wright , Christopher Peacocke , David Wiggins , Richard Rorty , and others.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Epistemic theories of truth Newton's flaming laser sword Semantic anti-realism (epistemology) Triangulation (social science) Validation References [ edit ] ^ "Verifiability principle" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2024 . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

^ Uebel, Thomas (2024).

"Vienna Circle" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

^ a b c d e Misak, C.J. (1995). "The Logical Positivists and the Verifiability Principle".

Verificationism: Its History and Prospects . New York: Routledge.

^ a b c d Hanfling, Oswald (1996). "Logical positivism". In Stuart G Shanker (ed.).

Philosophy of Science, Logic and Mathematics in the Twentieth Century . Routledge. pp.

193– 94.

^ Epstein, Miran (2012). "Introduction to philosophy of science". In Clive Seale (ed.).

Researching Society and Culture 3rd Ed . London: Sage Publications. pp.

18– 19.

^ Gilbert Ryle. "Introduction". In Ayer, A.J. (ed.).

The Revolution in Philosophy . p. 9.

^ Uebel 2024 Section 2.2 ^ Flew, Antony G (1984). "Science: Conjectures and refutations". In Andrew Bailey (ed.).

A Dictionary of Philosophy . New York: St Martin's Press. p. 156.

Despite Hume's radical empiricism, set forth near 1740, Hume was also committed to common sense and apparently did not take his own skepticism, such as the problem of induction , as drastically as others later did.

^ Uebel 2024 Section 3 ^ a b c d e Popper, Karl (2011). "Science: Conjectures and refutations". In Andrew Bailey (ed.).

First Philosophy: Fundamental Problems and Readings in Philosophy (2 ed.). Peterborough Ontario: Broadview Press. pp.

338– 42.

^ Jerrold J. Katz (2000).

"The epistemic challenge to antirealism" .

Realistic Rationalism . MIT Press. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0262263290 .

^ a b c Sahotra Sarkar; Jessica Pfeifer, eds. (2006). "Rudolf Carnap".

The Philosophy of Science: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1: A-M . New York: Routledge. p. 83.

^ Uebel 2024 Section 3.1 ^ Flew 1984 p.245 ^ a b Creath, Richard.

"Logical Empiricism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ Murzi, Mauro (2001).

"Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Ayer, A. J. (1936).

Language, Truth, and Logic (PDF) . pp.

6– 7.

^ Ayer, A. J. (29 November 2007).

"Ayer on the criterion of verifiability" (PDF) . Retrieved 9 July 2023 .

^ a b Shea, Brendan.

"Karl Popper: Philosophy of Science" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved May 12, 2019 .

^ a b Godfrey-Smith, Peter (2005).

Theory and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Science . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

57– 59.

^ Rocknak, Stefanie.

"Willard Van Orman Quine: The Analytic/Synthetic Distinction" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved July 14, 2024 .

^ Fetzer, James (2013).

"Carl Hempel" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 8 October 2024 .

^ Caldwell, Bruce (1994).

Beyond Positivism: Economic Methodology in the 20th Century . London: Routledge. pp.

47– 48.

^ Okasha, Samir (2002). "Scientific Change and Scientific Revolutions".

Philosophy of Science: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Uebel 2024 Section 3.3 ^ a b c Hacohen, Malachi Haim (2000).

Karl Popper: The Formative Years, 1902–1945: Politics and Philosophy in Interwar Vienna . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

212– 13.

^ Popper, Karl (1962).

Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge (2 ed.). Routledge. pp.

34– 37.

^ Chapman, Siobhan (2009). "Logical positivism". In Siobhan Chapman; Christopher Routledge (eds.).

Key ideas in linguistics and the philosophy of language . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Verificationism&oldid=1298435327 " Categories : Analytic philosophy Empiricism Logical positivism Metatheory of science Epistemological theories Meaning (philosophy of language) Meaning in religious language Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 13:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Verificationism 20 languages Add topic

