Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Geology and paleoclimatology 3 Flora and fauna 4 Ecoregions 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 Historiography 6 Agriculture 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Mediterranean basin 66 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latviešu Lingua Franca Nova Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mediterranean Basin ) Region of lands around the Mediterranean Sea that have a Mediterranean climate "Mediterranean region" redirects here. For other uses, see Mediterranean region (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with the drainage basin, including that of the River Nile, of the Mediterranean Sea .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mediterranean basin" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Physical and political map of the Mediterranean basin In biogeography , the Mediterranean basin ( / ˌ m ɛ d ɪ t ə ˈ r eɪ n i ən / MED -ih-tə- RAY -nee-ən ), also known as the Mediterranean region or sometimes Mediterranea , is the region of lands around the Mediterranean Sea that have mostly a Mediterranean climate , with mild to cool, rainy winters and warm to hot, dry summers , which supports characteristic Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub vegetation.

Geography [ edit ] Köppen–Geiger -based map of the areas surrounding the Mediterranean Sea. Based on the work of M. C. Peel, B. L. Finlayson and T. A. McMahon at the University of Melbourne . For a full legend, see Legend of the Köppen–Geiger climate classification on the Wikimedia Commons.

Desert climate Semi-arid climate Mediterranean climate Humid subtropical climate Oceanic climate Humid continental climate Subarctic climate Tundra The Mediterranean basin covers portions of three continents: Africa , Asia , and Europe .

[ 1 ] It is not the same as the drainage basin of the Mediterranean Sea; the drainage basin is larger, as rivers including the Nile and Rhône reach further into Africa and Europe. Conversely, the Mediterranean basin includes regions not in the drainage basin, such as Iraq , Jordan , and Portugal .

It has a varied and contrasting topography. The Mediterranean region offers a varied landscape of high mountains, rocky shores, impenetrable scrub, semi-arid steppes, coastal wetlands, sandy beaches and a myriad of islands of various shapes and sizes dotted amidst the clear blue sea. Contrary to the classic sandy beach images portrayed in most tourist brochures, the Mediterranean is surprisingly hilly. Mountains can be seen from almost anywhere.

[ 2 ] By definition, the Mediterranean basin extends from Macaronesia in the west, to the Levant in the east, although some places may or may not be included depending on the view, as is the case with Macaronesia: some definitions only include the Canary Islands and Madeira [ 3 ] while others include the whole Macaronesia (with the Azores and Cape Verde ).

[ 4 ] The northern portion of the Maghreb region of north-western Africa has a Mediterranean climate, separated from the Sahara Desert , which extends across North Africa , by the Atlas Mountains . In the eastern Mediterranean the Sahara extends to the southern shore of the Mediterranean, with the exception of the northern fringe of the peninsula of Cyrenaica in Libya , which has a dry Mediterranean climate.

In West Asia , it covers the western and southern portions of the Anatolian Peninsula , as far as Iraq , [ 5 ] but excluding the temperate-climate mountains of central Turkey. It includes the Mediterranean Levant at the eastern end of the Mediterranean, bounded on the east and south by the Negev and Syrian deserts.

Europe lies to the north of the Mediterranean. The European portion of the Mediterranean basin loosely corresponds to Southern Europe . The three large Southern European peninsulas, the Apennine Peninsula , the Balkan Peninsula , and the Iberian Peninsula , extend into and comprise much of the Mediterranean-climate zone. A system of folded mountains, including the Pyrenees dividing Spain from France , the Alps dividing Italy from Central Europe , the Dinaric Alps along the eastern Adriatic , and the Balkan and Rila - Rhodope mountains of the Balkan Peninsula divide the Mediterranean from the temperate climate regions of Central Europe , Eastern Europe , and Northern , North-western , or Western Europe.

Geology and paleoclimatology [ edit ] The Mediterranean basin was shaped by the ancient collision of the northward-moving African–Arabian continent with the stable Eurasian continent. As Africa–Arabia moved north, it closed the former Tethys Sea , which formerly separated Eurasia from the ancient super continent of Gondwana , of which Africa was part. At about the same time, 170 mya in the Jurassic period, a small Neotethys ocean basin formed shortly before the Tethys Sea was closed at the eastern end. The collision pushed up a vast system of mountains, extending from the Pyrenees in Spain to the Zagros Mountains in Iran . This episode of mountain building, known as the Alpine orogeny , occurred mostly during the Oligocene (34 to 23 million years ago ( mya )) and Miocene (23 to 5.3 mya) epochs. The Neotethys became larger during these collisions and associated folding and subduction.

About 6 mya during the late Miocene, the Mediterranean was closed at its western end by drifting Africa, which caused the entire sea to evaporate. There followed several (debated) episodes of sea drawdown and re-flooding known as the Messinian Salinity Crisis ,  which ended when the Atlantic last re-flooded the basin at the end of the Miocene.

[ 6 ] Recent research has suggested that a desiccation-flooding cycle may have repeated several times [ 7 ] [ 8 ] during the last 630,000 years of the Miocene epoch, which could explain several events of large amounts of salt deposition. Recent studies, however, show that repeated desiccation and re-flooding is unlikely from a geodynamic point of view.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The end of the Miocene also marked a change in the Mediterranean basin's climate. Fossil evidence shows that the Mediterranean basin had a relatively humid subtropical climate with summer rainfall during the Miocene, which supported laurel forests . The shift to a Mediterranean climate occurred within the last 3.2–2.8 million years, during the Pliocene epoch, as summer rainfall decreased. The subtropical laurel forests retreated, although they persisted on the islands of Macaronesia off the Atlantic coast of Iberia and North Africa, and the present Mediterranean vegetation evolved, dominated by coniferous trees and sclerophyllous trees and shrubs, with small, hard, waxy leaves that prevent moisture loss in the dry summers. Much of these forests and shrublands have been altered beyond recognition by thousands of years of human habitation. There are now very few relatively intact natural areas in what was once a heavily wooded region.

Flora and fauna [ edit ] See also: Category:Environment of the Mediterranean Phytogeographically , the Mediterranean basin together with the nearby Atlantic coast, the Mediterranean woodlands and forests and Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe of North Africa , the Black Sea coast of northeastern Anatolia , the southern coast of Crimea between Sevastopol and Feodosiya in Ukraine and the Black Sea coast between Anapa and Tuapse in Russia forms the Mediterranean floristic region , which belongs to the Tethyan Subkingdom of the Boreal Kingdom and is enclosed between the Circumboreal , Irano-Turanian , Saharo-Arabian and Macaronesian floristic regions .

The Mediterranean region was first proposed by German botanist August Grisebach in the late 19th century.

The Mediterranean basin is a hotspot of plant diversity with many endemic species.

[ 11 ] The genera Aubrieta , Sesamoides , Cynara , Dracunculus , Arisarum and Biarum are nearly endemic. Among the endemic species prominent in the Mediterranean vegetation are the Aleppo pine , stone pine , Mediterranean cypress , bay laurel , Oriental sweetgum , holm oak , kermes oak , strawberry tree , Greek strawberry tree , mastic , terebinth , common myrtle , oleander , Acanthus mollis and Vitex agnus-castus . Moreover, many plant taxa are shared with one of the four neighbouring floristic regions only. According to different versions of Armen Takhtajan 's delineation, the Mediterranean region is further subdivided into seven to nine floristic provinces : Southwestern Mediterranean (or Southern Moroccan and Southwestern Mediterranean), Ibero-Balearian (or Iberian and Balearian), Liguro-Tyrrhenian, Adriatic, East Mediterranean , South Mediterranean and Crimeo-Novorossiysk.

[ 12 ] The Mediterranean basin is the largest of the world's five Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub regions. It is home to a number of plant communities, which vary with rainfall, elevation, latitude, and soil.

Scrublands occur in the driest areas, especially areas near the seacoast where wind and salt spray are frequent. Low, soft-leaved scrublands around the Mediterranean are known as garrigar in Catalan , garrigue in French , phrygana in Greek , tomillares in Spanish , and batha in Hebrew .

Shrublands are dense thickets of evergreen sclerophyll shrubs and small trees and are the most common plant community around the Mediterranean. Mediterranean shrublands are known as màquia in Catalan, macchia in Italian , maquis in French, and " matorral " in Spanish. In some places, shrublands are the mature vegetation type, and in other places the result of the degradation of former forest or woodland by logging or overgrazing , or disturbance by major fires.

Savannas and grasslands occur around the Mediterranean, usually dominated by annual grasses .

Woodlands are usually dominated by oak and pine , mixed with other sclerophyll and coniferous trees.

Forests are distinct from woodlands in having a closed canopy, and occur in the areas of highest rainfall and in riparian zones along rivers and streams where they receive summer water. Mediterranean forests are generally composed of evergreen trees, predominantly oak and pine. At higher elevations Mediterranean forests transition to mixed broadleaf and tall conifer forests similar to temperate zone forests.

The Mediterranean basin is home to considerable biodiversity , including 22,500 endemic vascular plant species .

Conservation International designates the region as a biodiversity hotspot , because of its rich biodiversity and its threatened status. The Mediterranean basin has an area of 2,085,292 km 2 , of which only 98,009 km 2 remains undisturbed.

Endangered mammals of the Mediterranean basin include the Mediterranean monk seal , the Barbary macaque , and the Iberian lynx .

Ecoregions [ edit ] The WWF identifies 22 Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ecoregions in the Mediterranean basin, most of which feature sclerophyll plant species: [ 13 ] Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests ( Greece , Turkey , North Macedonia , Bulgaria ) Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests ( Turkey ) Canary Islands dry woodlands and forests ( Spain ) Corsican montane broadleaf and mixed forests ( France ) Crete Mediterranean forests ( Greece ) Cyprus Mediterranean forests ( Cyprus ) Eastern Mediterranean conifer–sclerophyllous–broadleaf forests ( Lebanon , Iraq , Israel , Jordan , Palestine , Syria , Turkey ) Iberian conifer forests ( Spain ) Iberian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests ( Portugal , Spain ) Illyrian deciduous forests ( Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , Greece , Italy , Montenegro , Slovenia ) Italian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests ( France , Italy , San Marino ) Mediterranean acacia–argania dry woodlands ( Western Sahara , Morocco , Canary Islands ( Spain )) Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe ( Algeria , Egypt , Libya , Morocco , Tunisia ) Mediterranean woodlands and forests ( Algeria , Libya , Morocco , Tunisia ) Northeastern Spain and Southern France Mediterranean forests ( France , Monaco , Spain ) Northwest Iberian montane forests ( Portugal , Spain ) Pindus Mountains mixed forests ( Albania , Greece , Kosovo , North Macedonia ) South Apennine mixed montane forests ( Italy ) Southeastern Iberian shrubs and woodlands ( Spain ) Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests ( Lebanon , Israel , Jordan , Syria , Turkey ) Southwest Iberian Mediterranean sclerophyllous and mixed forests ( Portugal , Spain ) Tyrrhenian–Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests ( Croatia , France , Italy , Malta ) Map of the Mediterranean basin's ecoregions.

1201 : Aegean and Western Turkey sclerophyllous and mixed forests.

1202 : Anatolian conifer and deciduous mixed forests.

1203 : Canary Islands dry woodlands and forests.

1204 : Corsican montane broadleaf and mixed forests.

1205 : Crete Mediterranean forests.

1206 : Cyprus Mediterranean forests.

1207 : Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forests.

1208 : Iberian conifer forests.

1209 : Iberian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests.

1210 : Illyrian deciduous forests.

1211 : Italian sclerophyllous and semi-deciduous forests.

1212 : Mediterranean acacia-argania dry woodlands and succulent thickets.

1213 : Mediterranean dry woodlands and steppe.

1214 : Mediterranean woodlands and forests.

1215 : Northeastern Spain and Southern France Mediterranean forests.

1216 : Northwest Iberian montane forests.

1217 : Pindus Mountains mixed forests.

1218 : South Apeninne mixed montane forests.

1219 : Southeastern Iberian shrubs and woodlands.

1220 : Southern Anatolian montane conifer and deciduous forests.

1221 : Southwest Iberian Mediterranean sclerophyllous and mixed forests.

1222 : Tyrrhenian-Adriatic sclerophyllous and mixed forests.

History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Mediterranean region Neanderthals inhabited western Asia and the non-glaciated portions of Europe starting about 230,000 years ago. Modern humans moved into western Asia from Africa less than 100,000 years ago. Modern humans, known as Cro-Magnons , moved into Europe approximately 50–40,000 years ago.

The most recent glacial period, the Wisconsin glaciation ( Würm in Southern European contexts), reached its maximum extent approximately 21,000 years ago, and ended approximately 12,000 years ago. A warm period, known as the Holocene climatic optimum , followed the ice age.

Food crops, including wheat , chickpeas , and olives , along with sheep and goats , were domesticated in the eastern Mediterranean in the 9th millennium BCE , which allowed for the establishment of agricultural settlements . Near Eastern crops spread to southeastern Europe in the 7th millennium BCE .

Poppy and oats were domesticated in Europe from the 6th to the 3rd millennium BCE. Agricultural settlements spread around the Mediterranean basin.

Megaliths were constructed in Europe from 4500 – 1500 BCE.

A strengthening of the summer monsoon 9000–7000 years ago increased rainfall across the Sahara , which became a grassland , with lakes, rivers, and wetlands. After a period of climatic instability, the Sahara settled into a desert state by the 4th millennium BCE .

Historiography [ edit ] One of the earliest modern studies of the Mediterranean was Fernand Braudel 's La Méditerranéee et le monde méditerranéen à l époque de Philippe II (The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II), published in 1949.

S.D. Goitein 's multivolume study of the Cairo Geniza documents was another important contribution in the area of Mediterranean Jewish culture.

[ 14 ] Agriculture [ edit ] Further information: Mediterranean cuisine Wheat is the dominant grain grown around the Mediterranean basin. The characteristic tree crop is the olive ; and the grape, for wine, completes the "trinity" of basic ingredients of traditional Mediterranean cuisine.

[ 15 ] The Arab Agricultural Revolution brought a new combination of foods to Portugal, Spain , and Sicily in the Middle Ages .

[ 16 ] Those foods included aubergines, spinach , sugar cane , rice , apricots , and citrus fruits .

[ 17 ] The Columbian Exchange in the early modern period added the tomato and the haricot bean .

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mediterranean .

Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Indo-Mediterranean Life zones of the Mediterranean region Mediterranean wine climate MISTR Also, Ottoman Empire Phoenicia Zanclean flood References [ edit ] ^ magdy (2025-01-08).

"Landscapes Across the Mediterranean: A Comprehensive Case Study" .

IEREK . Retrieved 2025-06-24 .

^ Natura 2000 in the Mediterranean Region (PDF) . European Commission of the European Union. 2009.

ISBN 978-92-79-11587-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 19, 2017 . Retrieved August 6, 2015 .

^ The Status and Distribution of Reptiles and Amphibians of the Mediterranean Basin . Neil Cox, Janice Chanson, Simon Stuart. 2006.

ISBN 978-2-8317-0912-3 .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2020 .

^ "Mediterranean Basin" .

CEPF .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2020 .

^ Hegazy, Ahmad; Lovett-Doust, Jonathan (2016). "2.18 Iraq".

Plant Ecology in the Middle East .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-107874-3 .

the Eastern Mediterranean conifer-sclerophyllous-broadleaf forest ecoregion, which extends slightly into Iraq ^ W. Krijgsman; A. R. Fortuinb; F. J. Hilgenc; F. J. Sierrod (2001).

"Astrochronology for the Messinian Sorbas basin (SE Spain) and orbital (precessional) forcing for evaporite cyclicity" (PDF) .

Sedimentary Geology .

140 (1): 43– 60.

Bibcode : 2001SedG..140...43K .

doi : 10.1016/S0037-0738(00)00171-8 .

hdl : 1874/1632 .

Archived from the original on 2024-01-01 . Retrieved 2019-04-05 .

^ Gargani J., Rigollet C. (2007).

"Mediterranean Sea level variations during the Messinian Salinity Crisis" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

34 (L10405): L10405.

Bibcode : 2007GeoRL..3410405G .

doi : 10.1029/2007GL029885 .

^ Gargani J.; Moretti I.; Letouzey J. (2008).

"Evaporite accumulation during the Messinian Salinity Crisis : The Suez Rift Case" (PDF) .

Geophysical Research Letters .

35 (2): L02401.

Bibcode : 2008GeoRL..35.2401G .

doi : 10.1029/2007gl032494 .

S2CID 129573384 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-05-07 . Retrieved 2021-05-06 .

^ Govers, Rob (1 February 2009). "Choking the Mediterranean to dehydration: The Messinian salinity crisis".

Geology .

37 (2): 167– 170.

Bibcode : 2009Geo....37..167G .

doi : 10.1130/G25141A.1 .

ISSN 0091-7613 .

^ Garcia-Castellanos, D.; Villaseñor, A. (2011).

"Messinian salinity crisis regulated by competing tectonics and erosion at the Gibraltar Arc" .

Nature .

480 (7377): 359– 63.

Bibcode : 2011Natur.480..359G .

doi : 10.1038/nature10651 .

PMID 22170684 .

S2CID 205227033 .

Archived from the original on 2012-11-10 . Retrieved 2011-12-15 – via sites.google.com.

^ Bedair, Heba; Shaltout, Kamal; Halmy, Marwa Waseem. A. (2023).

"A critical inventory of the mediterranean endemics in the egyptian flora" (PDF) .

Biodiversity and Conservation .

32 (4): 1327– 1351.

doi : 10.1007/s10531-023-02555-5 . Retrieved 6 August 2025 .

^ Тахтаджян, А. Л.

"Флористические деления суши и океана" .

Древнесредиземноморское подцарство (in Russian). Archived from the original on 2008-06-16 . Retrieved 26 January 2019 .

^ This article incorporates text available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license.

"Mediterranean Forests, Woodlands, and Scrub Ecoregions" . World Wide Fund for Nature. Archived from the original on 2011-04-01 . Retrieved 2010-05-27 .

^ Wacks, David A. (2019).

Medieval Iberian Crusade Fiction and the Mediterranean World . University of Toronto Press. p. 4.

^ Essid, Mohamed Yassine (2012). "Chapter 2. History of Mediterranean Food".

MediTerra: The Mediterranean Diet for Sustainable Regional Development . Presses de Sciences Po. p. 29.

ISBN 978-2-7246-1248-6 .

^ a b Schwabe, Calvin W. (1979).

Unmentionable Cuisine . University of Virginia Press. p. 414.

ISBN 978-0-8139-1162-5 .

^ Duarte, A.; Fernandes, J.; Bernardes, J.; Miguel, G. (2016).

"Citrus as a Component of the Mediterranean Diet" .

Journal of Spatial and Organizational Dynamics .

IV (4): 289– 304.

Archived from the original on 2018-10-01 . Retrieved 2019-02-28 .

Further reading [ edit ] Attenborough, David (1987).

The First Eden: The Mediterranean world and man .

Boston , MA: Little Brown and Company.

Borutta, Manuel, Mediterraneum , EGO - European History Online , Mainz: Institute of European History , 2021, retrieved: March 8, 2021.

Dallman, Peter F. (1998).

Plant Life in the World's Mediterranean Climates .

Berkeley, California : University of California Press.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) Suc, J.-P. (1984). "Origin and evolution of the Mediterranean vegetation and climate in Europe".

Nature .

307 (5950): 429– 432.

Bibcode : 1984Natur.307..429S .

doi : 10.1038/307429a0 .

S2CID 4318726 .

Wagner, Horst-Günter (2011).

Mittelmeerraum, Geography, History, Economy . Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.

ISBN 978-3-534-23179-9 .

External links [ edit ] Mediterranean Basin biodiversity hotspot (Conservation International) (archived 23 November 2005) Are wildfires a disaster in the Mediterranean basin? – A review (PDF) MedTrees: Trees and large shrubs of the Mediterranean Basin Mediterranean Experts on Climate and environmental Change (MedECC) v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Floristic regions of the world Holarctic kingdom Circumboreal Eastern Asiatic North American Atlantic Rocky Mountain Macaronesian Mediterranean Saharo-Arabian Irano-Turanian Madrean Paleotropical kingdom Guineo-Congolian Usambara-Zululand Sudano-Zambezian Karoo-Namib St. Helena and Ascension Madagascan Indian Indochinese Malesian Papuasian Fijian Polynesian Hawaiian Neocaledonian Neotropical kingdom Caribbean Guayana Highlands Amazonian Brazilian Andean South African kingdom Cape Australian kingdom Northeast Southwest Central Australian or Eremaean Antarctic kingdom Fernandezian Chile-Patagonian South Subantarctic Islands Neozeylandic Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Sweden Vatican Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mediterranean_basin&oldid=1304638459 " Categories : Mediterranean basin Drainage basins of the Mediterranean Sea Environment of the Mediterranean Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Palearctic realm Palearctic ecoregions Natural history of Europe Levant Floristic regions Regions of Europe Geography of North Africa Geography of Europe Geography of West Asia Geography of the Middle East Regions of Africa Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is locally defined CS1 errors: periodical ignored This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 07:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mediterranean basin 66 languages Add topic

