Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Oozes 2 Red and brown clays 3 Distribution and average thickness of marine sediments 4 Classification of marine sediments by source of particles 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pelagic sediment 12 languages العربية Eesti Español فارسی हिन्दी 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fine-grained sediment that accumulates on the floor of the open ocean Tripodfish on pelagic sediment Part of a series on Sediments By origin Terrigenous (lithogenous) Biogenous Cosmogenous Hydrogenous By texture Roundness Sorting Grain size boulder cobble gravel pebble granule sand silt clay colloid Other oolite scree till By composition Manganese nodules Oolitic aragonite sand Quicksand Tektites By process Sedimentation Sedimentary budget Sediment transport coastal Weathering Erosion Aeolian (windborne) transport Biomineralization Bioturbation Compaction Concretion Exner equation Fluvial processes Glacier flow ice-sheet dynamics ice rafting Lithification Siltation Turbidity currents By structure Sedimentary structures Bedforms cross-bedding duness graded bedding ripple marks Alluvial fan Alluvial river Fault Fold Paleocurrent indicators sole markings imbrication River delta Sediment–water interface Sedimentary basin Soft-sediment deformation Unconformity Vegetation-induced Soil sediment Soil matrix pore space permeability morphology texture value color Catena Soil horizon Humus Humin Soil salinity Hydropedology Mineralization Microbial calcite precipitation Marine sediment Abyssal fan Aragonite aragonite sea oolitic aragonite sand Calcite calcite sea Amorphous calcium carbonate Calcification Continental rise Bay mud Bioirrigation Coastal sediment transport Coastal sediment supply Evaporites Marine clay pelagic red clay Marine regression transgression Pelagic turbidite contourite hemipelagite Salt tectonics Sedimentary basin Tidal bundle Biogenous sediments Calcareous ooze biogenic calcification calcareous nannoplankton Siliceous ooze biogenic silica silicification diatomaceous earth radiolarite Microfossil Reverse weathering Sedimentary ecology Soil biomantle Soil zoology soil pathogens Pedodiversity Soil biodiversity Rhizosphere root microbiome Sedimentary carbon Soil carbon storage Soil carbon Coal Peat Sedimentary rock Badlands Carbonates limestone dolomite Clastic conglomerate breccia sandstone mudrock Evaporite Chalk Chert Greywacke Iron-rich Organic-rich Phosphorite Siliceous Related History geology geological paleontology soil science Legacy sediment Principles cross-cutting relationships lateral continuity original horizontality Provenance Sedimentary record Sedimentology Stratigraphy Rock cycle calcium silica carbonate-silicate Paleolimnology Biosignature Category v t e Pelagic sediment or pelagite is a fine-grained sediment that accumulates as the result of the settling of particles to the floor of the open ocean, far from land. These particles consist primarily of either the microscopic, calcareous or siliceous shells of phytoplankton or zooplankton ; clay -size siliciclastic sediment ; or some mixture of these, along with detritus ( marine snow ) included. Trace amounts of meteoric dust and variable amounts of volcanic ash also occur within pelagic sediments. 
Based upon the composition of the ooze, there are three main types of pelagic sediments: siliceous oozes , calcareous oozes , and red clays .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The composition of pelagic sediments is controlled by three main factors. The first factor is the distance from major landmasses, which affects their dilution by terrigenous, or land-derived, sediment. The second factor is water depth , which affects the preservation of both siliceous and calcareous biogenic particles as they settle to the ocean bottom. The final factor is ocean fertility, which controls the amount of biogenic particles produced in surface waters.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Oozes [ edit ] In case of marine sediments , ooze does not refer to a sediment's consistency, but to its composition, which directly reflects its origin. Ooze is pelagic sediment that consists of at least 30% of microscopic remains of either calcareous or siliceous planktonic debris organisms. The remainder typically consists almost entirely of clay minerals. As a result, the grain size of oozes is often bimodal with a well-defined biogenic silt- to sand -size fraction and siliciclastic clay-size fraction. Oozes can be defined by and classified according to the predominant organisms that compose them. For example, there are diatom , coccolith , foraminifera , globigerina , pteropod , and radiolarian oozes. Oozes are also classified and named according to their mineralogy, i.e. calcareous or siliceous oozes. Whatever their composition, all oozes accumulate extremely slowly, at no more than a few centimeters per millennium .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Calcareous ooze is ooze that is composed of at least 30% of the calcareous microscopic shells—also known as tests —of foraminifera, coccolithophores, and pteropods. This is the most common pelagic sediment by area, covering 48% of the world ocean's floor. This type of ooze accumulates on the ocean floor at depths above the carbonate compensation depth . It accumulates more rapidly than any other pelagic sediment type, with a rate that varies from 0.3–5 cm/1000 yr.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Siliceous ooze is ooze that is composed of at least 30% of the siliceous microscopic "shells" of plankton, such as diatoms and radiolaria. Siliceous oozes often contain lesser proportions of either sponge spicules , silicoflagellates or both. This type of ooze accumulates on the ocean floor at depths below the carbonate compensation depth. Its distribution is also limited to areas with high biological productivity, such as the polar oceans, and upwelling zones near the equator. The least common type of sediment, it covers only 15% of the ocean floor. It accumulates at a slower rate than calcareous ooze: 0.2–1 cm/1000 yr.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Red and brown clays [ edit ] Main article: Pelagic red clay Red clay , also known as either brown clay or pelagic clay, accumulates in the deepest and most remote areas of the ocean. It covers 38% of the ocean floor and accumulates more slowly than any other sediment type, at only 0.1–0.5 cm/1000 yr.

[ 1 ] Containing less than 30% biogenic material, it consists of sediment that remains after the dissolution of both calcareous and siliceous biogenic particles while they settled through the water column. These sediments consist of aeolian quartz , clay minerals , volcanic ash , subordinate residue of siliceous microfossils , and authigenic minerals such as zeolites , limonite and manganese oxides . The bulk of red clay consists of eolian dust. Accessory constituents found in red clay include meteorite dust , fish bones and teeth, whale ear bones, and manganese micro-nodules .

[ 2 ] These pelagic sediments are typically bright red to chocolate brown in color. The color results from coatings of iron and manganese oxide on the sediment particles. In the absence of organic carbon, iron and manganese remain in their oxidized states and these clays remain brown after burial. When more deeply buried, brown clay may change into red clay due to the conversion of iron-hydroxides to hematite .

[ 2 ] These sediments accumulate on the ocean floor within areas characterized by little planktonic production. The clays which comprise them were transported into the deep ocean in suspension, either in the air over the oceans or in surface waters. Both wind and ocean currents transported these sediments in suspension thousands of kilometers from their terrestrial source. As they were transported, the finer clays may have stayed in suspension for a hundred years or more within the water column before they settled to the ocean bottom. The settling of this clay-size sediment occurred primarily by the formation of clay aggregates by flocculation and by their incorporation into fecal pellets by pelagic organisms.

[ 2 ] Distribution and average thickness of marine sediments [ edit ] Total sediment thickness of the ocean floor Deposits are thick on the continental shelves, and thinnest in the deep sea on either side of the mid-ocean ridge .

Region Percent of ocean area [ citation needed ] Percent of total volume of marine sediments Average thickness Continental shelves 9% 15% 2.5 km (1.6 mi) Continental slopes 6% 41% 9 km (5.6 mi) Continental rises 6% 31% 8 km (5 mi) Deep-ocean floor 78% 13% 0.6 km (0.4 mi) Classification of marine sediments by source of particles [ edit ] Sediment type Source Examples Distribution Percent of all ocean floor area covered Terrigenous Erosion of land , volcanic eruptions , blown dust Quartz sand , clays, estuarine mud Dominant on continental margins , abyssal plains , polar ocean floors ~45% Biogenous Organic; accumulation of hard parts of some marine organisms Calcareous and siliceous oozes Dominant on deep-ocean floor ( siliceous ooze below about 5 km) ~55% Hydrogenous (authigenic) Precipitation of dissolved mineral from water, often by bacteria Manganese nodules , phosphorite deposits Present with other, more dominant sediments 1% Cosmogenous Dust from space , meteorite debris Tektite spheres, glassy nodules Mixed in very small proportion with more dominant sediments 1% See also [ edit ] Chalk Diatomaceous earth Marine geology Petrological Database of the Ocean Floor Radiolarite SedDB , online database for sediment geochemistry Biogenous ooze Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Rothwell, R.G., (2005) Deep Ocean Pelagic Oozes , Vol. 5. of Selley, Richard C., L. Robin McCocks, and Ian R. Plimer, Encyclopedia of Geology, Oxford: Elsevier Limited.

ISBN 0-12-636380-3 ^ a b c d e f g h HüNeke, H., and T. Mulder (2011) Deep-Sea Sediments . Developments in Sedimentology, vol. 63. Elsiever, New York. 849 pp.

ISBN 978-0-444-53000-4 ^ Neuendorf, K.K.E., J.P. Mehl Jr., and J.A. Jackson, J.A., eds. (2005) Glossary of Geology (5th ed.). Alexandria, Virginia, American Geological Institute. 779 pp.

ISBN 0-922152-76-4 External links [ edit ] http://www.odp.usyd.edu.au Total Sediment Thickness of the World's Oceans and Marginal Seas, Version 2 v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pelagic_sediment&oldid=1280767198 " Categories : Sedimentary rocks Marine geology Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 10:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pelagic sediment 12 languages Add topic

