Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gallery 2 Books and articles about Master MS 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Master MS 6 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français Magyar Русский Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German painter The Visitation : Mary visits Elizabeth (1500-1510) Master M. S.

( Hungarian : M. S. Mester , German : Meister M. S.

, Slovak : Majster M. S.

) was a 16th-century painter in Central Europe in late Gothic and early Renaissance art .

He was active in Selmecbánya (now Banská Štiavnica, Slovakia) in the Kingdom of Hungary , and probably led a workshop there. Since his true name is unknown, he is sometimes identified with various other Gothic "masters". German art historians generally identify him with J. Brieu , a painter from Augsburg . Also some art historians identify him with the engraver Master MZ , often identified as Matthäus Zaisinger (1498–1555), a German goldsmith from Munich . According to other research the master could have been a Hungarian painter called Sebestyén , whose name is mentioned in the charter of Selmecbánya in 1507.

[ 1 ] The art historian Miklós Mojzer noted the similarities between this work and that of the painter who accompanied Veit Stoss and made the passion paintings in an altar now in the Esztergom Christian Museum and he called him Marten Swarcz.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His art combining dramatic depth and colourful decorative formation is akin to that of the German painters Martin Schongauer , Albrecht Dürer , J. Brieu and mainly Matthias Grünewald .

Only seven of his panel paintings are known out of eight which used to decorate the high altar of a church in Selmecbánya. It was believed that the altar was in the Saint Catherine Church , but according to the new research the pictures were part of the altar in the Virgin Mary Church, later rebuilt into the fortress called the Old Castle . Now there are four Passion paintings in Esztergom , Hungary,  in the Christian Museum ; the painting "The Birth of Christ" is held in Svätý Anton (formerly known also as Hontszentantal) near Banská Štiavnica, and The Adoration of the Magi is in the Museum of Lille in France. His painting entitled " The Visitation " depicts the meeting of the two saints, the Virgin Mary and St. Elizabeth , is in Budapest , in the Hungarian National Gallery .

There are also three more-than-life-size wood-carved polychromed sculptures preserved which originally belong to the same altar. The statue of Madonna is in the Saint Catherine Church of Banská Štiavnica, the statues of Saint Catherine and Saint Barbara are in the art gallery of the Slovak Mining Museum in Banská Štiavnica .

At the Old Castle in Banská Štiavnica, a half-sized maquette of the altar is exhibited, featuring full-coloured photocopies of all the known panel paintings by Master MS, as well as fragments of  decorative wood carvings which presumably were parts of the altar.

Gallery [ edit ] Birth of Jesus Carrying the Cross Calvary Resurrection Books and articles about Master MS [ edit ] Meister M. S., by Genthon István, Berlin, 1932 450 Jahre Meister M. S., by Radocsay Dénes, Budapest, 1957 Tanulmányok a Keresztény Múzeumban II. : M. S. mester zászlai, by Mojzer Miklós, Művészettörténeti Értesítő, 1965 M.S. mester passióképei az esztergomi Keresztény Múzeumban, by Mojzer Miklós, Budapest, Magyar Helikon, Corvina Kiadó Vállalat, 1976 Paintings of the Passion by Master M.S. in the Christian Museum of Esztergom , English translation of the book by Miklos Mojzer by Lili Halapy (44P), ISBN 9789632073576 "Magnificat anima mea Dominum" M S Mester Vizitáció-képe és egykori selmecbányai főoltára, catalog Kiállítási, Budapest, Magyar Nemzeti Galéria, 1997 "Gemartert ward under Poncio Pylato.", Eörsi Anna Megjegyzések M S mester Kálváriájának ikonográfiájához. Művészettörténeti Értesítő XLVII. 1998, 199-213. oldal "Magnificat anima mea Dominum", by Végh János, M S mester Vizitáció-képe és egykori selmecbányai főoltára Új Művészet, VIII. évf. 10-11. sz. 1997. október-November, 20-22. oldal References [ edit ] ^ MASTER M S in the Web Gallery of Art ^ Master MS in Esztergom Christian Museum ^ Obituary Miklós Mojzer External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Master M S .

Master MS biography and images, hung-art.hu, English "Meeting of Virgin Mary and St. Elizabeth" - a book about the painting in Hungarian A photograph of the half-sized maquette of the high altar with panel paintings by Master MS A photograph of the sculptures of Madonna, St. Catherine and St. Barbara, gathered together for a temporary exhibition at the Slovak Mining Museum in Banská Štiavnica Authority control databases National Czech Republic Artists RKD Artists Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Master_MS&oldid=1255339812 " Categories : Hungarian painters Gothic artists Renaissance artists 16th-century German painters Anonymous artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 4 November 2024, at 12:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Master MS 6 languages Add topic

