Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Relation to other criteria 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Explanatory power 10 languages العربية Français עברית Português Русский کوردی Suomi Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ability of a theory to explain a subject This article is about explanatory power in the context of the philosophy of science. For a statistical measure of explanatory power, see Explanatory power (statistics) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Explanatory power" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Explanatory power is the ability of a hypothesis or theory to explain the subject matter effectively to which it pertains. Its opposite is explanatory impotence .

In the past, various criteria or measures for explanatory power have been proposed. In particular, one hypothesis, theory, or explanation can be said to have more explanatory power than another about the same subject matter [ citation needed ] If more facts or observations are accounted for; If it changes more "surprising facts"  into "a matter of course" (following Peirce ); If more details of causal relations are provided, leading to a high accuracy and precision of the description; If it offers greater predictive power (if it offers more details about what should be expected to be seen and not seen); If it depends less on authorities and more on observations; If it makes fewer assumptions; If it is more falsifiable (more testable by observation or experiment, according to Popper ).

If it can be used to compress encoded observations into fewer bits ( Solomonoff's theory of inductive inference ) Recently, David Deutsch proposed that theorists should seek explanations that are hard to vary . A theory or explanation is hard to vary if all details play a functional role, i.e., cannot be varied or removed without changing the predictions of the theory. Easy to vary (i.e., bad) explanations, in contrast, can be varied to be reconciled with new observations because they are barely connected to the details of the phenomenon of question.

Examples [ edit ] Deutsch takes examples from Greek mythology . He describes how very specific, and even somewhat falsifiable theories were provided to explain how the god Demeter 's sadness caused the seasons. Alternatively, Deutsch points out, one could have just as easily explained the seasons as resulting from the god's happiness, which would make it a poor explanation because it is so easy to arbitrarily change details.

[ 1 ] Without Deutsch's criterion, the 'Greek gods explanation' could have just kept adding justifications. The same criterion, of being "hard to vary", may be what makes the modern explanation for the seasons a good one. None of the details about the Earth rotating around the Sun at a certain angle in a certain orbit can be easily modified without changing the theory's coherence.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Relation to other criteria [ edit ] The philosopher Karl Popper acknowledged it is logically possible to avoid falsification of a hypothesis by changing details to avoid any criticism, adopting the term an immunizing stratagem from Hans Albert .

[ 3 ] Popper argued that scientific hypotheses should be subjected to methodological testing to select for the strongest hypothesis.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Falsifiability Razor (philosophy) Critical rationalism References [ edit ] ^ a b David Deutsch, "A new way of explaining explanation" ^ David Deutsch (2011), The Beginning Of Infinity" , ch1, The Reach of Explanations ^ Ray S. Percival (2012), The Myth of the Closed Mind: Explaining why and how People are Rational , p.206, Chicago.

^ Karl R. Popper (1934), The Logic of Scientific Discovery , p.20, Routledge Classics (ed. 2004) Links to related articles v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explanatory_power&oldid=1192309075 " Categories : Concepts in the philosophy of science Metatheory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 This page was last edited on 28 December 2023, at 18:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explanatory power 10 languages Add topic

