Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 Impact on theory 3 Generalizations 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander horned sphere 11 languages العربية Català Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Topological embedding Alexander horned sphere The Alexander horned sphere is a pathological object in topology discovered by J. W. Alexander ( 1924 ). It is a particular topological embedding of a two-dimensional sphere in three-dimensional space. Together with its inside, it is a topological 3-ball , the Alexander horned ball , and so is simply connected ; i.e., every loop can be shrunk to a point while staying inside. However, the exterior is not simply connected, unlike the exterior of the usual round sphere.

Construction [ edit ] Diagram of the first few iterative steps in the construction of Alexander's horned sphere, from Alexander's original 1924 paper The Alexander horned sphere is the particular (topological) embedding of a sphere in 3-dimensional Euclidean space obtained by the following construction, starting with a standard torus : [ 1 ] Remove a radial slice of the torus.

Connect a standard punctured torus to each side of the cut, interlinked with the torus on the other side.

Repeat steps 1–2 on the two tori just added ad infinitum .

Animated construction of Alexander's sphere.

By considering only the points of the tori that are not removed at some stage, an embedding of the sphere with a Cantor set removed results.
This embedding extends to a continuous map from the whole sphere, which is injective (hence a topological embedding since the sphere is compact) since points in the sphere approaching two different points of the Cantor set will end up in different 'horns' at some stage and therefore have different images.

Impact on theory [ edit ] The horned sphere, together with its inside, is a topological 3-ball , the Alexander horned ball , and so is simply connected ; i.e., every loop can be shrunk to a point while staying inside. The exterior is not simply connected, unlike the exterior of the usual round sphere; a loop linking a torus in the above construction cannot be shrunk to a point without touching the horned sphere. This shows that the Jordan–Schönflies theorem does not hold in three dimensions, as Alexander had originally thought. Alexander also proved that the theorem does hold in three dimensions for piecewise linear / smooth embeddings. This is one of the earliest examples where the need for distinction between the categories of topological manifolds , differentiable manifolds , and piecewise linear manifolds became apparent.

Now consider Alexander's horned sphere as an embedding into the 3-sphere , considered as the one-point compactification of the 3-dimensional Euclidean space R 3 . The closure of the non-simply connected domain is called the solid Alexander horned sphere . Although the solid horned sphere is not a manifold , R. H. Bing showed that its double (which is the 3-manifold obtained by gluing two copies of the horned sphere together along the corresponding points of their boundaries) is in fact the 3-sphere.

[ 2 ] One can consider other gluings of the solid horned sphere to a copy of itself, arising from different homeomorphisms of the boundary sphere to itself. This has also been shown to be the 3-sphere. The solid Alexander horned sphere is an example of a crumpled cube ; i.e., a closed complementary domain of the embedding of a 2-sphere into the 3-sphere.

Generalizations [ edit ] One can generalize Alexander's construction to generate other horned spheres by increasing the number of horns at each stage of Alexander's construction or considering the analogous construction in higher dimensions.

Other substantially different constructions exist for constructing such "wild" spheres. Another  example, also found by Alexander, is Antoine's horned sphere , which is based on Antoine's necklace , a pathological embedding of the Cantor set into the 3-sphere.

See also [ edit ] Cantor tree surface Wild knot Wild arc , specifically the Fox–Artin arc References [ edit ] ^ Hocking & Young 1988 , pp. 175–176.

Spivak 1999 , p. 55 ^ Bing, R. H. (1952), "A homeomorphism between the 3-sphere and the sum of two solid horned spheres", Annals of Mathematics , Second Series, 56 (2): 354– 362, doi : 10.2307/1969804 , ISSN 0003-486X , JSTOR 1969804 , MR 0049549 Citations [ edit ] Alexander, J. W.

(1924), "An Example of a Simply Connected Surface Bounding a Region which is not Simply Connected", Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 10 (1), National Academy of Sciences: 8– 10, Bibcode : 1924PNAS...10....8A , doi : 10.1073/pnas.10.1.8 , ISSN 0027-8424 , JSTOR 84202 , PMC 1085500 , PMID 16576780 Fuchs, Dmitry ; Tabachnikov, Serge (2007), Mathematical Omnibus. 30 Lectures on Classical Mathematics , Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, doi : 10.1090/mbk/046 , ISBN 978-0-8218-4316-1 , MR 2350979 Hatcher, Allen , Algebraic Topology, http://pi.math.cornell.edu/~hatcher/AT/ATpage.html Hocking, John Gilbert; Young, Gail Sellers (1988) [1961].

Topology . Dover.

ISBN 0-486-65676-4 .

Spivak, Michael (1999).

A comprehensive introduction to differential geometry (Volume 1) . Publish or Perish.

ISBN 0-914098-70-5 .

External links [ edit ] Alexander horned sphere at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Weisstein, Eric W.

"Alexander's Horned Sphere" .

MathWorld .

Zbigniew Fiedorowicz. Math 655 – Introduction to Topology.

[1] Archived 2005-08-25 at the Wayback Machine – Lecture notes Construction of the Alexander sphere rotating animation PC OpenGL demo rendering and expanding the cusp v t e Fractals Characteristics Fractal dimensions Assouad Box-counting Higuchi Correlation Hausdorff Packing Topological Recursion Self-similarity Iterated function system Barnsley fern Cantor set Koch snowflake Menger sponge Sierpiński carpet Sierpiński triangle Apollonian gasket Fibonacci word Space-filling curve Blancmange curve De Rham curve Minkowski Dragon curve Hilbert curve Koch curve Lévy C curve Moore curve Peano curve Sierpiński curve Z-order curve String T-square n-flake Vicsek fractal Gosper curve Pythagoras tree Weierstrass function Strange attractor Multifractal system L-system Fractal canopy Space-filling curve H tree Escape-time fractals Burning Ship fractal Julia set Filled Newton fractal Douady rabbit Lyapunov fractal Mandelbrot set Misiurewicz point Multibrot set Newton fractal Tricorn Mandelbox Mandelbulb Rendering techniques Buddhabrot Orbit trap Pickover stalk Random fractals Brownian motion Brownian tree Brownian motor Fractal landscape Lévy flight Percolation theory Self-avoiding walk People Michael Barnsley Georg Cantor Bill Gosper Felix Hausdorff Desmond Paul Henry Gaston Julia Niels Fabian Helge von Koch Paul Lévy Aleksandr Lyapunov Benoit Mandelbrot Hamid Naderi Yeganeh Lewis Fry Richardson Wacław Sierpiński Other Coastline paradox Fractal art List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension The Fractal Geometry of Nature (1982 book) The Beauty of Fractals (1986 book) Chaos: Making a New Science (1987 book) Kaleidoscope Chaos theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_horned_sphere&oldid=1240225399 " Categories : Geometric topology Fractals Eponyms in geometry 1924 introductions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 14 August 2024, at 06:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander horned sphere 11 languages Add topic

