Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Quantitative description 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Chromaticity 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specification of color hue and saturation For the album by Tony MacAlpine, see Chromaticity (album) .

The CIE 1931 xy chromaticity space, also showing the chromaticities of black-body light sources of various temperatures, and lines of constant correlated color temperature sRGB gamut plotted in CIE xyY color space.

x and y are the chromaticity axes , the Y axis represents (linear) luminance .

Chromaticity is an objective specification of the quality of a color regardless of its luminance . Chromaticity consists of two independent parameters , often specified as hue ( h ) and colorfulness ( s ), where the latter is alternatively called saturation , chroma , intensity , [ 1 ] or excitation purity .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This number of parameters follows from trichromacy of vision of most humans, which is assumed by most models in color science .

Quantitative description [ edit ] In color science, the white point of an illuminant or of a display is a neutral reference characterized by a chromaticity; all other chromaticities may be defined in relation to this reference using polar coordinates . The hue is the angular component, and the purity is the radial component, normalized [ clarification needed ] by the maximum radius for that hue.

Purity is roughly equivalent to the term saturation in the HSV color model . The property hue is as used in general color theory and in specific color models such as HSL and HSV color spaces, though it is more perceptually uniform in color models such as Munsell , CIELAB or CIECAM02 .

Some color spaces separate the three dimensions of color into one luminance dimension and a pair of chromaticity dimensions. For example, the white point of an sRGB display is an x , y chromaticity of (0.3127, 0.3290), where x and y coordinates are used in the xyY space.

( u′ , v′ ) , the chromaticity in CIELUV , is a fairly perceptually uniform presentation of the chromaticity as (another than in CIE 1931) planar Euclidean shape. This presentation is a projective transformation of the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram above.

These pairs determine a chromaticity as affine coordinates on a triangle in a 2D-space , which contains all possible chromaticities. These x and y are used because of simplicity of expression in CIE 1931 (see below) and have no inherent advantage. Other coordinate systems on the same X-Y-Z triangle, or other color triangles , can be used.

On the other hand, some color spaces such as RGB and XYZ do not separate out chromaticity, but chromaticity is defined by a mapping that normalizes out intensity , and its coordinates, such as r and g or x and y , can be calculated through the division operation, such as x = ⁠ X / X + Y + Z ⁠ , and so on.

The xyY space is a cross between the CIE XYZ and its normalized chromaticity coordinates xyz, such that the luminance Y is preserved and augmented with just the required two chromaticity dimensions.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chromatic diagrams .

CIE xyY (chromaticity diagram) Chrominance rg chromaticity Impossible color Color index in astronomy References [ edit ] ^ In modern terminology the word intensity may refer to lightness, not colorfulness.

^ Emil Wolf (1961).

Progress in Optics . North Holland Pub. Co.

^ Leslie D. Stroebel, Richard D. Zakia (1993).

The Focal Encyclopedia of Photography . Focal Press. p.

124 .

ISBN 978-0-240-51417-8 .

chromaticity hue saturation chroma colorfulness purity.

^ Charles A. Poynton (2003).

Digital Video and HDTV: Algorithms and Interfaces . Morgan Kaufmann.

ISBN 978-1-55860-792-7 .

External links [ edit ] Stanford University CS 178 interactive Flash demo explaining chromaticity diagrams.

JOES application software for calculation and plotting of CIE 1931 and 1976 from spectra [ 1 ] v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index ^ Ćirić, Aleksandar; Stojadinović, Stevan; Sekulić, Milica; Dramićanin, Miroslav D. (January 2019). "JOES: An application software for Judd-Ofelt analysis from Eu 3+ emission spectra".

Journal of Luminescence .

205 : 351– 356.

Bibcode : 2019JLum..205..351C .

doi : 10.1016/j.jlumin.2018.09.048 .

S2CID 105828989 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chromaticity&oldid=1302000532 " Categories : Color Photometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 21:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chromaticity 12 languages Add topic

