Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Structure and function 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Peri-urbanisation 8 languages العربية Беларуская Español Français Македонски 日本語 Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of urban growth Mountain valleys of industrialised countries (e.g.

Inn valley ) are often periurbanised.

The periurbanised Swiss Limmat valley .

Hospital in a peri-urban area in Gijón .

Peri-urbanisation relates to the processes of scattered and dispersive urban growth that create hybrid landscapes of fragmented and mixed urban and rural characteristics. Such areas may be referred to as the rural–urban fringe , the outskirts or the urban hinterland .

Etymology [ edit ] The expression originates from the French word périurbanisation ("peri-urban" meaning "around urban"), which is used by the INSEE [ 1 ] (the French statistics agency) to describe spaces—between the city and the countryside—that are shaped by the fragmented urbanisation of former rural areas in the urban fringe, both in a qualitative (e.g. diffusion of urban lifestyle) and in a quantitative (e.g. new residential zones) sense. It is frequently seen as a result of post-modernity . In science, the term was used initially in France and Switzerland .

Structure and function [ edit ] Peri-urban areas (also called urban space , outskirts or the hinterland ) are defined by the structure resulting from the process of peri-urbanisation. It can be described as the landscape interface or ecotone between town and countryside, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] or also as the rural—urban transition zone where urban and rural uses and functions mix and often clash.

[ 4 ] It can thus be viewed as a new landscape type in its own right, one forged from an interaction of urban and rural land use .

Its definition shifts depending on the global location, but typically in Europe where suburban areas are intensively managed to prevent urban sprawl and protect agricultural land, the urban fringe will be characterised by certain land uses which have either purposely moved from the urban area or require much larger tracts of land. As examples: Roads, especially motorways and bypasses Waste transfer stations, recycling facilities and landfill sites Park and ride sites Airports Large hospitals Power, water and sewerage facilities Factories Large out-of-town shopping facilities, e.g. large supermarkets High-density residential buildings Despite these urban uses, the fringe remains largely open with the majority of the land for agricultural, woodland or other rural uses. The quality of living of the countryside around urban areas tends to be low with severance between areas of open land and poorly maintained woodlands and hedgerows with the scattered urban facilities.

"Peri-urbanisation" is also sometimes used to fill the gap between suburbanisation and exurbanisation , and thus relates moreover to the movement of people in space. In this case, it implies the expansion of functional rural-urban linkages such as by commuting .

In the United States, urban areas are defined as contiguous territory having a density of at least 1,000 persons per square mile, though in some areas the density may be as low as 500 per square mile. Urban areas also include outlying territory of less density if it is connected to the core of the contiguous area by road and within 2.5 road miles of that core, or within 5 road miles but separated by water or other undevelopable territory. Territory with population density below 1,000 people per square mile is included in the urban fringe if it eliminates an enclave or closes an indentation in the boundary of the urbanized area.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Desakota European Association of Periurban Parks (FEDENATUR) Peri Urban Regions Platform Europe Peri-urban agriculture Urban sprawl Urban village Urban vitality References [ edit ] ^ "Définition - Couronne | Insee" .

www.insee.fr .

^ Verstoep, Timon (2022).

"ECOTONE URBANISM" .

Wageningen University Landscape Architecture Group .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2007-03-11 . Retrieved 2011-07-23 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Griffiths, Michael B.; Chapman, Malcolm; Christiansen, Flemming (2010). "Chinese consumers: The Romantic reappraisal".

Ethnography .

11 (3): 331– 357.

doi : 10.1177/1466138110370412 .

S2CID 144152261 .

^ Department of Commerce - Census Bureau (August 24, 2011).

"Urban Area Criteria for the 2010 Census; Notice" (PDF) .

Federal Register . National Archives and Records Administration . Retrieved August 3, 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Astrade, Laurent; Lutoff, Céline; Nedjai, Rachid; Philippe, Céline; Loison, Delphine; Bottollier-Depois, Sandrine (2007).

"Periurbanisation and natural hazards" .

Revue de géographie alpine .

95 (2): 19– 28.

doi : 10.4000/rga.132 .

Zasada, Ingo; Fertner, Christian; Piorr, Annette; Nielsen, Thomas Sick (2011).

"Peri-urbanisation and multifunctional adaptation of agriculture around Copenhagen" (PDF) .

Danish Journal of Geography .

111 (1): 59– 72.

Bibcode : 2011GeTid.111...59Z .

doi : 10.1080/00167223.2011.10669522 .

S2CID 53548764 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-19.

Anne Lambert 2011: The (mis)measurement of periurbanization. In: Metropolitics, 11 May 2011. URL: http://www.metropolitiques.eu Authority control databases : National France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peri-urbanisation&oldid=1304362717 " Categories : Urbanization Urban geography Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from December 2018 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 15:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peri-urbanisation 8 languages Add topic

