Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 In exile 3 Later life 4 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 4.1 Exegetical 4.2 Theological 4.3 Historical works and hymns 5 Reputation and veneration Toggle Reputation and veneration subsection 5.1 Iconography 5.2 Dedications 6 Saint Hilary of Aquileia 7 See also 8 Bibliography 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Hilary of Poitiers 54 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Malti مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Picard Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Poitiers (c. 310 – c. 367) Saint Hilary of Poitiers The Ordination of Saint Hilary , from a 14th-century manuscript " Malleus Arianorum " and the " Athanasius of the West"; Bishop, Confessor and Doctor of the Church Born c.

310 Pictavium , Gallia Aquitania , Roman Empire Died c.

367 (aged c.

56–57 ) Pictavium, Septem Provinciae , Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Anglican Communion Lutheran Church Oriental Orthodoxy Canonized Pre-Congregation Feast 13 January 14 January ( Byzantine Christianity ; some local calendars and pre-1970 General Roman Calendar ) Attributes episcopal vestments, a mitre and crozier, and usually white and often long beard [ 1 ] Influences Origen , Athanasius Hilary of Poitiers ( Latin : Hilarius Pictaviensis ; c.

310 – c.

367 ) [ 2 ] was Bishop of Poitiers and a Doctor of the Church . He was sometimes referred to as the "Hammer of the Arians " ( Malleus Arianorum ) and the " Athanasius of the West".

[ 3 ] His name comes from the Latin word for happy or cheerful. In addition to his important work as bishop, Hilary was married and the father of Abra of Poitiers , a nun and saint who became known for her charity.

Early life [ edit ] Hilary was born at Poitiers either at the end of the 3rd or beginning of the 4th century AD.

[ 4 ] His parents were pagans of distinction. He received a good education, [ 5 ] which included a high level of Greek.

[ 6 ] He studied, later on, the Old and New Testament writings, with the result that he abandoned his Neoplatonism for Christianity , and with his wife and his daughter, traditionally known as Saint Abra of Poitiers , was baptized and received into the Church .

[ 3 ] Arianism was becoming popular among Christians in this era and this theological position was supported by Constantine the Great . There were a series of violent battles between Trinitarians and Arians.

[ citation needed ] In 353, the Trinitarian Christians of Arles elected Hilary as bishop as the existing bishop, Saturninus of Arles , was an Arian.

[ 7 ] At the Council of Arles , the legates of Pope Liberius refused to condemn Arianism and considered formally opposing Athanasius of Alexandria , who was a strong advocate of Trinitarianism against Arianism. Hilary still managed to secure the local excommunication , by those of the Gallican hierarchy who were his allies, of Bishop Saturninus and two of his prominent supporters, Bishops Ursacius of Singidunum and Valens of Mursa .

[ 3 ] About the same time, Hilary wrote to Emperor Constantius II a remonstrance against the persecutions by which the Arians had sought to crush their opponents ( Ad Constantium Augustum liber primus , of which the most probable date is 355).

[ 3 ] Other historians refer to this first book to Constantius as the "Book Against Valens", of which only fragments are extant.

[ 8 ] His efforts did not succeed at first, for at the synod of Biterrae ( Béziers ), summoned by the emperor in 356 with the professed purpose of settling the longstanding dispute, an imperial rescript banished the new bishop, along with Rhodanus of Toulouse, to Phrygia , a stronghold of Arianism.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Hilary spent nearly four years in exile, although the reasons for this banishment remain obscure. The traditional explanation is that Hilary was exiled for refusing to subscribe to the condemnation of Athanasius and the Nicene faith. More recently several scholars have suggested that political opposition to Constantius and support of the usurper Claudius Silvanus may have led to Hilary's exile.

[ 4 ] In exile [ edit ] While in Phrygia , however, he continued to govern his diocese, as well as writing two of the most important of his contributions to dogmatic and polemical theology: the De synodis or De fide Orientalium , an epistle addressed in 358 to the Semi-Arian bishops in Gaul , Germania and Britain , analyzing the views of the Eastern bishops on the Nicene controversy.

[ 11 ] In reviewing the professions of faith of the Oriental bishops in the Councils of Ancyra , Antioch , and Sirmium , he sought to show that sometimes the difference between certain doctrines and orthodox beliefs was rather in the words than in the ideas, which led to his counseling the bishops of the West to be more reserved in their condemnation.

[ 12 ] The De trinitate libri XII , composed in 359 and 360, was the first successful expression in Latin of that Council's theological subtleties originally elaborated in Greek. Although some members of Hilary's own party thought the first had shown too great a forbearance towards the Arians, Hilary replied to their criticisms in the Apologetica ad reprehensores libri de synodis responsa .

[ 11 ] In his classic introduction to the works of Hilary, Watson summarizes Hilary's points: "They were the forerunners of Antichrist ... They bear themselves not as bishops of Christ but as priests of Antichrist. This is not random abuse, but sober recognition of the fact, stated by St. John, that there are many Antichrists. For these men assume the cloak of piety, and pretend to preach the Gospel, with the one object of inducing others to deny Christ. It was the misery and folly of the day that men endeavoured to promote the cause of God by human means and the favour of the world. Hilary asks bishops, who believe in their office, whether the Apostles had secular support when by their preaching they converted the greater part of mankind ..." "The Church seeks for secular support, and in so doing insults Christ by the implication that His support is insufficient. She in her turn holds out the threat of exile and prison. It was her endurance of these that drew men to her; now she imposes her faith by violence. She craves for favours at the hand of her communicants; once it was her consecration that she braved the threatenings of persecutors. Bishops in exile spread the Faith; now it is she that exiles bishops. She boasts that the world loves her; the world's hatred was the evidence that she was Christ's ... The time of Antichrist, disguised as an angel of light, has come.  The true Christ is hidden from almost every mind and heart. Antichrist is now obscuring the truth that he may assert falsehood hereafter." [ 13 ] Constantius II coin Hilary also attended several synods during his time in exile, including the council at Seleucia (359) which saw the triumph of the homoion party and the forbidding of all discussion of the divine substance.

[ 11 ] In 360, Hilary tried unsuccessfully to secure a personal audience with Constantius , as well as to address the council which met at Constantinople in 360. When this council ratified the decisions of Ariminum and Seleucia, Hilary responded with the bitter In Constantium , which attacked the Emperor Constantius as Antichrist and persecutor of orthodox Christians.

[ 4 ] Hilary's urgent and repeated requests for public debates with his opponents, especially with Ursacius and Valens, proved at last so inconvenient that he was sent back to his diocese, which he appears to have reached about 361, within a very short time of the accession of Emperor Julian .

[ 11 ] Later life [ edit ] On returning to his diocese in 361, Hilary spent most of the first two or three years trying to persuade the local clergy that the homoion confession was merely a cover for traditional Arian subordinationism. Thus, a number of synods in Gaul condemned the creed promulgated at the Council of Ariminum (359).

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In about 360 or 361, with Hilary's encouragement, Martin , the future bishop of Tours , founded a monastery at Ligugé in his diocese.

In 364, Hilary extended his efforts once more beyond Gaul. He impeached Auxentius , bishop of Milan , a man high in the imperial favour, as heterodox. Emperor Valentinian I accordingly summoned Hilary to Milan to there maintain his charges. However, the supposed heretic gave satisfactory answers to all the questions proposed. Hilary denounced Auxentius as a hypocrite as he had been ignominiously expelled from Milan. Upon returning home, Hilary in 365, published the Contra Arianos vel Auxentium Mediolanensem liber, describing his unsuccessful efforts against Auxentius. He also, perhaps at a somewhat earlier date, published the Contra Constantium Augustum liber , accusing the deceased emperor as having been the Antichrist , a rebel against God , "a tyrant whose sole object had been to make a gift to the devil of that world for which Christ had suffered." [ 11 ] According to Jerome , Hilary died in Poitiers in 367.

[ 16 ] Writings [ edit ] Opera omnia (1523) While Hilary closely followed the two great Alexandrians, Origen and Athanasius , in exegesis and Christology respectively, his work shows many traces of vigorous independent thought.

[ 11 ] Exegetical [ edit ] Among Hilary's earliest writings, completed some time before his exile in 356, is his Commentarius in Evangelium Matthaei , an allegorical exegesis of the first Gospel . This is the first Latin commentary on Matthew to have survived in its entirety. Hilary's commentary was strongly influenced by Tertullian and Cyprian, and made use of several classical writers, including Cicero, Quintilian, Pliny and the Roman historians.

[ 15 ] Hilary's expositions of the Psalms , Tractatus super Psalmos , largely follow Origen , and were composed some time after Hilary returned from exile in 360.

[ 11 ] Since Jerome found the work incomplete, [ 17 ] no one knows whether Hilary originally commented on the whole Psalter. Now extant are the commentaries on Psalms 1, 2, 9, 13, 14, 51–69, 91, and 118–150.

[ 15 ] The third surviving exegetical writing by Hilary is the Tractatus mysteriorum , preserved in a single manuscript first published in 1887.

[ 15 ] Because Augustine cites part of the commentary on Romans as by "Sanctus Hilarius" it has been ascribed by various critics at different times to almost every known Hilary.

Theological [ edit ] Hilary's major theological work was the twelve books now known as De Trinitate . This was composed largely during his exile, though perhaps not completed until his return to Gaul in 360.

[ 18 ] Another important work is De synodis , written early in 359 in preparation for the councils of Ariminium and Seleucia.

[ 18 ] Historical works and hymns [ edit ] Various writings comprise Hilary's historical works. These include the Liber II ad Constantium imperatorem , the Liber in Constantium inperatorem , Contra Arianos vel Auxentium Mediolanensem liber , and the various documents relating to the Arian controversy in Fragmenta historica .

[ 18 ] Some consider Hilary as the first Latin Christian hymn writer, because Jerome said Hilary produced a liber hymnorum .

[ 17 ] Three hymns are attributed to him, though none are indisputable.

Reputation and veneration [ edit ] Saint Hilaire, depicted by Pierre-Floréal Crémière (1846) Hilary is the pre-eminent Latin writer of the 4th century (before Ambrose ).

Augustine of Hippo called him "the illustrious doctor of the churches", and his works continued to be highly influential in later centuries.

Venantius Fortunatus wrote a vita of Hilary by 550, but few now consider it reliable. More trustworthy are the notices in Saint Jerome ( De vir. illus.

100), Sulpicius Severus ( Chron.

ii. 39–45) and in Hilary's own writings.

[ 11 ] Pope Pius IX formally recognized him as a Doctor of the Church in 1851.

In the Roman calendar of saints, Hilary's feast day is on 13 January, 14 January in the pre-1970 form of the calendar. The spring terms of the English and Irish law courts and Oxford and Dublin universities are called the Hilary term since they begin on approximately this date.

[ 19 ] Some consider Saint Hilary of Poitiers the patron saint of lawyers .

[ 20 ] Hilary is remembered in the Anglican Communion with a lesser festival on 13 January .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Iconography [ edit ] From his writing St. Hilary's symbol came to be three books and a quill pen.

[ 24 ] Dedications [ edit ] Sulpicius Severus ' Vita Sancti Martini led to a cult of Saint Hilary as well as of St. Martin of Tours which spread early to western Britain . The villages of St Hilary in Cornwall and Glamorgan and that of Llanilar in Ceredigion bear his name.

In France most dedications to Saint Hilary are styled "Saint-Hilaire" and lie west (and north) of the Massif Central ; the cult in this region eventually extended to Canada .

In northwest Italy the church of Sant'Ilario at Casale Monferrato was dedicated to St. Hilary as early as 380.

In southern Spain the feast of San Hilario is celebrated in the village of Comares with a Mass, a procession and local Verdiales dances.

In Wales the village St Hilary has a Church allegedly dedicated to St Hilary, from which the village is named.

Saint Hilary of Aquileia [ edit ] Another saint with a similar name was Hilary of Aquileia , also known as Elaro, Ellaro, Hilarius, or Ilario, lived in the third century. He was an active proselytizer and became a Christian bishop of Aquileia , Italy . This was the time of the Roman Emperor Numerian who was anti-Christian. Hilary's refusal to renounce his belief in Christianity made him a target for persecution. He was captured and subjected to severe torture and was eventually martyred around the year 284.

[ 25 ] In 2025 a relic of this saint was discovered in a school in Dublin .

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] Paulinus of Nola Tiberianus Trochaic septenarius Bibliography [ edit ] Carl Beckwith, Hilary of Poitiers on the Trinity: From De Fide to De Trinitate (New York and Oxford, 2009).

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Hilarius, St ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

458– 459.

J. Doignon, Hilaire de Poitiers avant l'exil. Recherches sur la naissance, l'enseignementet l'épreuve d'une foi épiscopale en Gaule au milieu du IVé siècle , EAA, Paris 1971.

Hunter, David G. (2010). "Fourth-century Latin writers". In Young, Frances; Ayres, Lewis; Young, Andrew (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Early Christian Literature .

Rondeau, Marie Josèphe (1962). "Remarques sur l'anthropologie de saint Hilaire".

Studia Patristica . 6 (Papers presented to the Third International Conference on Patristic Studies held at Christ Church, Oxford, 1959, Part IV Theologica, Augustiniana, ed. F. L. Cross). Berlin: Akademie-Verlag: 197– 210.

P.T. Wild, The divinization of man according to Saint Hilary of Poitiers , Mundelein, Illinois 1955.

Weedman, Mark (2007).

The Trinitarian Theology of Hilary of Poitiers . Leiden-Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004162242 .

Alberto Gibilaro, Il Liber hymnorum di Ilario di Poitiers. Introduzione, edizione, traduzione e commento , Milano, Vita e Pensiero, 2023, ISBN 978-88-343-5533-6 References [ edit ] ^ Stracke, Richard (20 October 2015).

"Saint Hilary: The Iconography" .

Christian Iconography .

^ General Audience Libreria Editrice Vaticana ^ a b c d Chisholm 1911 , p. 458.

^ a b c Hunter 2010 , p. 302.

^ Bettenson, Henry.

The Later Christian Fathers OUP (1970), p.4 ^ Watson E.W. "Introduction to the Life and writings of St Hilary of Poitiers" in Library of Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers - Series II N° IX Eerdmans reprint 1983, p. ii ^ Hunter (2010 , p. 302) names the date as 350.

^ "Early Christian Greek and Latin Literature, A Literary History" O'Connell, Mathew, Peabody Mass, 2002, p.252-253 ^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 458–459.

^ Clavis Patrum Latinorun, E. Dekkers, Claudio Moreschin, Enrico Norello, Vienna, 1995 ^ a b c d e f g h Chisholm 1911 , p. 459.

^ Clugnet, Léon. "St. Hilary of Poitiers." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 14 Aug. 2014 ^ E. W. Watson, Introduction to Hilary of Poitiers, in NPNF, 2d series, vol. 9, pp. lii, liii.

^ Sulpicius Severus, Chronicum 2.45 ^ a b c d Hunter 2010 , p. 303.

^ Jerome, Vir Ill 100; Hunter 2010 , p. 203 ^ a b Vir Ill 100 ^ a b c Hunter 2010 , p. 304.

^ Cross, F.L.; Livingstone, E.A., eds. (1974). "Hilary of Poitiers, St.".

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . OUP.

^ Farmer, David Hugh (1997).

The Oxford dictionary of saints (4. ed.). Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-19-280058-2 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ "For All the Saints / For All the Saints - A Resource for the Commemorations of the Calendar / Worship Resources/ Karakia/ ANZPB-HKMOA / Resources / Home - Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia" .

www.anglican.org.nz . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ "Hilary of Poitiers, Bishop, 367" .

The Episcopal Church . Retrieved 19 July 2022 .

^ " "Saint Hilary of Poitiers", St. Hilary's Episcopal Church; Hisperia, California" . Archived from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 4 June 2013 .

^ "Saint Hilary of Aquileia" .

saintforaminute . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

^ "Fifth year students find relic of saint in Dublin school" . RTE. 22 May 2025 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Hilary of Poitiers at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by Saint Hilary at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Hilary of Poitiers at the Internet Archive Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series II, Vol. IX St Hilary of Poitiers: introduction and texts Opera Omnia See also patristique.org (in French) BENEDICT XVI: Saint Hilary of Poitiers General Audience Wednesday, 10 October 2007 The works of Hilary in chronological order.

Life of SAINT HILARY OF POITIERS, in BTM.

Saint Hilary of Poitiers at the Christian Iconography web site Here Followeth the Life of S. Hilary from Caxton's translation of the Golden Legend v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category Portals : Saints Biography Christianity France Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hilary_of_Poitiers&oldid=1303619533 " Categories : 310 births 367 deaths 4th-century apocalypticists 4th-century bishops in Gaul 4th-century Christian saints 4th-century Christian theologians 4th-century writers in Latin Anglican saints Bishops of Poitiers Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Gallo-Roman saints Hymnographers Married Roman Catholic bishops Opponents of Arianism People from Poitiers Roman Catholic writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2019 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1: long volume value Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hilary of Poitiers 54 languages Add topic

