Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 References Toggle the table of contents Critical medical anthropology 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Medical and psychological anthropology Basic concepts Health Culture-bound syndrome Double bind Case studies Navajo medicine Related articles Nutritional anthropology Psychological anthropology Cognitive anthropology Transpersonal anthropology Ethnomedicine Clinical ethnography Critical medical anthropology Cross-cultural psychiatry Person-centered ethnography Society for Medical Anthropology National character studies Syndemic Major theorists Gregory Bateson Maurice Bloch Charles L. Briggs Veena Das George Devereux Cora Du Bois Paul Farmer Michael M. J. Fischer Arthur Kleinman Charles Laughlin E. Thomas Lawson Robert I. Levy Ralph Linton Tanya Luhrmann Marvin Opler Michelle Rosaldo Nancy Scheper-Hughes Richard Shweder Merrill Singer Dan Sperber Melford Spiro Beatrice Whiting John Whiting Journals Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry Ethos Medical Anthropology Quarterly Transcultural Psychiatry Journal of Cognition and Culture Anthropology of Consciousness Social and cultural anthropology v t e Critical medical anthropology ( CMA ) is a branch of medical anthropology that blends critical theory and ground-level ethnographic approaches in the consideration of the political economy of health, and the effect of social inequality on people's health. It puts emphasis on the structure of social relationships, rather than purely biomedical factors in analyzing health and accounting for its determinants.

CMA starts with the idea that human health is a biosocial and political ecological product. Consequently, CMA is critical of the tendency to naturalize the process of health and illness in the health and social sciences. CMA dates to the 1980s, but has deeper roots in critical theory concerning the social determinants of health. CMA adds an anthropological dimension to traditional critical approaches, thereby avoiding a top-down perspective. In other words, CMA recognizes that there is interaction between the macro-level of social structure, the meso-level of social organization and agentive action, and the micro-level of individual experience and health.

During the early years of medical anthropology's formation, explanations within the discipline tended to be narrowly focused on explaining health-related beliefs and behaviors at the local level in terms of specific ecological conditions, cultural configurations, or psychological factors. While providing needed insight about the nature and function of traditional and folk medical models, the initial perspectives in medical anthropology tended to ignore the wider causes and determinants of human decision making and behavior. Explanations that are limited to accounting for health-related issues in terms of the influence of human personalities, culturally constituted motivations and understandings, or even local ecological relationships, emergent critical medical anthropologists began to argue, are inadequate because they tend not to include examination of the structures of social relationship that unite (commonly in an unequal fashion) and influence far-flung individuals, communities, and even whole nations. A critical understanding, by contrast, involves paying close attention to what has been called the “vertical links” that connect the social group of interest to the larger regional, national, and global human society and to the configuration of social relationships that contribute to the patterning of human behavior, belief, attitude, and emotion.

Consequently, what came to be called critical medical anthropology focused attention on understanding the origins of dominant cultural constructions in health, including which social class, gender, or ethnic group's interests particular health concepts express and under what set of historic conditions they arise. Further, CMA emphasizes structures of power and inequality in health care systems and the contributions of health ideas and practices in reinforcing inequalities in the wider society. Moreover, CMA addresses the social origins of illness, such as the way in which poverty, discrimination, industrial pollution of the environment, social violence, and fear of violence contribute to poor health. Critical medical anthropologists argue that experience and “agency,” that is, individual and group decision-making and action, are constructed and reconstructed in the action arena between socially constituted categories of meaning and the political-economic forces that shape the context [and texture] of daily life. In other words, people develop their own individual and collective understandings and responses to illness and to other threats to their well-being, but they do so in a world that is not of their own making, a world in which inequality of access to health care, the media, productive resources (e.g., land, potable water, clean air), and valued social statuses play a significant role in their daily options.

Additionally, while recognizing the fundamental importance of physical (including biological) reality in health, such as the nature of particular pathogens or the release of toxins into the environment, CMA emphasizes the fact that it is not merely the idea of “nature”—the way external reality is conceived and related to by humans—but also the very physical shape of nature, including human biology, that has been deeply influenced by an evolutionary history of social inequality, overt and covert social conflict, and the operation of both physical power and the power to shape dominant ideas and conceptions in society and internationally through processes of globalization, control of production and reproduction, and control of labor.

References [ edit ] DRAFT ENTRY ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PUBLIC HEALTH (in press) Entry: Anthropology in Public Health Author: Kathleen M. MacQueen at Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Critical Studies in Medicine, Science and the Body (The research group that comprises the UCB side of Joint UCB/UCSF Ph.D. in Medical Anthropology) at UC Berkeley Merrill Singer and Hans Baer.  Critical Medical Anthropology.  Amityville, New York: Baywood Publishing Co., 1995.

Hans Baer, Merrill Singer and Ida Susser.  Medical Anthropology and the World System. Westport, CT: Merrill Singer, Ed.  The Political Economy of AIDS.  Amityville, New York: Baywood Publishing Co., 1998.

Arachu Castro and Merrill Singer, Eds.  Unhealthy Health Policy: A Critical Anthropological Examination. Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 2004.

Merrill Singer. The Face of Social Suffering: Life History of a Street Drug Addict.  Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 2006.

Merrill Singer and Hans Baer, Eds.  Killer Commodities: Public Health and the Corporate Production of Harm. Malden, MA: AltaMira/Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2008.

Merrill Singer.  Drugging the Poor: Legal and Illegal Drug Industries and the Structuring of Social Inequality. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 2008.

Merrill Singer.  Introduction to Syndemics: A Critical Systems Approach to Public and Community Health.  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2009.

Hans Baer and Merrill Singer.  Global Warming and the Political Ecology of Health: Emerging Crises and Systemic Solutions.  Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2009.

Merrill Singer and G. Derrick Hodge, Eds.  The War Machine and Global Health. Malden, MA: AltaMira/Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 2010.

Merrill Singer.  The Anthropology of Infectious Disease.  Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2014.

v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7c99c6d5f6‐2zl65
Cached time: 20250719182727
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: []
CPU time usage: 0.182 seconds
Real time usage: 0.221 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 199/1000000
Revision size: 6866/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 28984/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 6/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 17640/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.130/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1148001/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  173.203      1 -total
 79.81%  138.227      1 Template:Medical_anthropology
 77.70%  134.586      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.13%   34.872      1 Template:Critical_theory
 19.45%   33.688      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2363629:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250719182727 and revision id 1209122643. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_medical_anthropology&oldid=1209122643 " Categories : Anthropology Critical theory This page was last edited on 20 February 2024, at 12:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical medical anthropology 1 language Add topic

