Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 1.1 Place in the conservative coalition 1.1.1 Relationship with libertarianism 2 Politicians and campaigns Toggle Politicians and campaigns subsection 2.1 Support for Donald Trump 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Barstool conservatism Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political tendency in the United States This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Barstool conservatism is a name for a variety of political conservatism in the United States , associated with Dave Portnoy , founder and CEO of the Barstool Sports digital media empire, [ 1 ] and his audience of "stoolies", made up primarily of younger men.

[ 2 ] The term was coined by journalist Matthew Walther.

[ 3 ] In general, it supports Donald Trump , and combines an opposition to COVID-19 lockdowns and bans on abortion , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] with an "unwillingness to accept liberal social norms", [ 1 ] such as " gender pronoun usage and diversity, equity and inclusion practices", [ 2 ] and embraces "sexual libertinism , anti-authoritarianism , ... and lots of f-bombs ".

[ 5 ] As of November 2022, some alleged barstool conservatism to be "growing in prominence", [ 2 ] and even "largely" defining the Republican Party coalition; [ 1 ] and by 2024 was credited with helping Donald Trump win the election.

[ 6 ] Others complained it lacked "a clear, animating political vision", [ 5 ] and warned its embrace of recreational drugs and gambling would inevitably lead to a backlash when their social effects were felt.

[ 6 ] Usage [ edit ] One early use of the phrase came from journalist Matthew Walther who, shortly after Trump's 2017 inauguration , described the group of voters that Trump appealed to and who would influence the Republican Party after he was gone, as "barstool conservatives". He described them as having a streak at odds with Republican Christian "traditional social conservatives " —they did "not oppose or even care about abortion or same-sex marriage , much less stem-cell research "; [ 7 ] but instead accepted "with varying degrees of enthusiasm ....

pornography , homosexuality, drug use, legalized gambling , and whatever GamerGate was about"; but do side with conservatives in having "vague concerns about political correctness and ' SJWs ', opposition to the popularization of so-called critical race theory , sentimentality about the American flag and the military, the rights of male undergraduates to engage in fornication while intoxicated without fear of the Title IX mafia." [ 7 ] Reporter Robert Silverman also used the term "Barstool Republicans".

[ 8 ] Writing in November 2022, Benjamin Schnurr, describes Barstool, or at least Dave Portnoy's ideas, as "a mixture of politically incorrect and, at times, misogynistic behavior" with "more liberal stances on issues such as women's and LGBTQ rights".

[ 2 ] Some other descriptions of barstool conservatism are: "horny-bro aesthetic that embraces sports, sex and generally letting 'you do you' (provided you avoid making him do pretty much anything)" (Jane Coaston); [ 9 ] the meeting of "frat culture and cultural conservatism" (Eumenes of Cardia).

[ 10 ] Place in the conservative coalition [ edit ] The traditional American conservative/Republican Party coalition was said to be analogous to a "stool", needing " three legs ", namely, "social conservatives" seeking to "uphold traditional values and hierarchies", particularly religious ones like banning abortion (i.e.

"theocons" ); "libertarians" promoting "small government and free market capitalism", particularly low taxes; "foreign policy hawks" advocating for "an active and at times aggressive foreign policy approach", particularly containment of communism (i.e.

"neocons" ).

The integration of these three currents was known as Fusionism . Analogues of "barstool conservatives" were not part of this coalition but gained ground by the 2020s. With the end of the Cold War , the last leg of foreign policy "declined significantly", [ 2 ] and by the 2020s religious belief in America had declined, [ 10 ] suggesting a diminished importance for the first leg, and low tax, small-government conservatism also reportedly lost support.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the words of Derek Robertson of Politico , when Trump "dismantled that old fusion" of free-market economic enthusiasm and "country-club traditionalism, Barstool was ready." [ 1 ] In this new era, Trump was able "to mobilize a varied group of constituencies", particularly barstoolers and social conservatives, who shared "a resentment for new liberal social norms".

[ 2 ] Matthew Walther and Rod Dreher, alongside Matthew Schmitz, [ 13 ] argue that though traditionalists and non-religious "will never agree", [ 14 ] they can "ally" with each other, [ 7 ] [ 14 ] to form a new conservative coalition against "woke utopianism" that is claimed to be ascendant in the Democratic Party.

[ 14 ] [ 7 ] Schnurr thinks it remains to be seen whether the conservative cultural grievances of "stoolies" with microaggressions and political correctness will overcome its streak for keeping abortion legal, [ 2 ] which is a major issue for Portnoy.

[ 5 ] Relationship with libertarianism [ edit ] The association of aspects of barstool conservatism with libertarianism has proved controversial with conservative libertarians and paleolibertarians . Bonnie Kristian, writing for The Week , said "whatever we call this new libertinism in the GOP, libertarians had nothing to do with it".

[ 15 ] Politicians and campaigns [ edit ] Examples of the strength of barstool conservatism in the Republican Party according to Derek Robertson are, Madison Cawthorn , Matt Gaetz , Lauren Boebert , and Donald Trump .

[ 1 ] Another example is former New York Republican congressman George Santos (the first openly LGBT member elected to Congress as a non-incumbent Republican).

[ 16 ] Support for Donald Trump [ edit ] Robertson credits a 200 word long blog post by Portnoy in August 2015 with the birth of the barstool Republican. He said: “I am voting for Donald Trump. I don’t care if he's a joke. I don't care if he’s racist. I don't care if he's sexist. I don't care about any of it. I hope he stays in the race and I hope he wins. Why? Because I love the fact that he is making other politicians squirm. I love the fact he says shit nobody else will say, regardless of how ridiculous it is.” [ 1 ] In the 2024 election, Donald Trump's success in appealing to "vice voters" was seen as having "helped propel" him to victory. Vice voters were described as a predominantly young male voting bloc associated with Barstool Conservatism whose voting decisions are perceived as based on candidates support for online gambling , drug legalization , and cryptocurrency (activities often described as vices).

[ 6 ] [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Calendargate , 2023 controversy seen as pitting Barstool conservatives against social conservatives Conservatism in the United States Dirtbag left Factions in the Republican Party Libertarian conservatism Libertarianism in the United States Libertarian Republican Progressive conservatism South Park Republican , a similar trend, emerging 20 years prior Trumpism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Robertson, Derek (June 20, 2021).

"How Republicans Became the 'Barstool' Party" . Politico . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g Schnurr, Benjamin (November 3, 2022).

"The growing prominence of Barstool conservatism" . Massachusetts Daily Collegian . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ Cecchini, Evan (September 16, 2022).

"Where Barstool Conservatism Belongs in the Republican Party" .

W & L Speculator . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ Hochman, Nate (June 1, 2022).

"What Comes After the Religious Right?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ a b c d McGrew, Bethel (June 29, 2022).

"The Problem with 'Barstool Conservatives' " .

National Review . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ a b c Charles Fain Lehman (December 4, 2024).

"What Will Trump Do for 'Vice Voters'?" .

New York Times .

^ a b c d Walther, Matthew (February 1, 2021).

"Rise of the Barstool conservatives" .

The Week . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ "This Far-Right YouTuber Is the Latest Ivermectin Poster Boy" .

The Daily Beast . November 17, 2021.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2024 . Retrieved November 2, 2024 .

^ Coaston, Jane (March 14, 2023).

"The Debate Hugh Hefner Won and William Buckley Lost" .

New York Times . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ a b Eumenes of Cardia (June 30, 2021).

"Against Barstool Conservatism" .

New Conservatives . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ Jon Lieber (September 15, 2022).

"the-era-of-limited-government-is-over-for-conservatives" .

GZERO .

^ Brink Lindsey (June 16, 2022).

"The Dead End of Small Government" .

^ Schmitz, Matthew (September 24, 2020).

"The Woke and the Un-Woke" .

Tablet . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ a b c Dreher, Rod (February 1, 2021).

"Barstool Conservatism" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved August 14, 2023 .

^ Kristian, Bonnie (July 28, 2021).

"The right's new libertinism isn't libertarian" .

The Week . Retrieved July 19, 2025 .

^ McCoy, Terence; Dias, Marina (August 31, 2023).

"For George Santos, a life in Brazil at odds with his GOP politics" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 31, 2023 . Retrieved August 31, 2023 .

^ "Young men swung to the right for Trump after a campaign dominated by masculine appeals. Young men shifted toward Donald Trump in the 2024 presidential election in a change from recent years, when most young male voters backed the Democratic candidate" .

Washington Post . November 30, 2024 . Retrieved December 10, 2024 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barstool_conservatism&oldid=1305567782 " Categories : Barstool Sports Conservatism in the United States Trumpism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from November 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from November 2024 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 20:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Barstool conservatism Add languages Add topic

