Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Earth Toggle Earth subsection 2.1 Geology 2.1.1 Geological evolution 2.2 Historical perspective 3 Atmosphere, climate, and weather 4 Water on Earth Toggle Water on Earth subsection 4.1 Oceans 4.2 Lakes 4.2.1 Ponds 4.3 Rivers 4.4 Streams 5 Ecosystems Toggle Ecosystems subsection 5.1 Wilderness 6 Life Toggle Life subsection 6.1 Evolution 6.2 Microbes 6.3 Plants and animals 7 Human interrelationship Toggle Human interrelationship subsection 7.1 Human impact 7.2 Aesthetics and beauty 8 Matter and energy 9 Beyond Earth 10 See also 11 Notes and references 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Nature 169 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай ગુજરાતી Gungbe 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Лакку ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Luganda Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Material world and its phenomena "Natural" redirects here. For other uses, see Natural (disambiguation) and Nature (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Nature" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A timelapse composite panorama of different natural phenomena and environments around Mount Bromo , Indonesia.

Nature is an inherent character or constitution, [ 1 ] particularly of the ecosphere or the universe as a whole. In this general sense nature refers to the laws , elements and phenomena of the physical world, including life . Although humans are part of nature, human activity or humans as a whole are often described as at times at odds, or outright separate and even superior to nature.

[ 2 ] During the advent of modern scientific method in the last several centuries, nature became the passive reality , organized and moved by divine laws.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] With the Industrial Revolution , nature increasingly became seen as the part of reality deprived from intentional intervention: it was hence considered as sacred by some traditions ( Rousseau , American transcendentalism ) or a mere decorum for divine providence or human history ( Hegel , Marx ). However, a vitalist vision of nature, closer to the pre-Socratic one, got reborn at the same time, especially after Charles Darwin .

[ 2 ] Within the various uses of the word today, "nature" often refers to geology and wildlife . Nature can refer to the general realm of living beings , and in some cases to the processes associated with inanimate objects—the way that particular types of things exist and change of their own accord, such as the weather and geology of the Earth . It is often taken to mean the " natural environment " or wilderness —wild animals, rocks, forest, and in general those things that have not been substantially altered by human intervention, or which persist despite human intervention. For example, manufactured objects and human interaction generally are not considered part of nature, unless qualified as, for example, "human nature" or "the whole of nature". This more traditional concept of natural things that can still be found today implies a distinction between the natural and the artificial, with the artificial being understood as that which has been brought into being by a human consciousness or a human mind . Depending on the particular context, the term "natural" might also be distinguished from the unnatural or the supernatural .

[ 2 ] Etymology The word nature is borrowed from the Old French nature and is derived from the Latin word natura , or "essential qualities, innate disposition", and in ancient times, literally meant " birth ".

[ 5 ] In ancient philosophy, natura is mostly used as the Latin translation of the Greek word physis (φύσις), which originally related to the intrinsic characteristics of plants, animals, and other features of the world to develop of their own accord.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The concept of nature as a whole, the physical universe , is one of several expansions of the original notion; [ 2 ] it began with certain core applications of the word φύσις by pre-Socratic philosophers (though this word had a dynamic dimension then, especially for Heraclitus ), and has steadily gained currency ever since.

Earth Nature timeline This box: view talk edit −13 — – −12 — – −11 — – −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Dark Ages Reionization Matter-dominated era Water on Earth Life Multicellular life Vertebrates ← Earliest stars ← Earliest galaxy ← Earliest quasar / black hole ← Omega Centauri ← Andromeda Galaxy ← Milky Way spirals ← NGC 188 star cluster ← Alpha Centauri ← Accelerated expansion ← Earth / Solar System ← Earliest known life ← Atmospheric oxygen ← Sexual reproduction ← Earliest fungi ← Earliest land plants ← Cambrian explosion ← Earliest mammals ← Earliest apes / humans ( billion years ago ) Main articles: Earth and Earth science The Blue Marble , which is a famous view of the Earth , taken in 1972 by the crew of Apollo 17 Earth is the only planet known to support life , and its natural features are the subject of many fields of scientific research. Within the Solar System , it is third closest to the Sun; it is the largest terrestrial planet and the fifth largest overall. Its most prominent climatic features are its two large polar regions, two relatively narrow temperate zones, and a wide equatorial tropical to subtropical region.

[ 8 ] Precipitation varies widely with location, from several metres of water per year to less than a millimetre. 71 percent of the Earth's surface is covered by salt-water oceans. The remainder consists of continents and islands, with most of the inhabited land in the Northern Hemisphere .

Earth has evolved through geological and biological processes that have left traces of the original conditions. The outer surface is divided into several gradually migrating tectonic plates . The interior remains active, with a thick layer of plastic mantle and an iron-filled core that generates a magnetic field . This iron core is composed of a solid inner phase, and a fluid outer phase. Convective motion in the core generates electric currents through dynamo action, and these, in turn, generate the geomagnetic field.

The atmospheric conditions have been significantly altered from the original conditions by the presence of life-forms, [ 9 ] which create an ecological balance that stabilizes the surface conditions. Despite the wide regional variations in climate by latitude and other geographic factors, the long-term average global climate is quite stable during interglacial periods, [ 10 ] and variations of a degree or two of average global temperature have historically had major effects on the ecological balance, and on the actual geography of the Earth.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Geology Main article: Geology Geology is the science and study of the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth. The field of geology encompasses the study of the composition, structure , physical properties , dynamics, and history of Earth materials , and the processes by which they are formed, moved, and changed. The field is a major academic discipline , and is also important for mineral and hydrocarbon extraction, knowledge about and mitigation of natural hazards , some Geotechnical engineering fields, and understanding past climates and environments.

Geological evolution Three types of geological plate tectonic boundaries The geology of an area evolves through time as rock units are deposited and inserted and deformational processes change their shapes and locations.

Rock units are first emplaced either by deposition onto the surface or intrude into the overlying rock . Deposition can occur when sediments settle onto the surface of the Earth and later lithify into sedimentary rock , or when as volcanic material such as volcanic ash or lava flows, blanket the surface. Igneous intrusions such as batholiths , laccoliths , dikes , and sills , push upwards into the overlying rock, and crystallize as they intrude.

After the initial sequence of rocks has been deposited, the rock units can be deformed and/or metamorphosed . Deformation typically occurs as a result of horizontal shortening, horizontal extension , or side-to-side ( strike-slip ) motion. These structural regimes broadly relate to convergent boundaries , divergent boundaries , and transform boundaries , respectively, between tectonic plates .

Historical perspective Main articles: History of the Earth and Evolution An animation showing the movement of the continents from the separation of Pangaea until the present day Earth is estimated to have formed 4.54 billion years ago from the solar nebula , along with the Sun and other planets .

[ 13 ] The Moon formed roughly 20 million years later. Initially molten, the outer layer of the Earth cooled, resulting in the solid crust. Outgassing and volcanic activity produced the primordial atmosphere. Condensing water vapor , most or all of which came from ice delivered by comets , produced the oceans and other water sources.

[ 14 ] The highly energetic chemistry is believed to have produced a self-replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago.

[ 15 ] Plankton inhabit oceans, seas and lakes, and have existed in various forms for at least 2 billion years.

[ 16 ] Continents formed, then broke up and reformed as the surface of Earth reshaped over hundreds of millions of years, occasionally combining to make a supercontinent . Roughly 750 million years ago, the earliest known supercontinent Rodinia , began to break apart. The continents later recombined to form Pannotia which broke apart about 540 million years ago, then finally Pangaea , which broke apart about 180 million years ago.

[ 17 ] During the Neoproterozoic era, freezing temperatures covered much of the Earth in glaciers and ice sheets. This hypothesis has been termed the " Snowball Earth ", and it is of particular interest as it precedes the Cambrian explosion in which multicellular life forms began to proliferate about 530–540 million years ago.

[ 18 ] Since the Cambrian explosion there have been five distinctly identifiable mass extinctions .

[ 19 ] The last mass extinction occurred some 66 million years ago, when a meteorite collision probably triggered the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles, but spared small animals such as mammals . Over the past 66 million years, mammalian life diversified.

[ 20 ] Several million years ago, a species of small African ape gained the ability to stand upright.

[ 16 ] The subsequent advent of human life, and the development of agriculture and further civilization allowed humans to affect the Earth more rapidly than any previous life form, affecting both the nature and quantity of other organisms as well as global climate. By comparison, the Great Oxygenation Event , produced by the proliferation of algae during the Siderian period, required about 300 million years to culminate.

The present era is classified as part of a mass extinction event , the Holocene extinction event, the fastest ever to have occurred.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Some, such as E. O. Wilson of Harvard University , predict that human destruction of the biosphere could cause the extinction of one-half of all species in the next 100 years.

[ 23 ] The extent of the current extinction event is still being researched, debated and calculated by biologists.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Atmosphere, climate, and weather Blue light is scattered more than other wavelengths by the gases in the atmosphere , giving the Earth a blue halo when seen from space.

Main articles: Atmosphere of Earth , Climate , and Weather The Earth's atmosphere is a key factor in sustaining the ecosystem . The thin layer of gases that envelops the Earth is held in place by gravity. Air is mostly nitrogen , oxygen , water vapor , with much smaller amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, etc. The atmospheric pressure declines steadily with altitude. The ozone layer plays an important role in depleting the amount of ultraviolet (UV) radiation that reaches the surface. As DNA is readily damaged by UV light, this serves to protect life at the surface. The atmosphere also retains heat during the night, thereby reducing the daily temperature extremes.

Terrestrial weather occurs almost exclusively in the lower part of the atmosphere , and serves as a convective system for redistributing heat.

[ 27 ] Ocean currents are another important factor in determining climate, particularly the major underwater thermohaline circulation which distributes heat energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions. These currents help to moderate the differences in temperature between winter and summer in the temperate zones. Also, without the redistributions of heat energy by the ocean currents and atmosphere, the tropics would be much hotter, and the polar regions much colder.

Lightning Weather can have both beneficial and harmful effects. Extremes in weather, such as tornadoes or hurricanes and cyclones , can expend large amounts of energy along their paths, and produce devastation. Surface vegetation has evolved a dependence on the seasonal variation of the weather, and sudden changes lasting only a few years can have a dramatic effect, both on the vegetation and on the animals which depend on its growth for their food.

Climate is a measure of the long-term trends in the weather. Various factors are known to influence the climate , including ocean currents, surface albedo , greenhouse gases , variations in the solar luminosity, and changes to the Earth's orbit. Based on historical and geological records, the Earth is known to have undergone drastic climate changes in the past, including ice ages .

A tornado in central Oklahoma The climate of a region depends on a number of factors, especially latitude . A latitudinal band of the surface with similar climatic attributes forms a climate region. There are a number of such regions, ranging from the tropical climate at the equator to the polar climate in the northern and southern extremes. Weather is also influenced by the seasons, which result from the Earth 's axis being tilted relative to its orbital plane . Thus, at any given time during the summer or winter, one part of the Earth is more directly exposed to the rays of the sun . This exposure alternates as the Earth revolves in its orbit. At any given time, regardless of season, the Northern and Southern Hemispheres experience opposite seasons.

Weather is a chaotic system that is readily modified by small changes to the environment , so accurate weather forecasting is limited to only a few days.

[ 28 ] Overall, two things are happening worldwide: (1) temperature is increasing on the average; and (2) regional climates have been undergoing noticeable changes.

[ 29 ] Water on Earth The Iguazu Falls on the border between Brazil and Argentina Main article: Water Water is a chemical substance that is composed of hydrogen and oxygen (H 2 O) and is vital for all known forms of life.

[ 30 ] In typical usage, "water" refers only to its liquid form , but it also has a solid state, ice , and a gaseous state, water vapor , or steam . Water covers 71% of the Earth 's surface.

[ 31 ] On Earth, it is found mostly in oceans and other large bodies of water, with 1.6% of water below ground in aquifers and 0.001% in the air as vapor , clouds, and precipitation .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Oceans hold 97% of surface water, glaciers , and polar ice caps 2.4%, and other land surface water such as rivers, lakes, and ponds 0.6%. Additionally, a minute amount of the Earth's water is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products.

Oceans A view of the Atlantic Ocean from Leblon , Rio de Janeiro Main article: Ocean An ocean is a major body of saline water , and a principal component of the hydrosphere. Approximately 71% of the Earth's surface (an area of some 361 million square kilometers) is covered by ocean, a continuous body of water that is customarily divided into several principal oceans and smaller seas. More than half of this area is over 3,000 meters (9,800 feet) deep. Average oceanic salinity is around 35 parts per thousand (ppt) (3.5%), and nearly all seawater has a salinity in the range of 30 to 38 ppt. Though generally recognized as several 'separate' oceans, these waters comprise one global, interconnected body of salt water often referred to as the World Ocean or global ocean.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] This concept of a global ocean as a continuous body of water with relatively free interchange among its parts is of fundamental importance to oceanography .

[ 36 ] The major oceanic divisions are defined in part by the continents , various archipelagos , and other criteria: these divisions are (in descending order of size) the Pacific Ocean , the Atlantic Ocean , the Indian Ocean , the Southern Ocean , and the Arctic Ocean . Smaller regions of the oceans are called seas, gulfs, bays and other names. There are also salt lakes , which are smaller bodies of landlocked saltwater that are not interconnected with the World Ocean. Two notable examples of salt lakes are the Aral Sea and the Great Salt Lake .

Lakes Lake Mapourika , New Zealand Main article: Lake A lake (from Latin word lacus ) is a terrain feature (or physical feature ), a body of liquid on the surface of a world that is localized to the bottom of basin (another type of landform or terrain feature; that is, it is not global) and moves slowly if it moves at all. On Earth, a body of water is considered a lake when it is inland, not part of the ocean, is larger and deeper than a pond, and is fed by a river.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The only world other than Earth known to harbor lakes is Titan , Saturn's largest moon, which has lakes of ethane , most likely mixed with methane . It is not known if Titan's lakes are fed by rivers, though Titan's surface is carved by numerous river beds. Natural lakes on Earth are generally found in mountainous areas, rift zones , and areas with ongoing or recent glaciation . Other lakes are found in endorheic basins or along the courses of mature rivers. In some parts of the world, there are many lakes because of chaotic drainage patterns left over from the last ice age . All lakes are temporary over geologic time scales, as they will slowly fill in with sediments or spill out of the basin containing them.

Ponds The Westborough Reservoir (Mill Pond) in Westborough, Massachusetts Main article: Pond A pond is a body of standing water , either natural or human-made, that is usually smaller than a lake. A wide variety of human-made bodies of water are classified as ponds, including water gardens designed for aesthetic ornamentation, fish ponds designed for commercial fish breeding, and solar ponds designed to store thermal energy. Ponds and lakes are distinguished from streams via current speed. While currents in streams are easily observed, ponds and lakes possess thermally driven micro-currents and moderate wind driven currents. These features distinguish a pond from many other aquatic terrain features, such as stream pools and tide pools .

Rivers The Nile river in Cairo , Egypt's capital city Main article: River A river is a natural watercourse , [ 39 ] usually freshwater , flowing towards an ocean, a lake, a sea or another river. In a few cases, a river simply flows into the ground or dries up completely before reaching another body of water. Small rivers may also be called by several other names, including stream, creek, brook, rivulet, and rill; there is no general rule that defines what can be called a river. Many names for small rivers are specific to geographic location; one example is Burn in Scotland and North-east England. Sometimes a river is said to be larger than a creek, but this is not always the case, due to vagueness in the language.

[ 40 ] A river is part of the hydrological cycle . Water within a river is generally collected from precipitation through surface runoff , groundwater recharge, springs , and the release of stored water in natural ice and snowpacks (i.e., from glaciers ).

Streams A rocky stream in Hawaii Main article: Stream A stream is a flowing body of water with a current , confined within a bed and stream banks . In the United States, a stream is classified as a watercourse less than 60 feet (18 metres) wide. Streams are important as conduits in the water cycle , instruments in groundwater recharge , and they serve as corridors for fish and wildlife migration. The biological habitat in the immediate vicinity of a stream is called a riparian zone . Given the status of the ongoing Holocene extinction , streams play an important corridor role in connecting fragmented habitats and thus in conserving biodiversity . The study of streams and waterways in general involves many branches of inter-disciplinary natural science and engineering, including hydrology , fluvial geomorphology , aquatic ecology , fish biology , riparian ecology , and others.

Ecosystems Loch Lomond in Scotland forms a relatively isolated ecosystem. The fish community of this lake has remained unchanged over a very long period of time.

[ 41 ] Lush green Aravalli Mountain Range in the Desert country – Rajasthan , India.

An aerial view of a human ecosystem . Pictured is the city of Chicago.

Main articles: Ecology and Ecosystem Ecosystems are composed of a variety of biotic and abiotic components that function in an interrelated way.

[ 42 ] The structure and composition is determined by various environmental factors that are interrelated. Variations of these factors will initiate dynamic modifications to the ecosystem. Some of the more important components are soil , atmosphere , radiation from the sun , water, and living organisms.

Peñas Blancas, part of the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve . Located northeast of the city of Jinotega in Northeastern Nicaragua Central to the ecosystem concept is the idea that living organisms interact with every other element in their local environment . Eugene Odum, a founder of ecology, stated: "Any unit that includes all of the organisms (i.e.: the "community") in a given area interacting with the physical environment so that a flow of energy leads to clearly defined trophic structure, biotic diversity, and material cycles (i.e.: exchange of materials between living and nonliving parts) within the system is an ecosystem." [ 43 ] Within the ecosystem, species are connected and dependent upon one another in the food chain , and exchange energy and matter between themselves as well as with their environment.

[ 44 ] The human ecosystem concept is based on the human/nature dichotomy and the idea that all species are ecologically dependent on each other, as well as with the abiotic constituents of their biotope .

[ 45 ] A smaller unit of size is called a microecosystem . For example, a microsystem can be a stone and all the life under it. A macroecosystem might involve a whole ecoregion , with its drainage basin .

[ 46 ] Wilderness Old growth European Beech forest in Biogradska Gora National Park, Montenegro Main article: Wilderness Wilderness is generally defined as areas that have not been significantly modified by human activity. Wilderness areas can be found in preserves, estates, farms, conservation preserves, ranches, national forests , national parks , and even in urban areas along rivers, gulches, or otherwise undeveloped areas. Wilderness areas and protected parks are considered important for the survival of certain species , ecological studies, conservation , and solitude. Some nature writers believe wilderness areas are vital for the human spirit and creativity, [ 47 ] and some ecologists consider wilderness areas to be an integral part of the Earth's self-sustaining natural ecosystem (the biosphere ). They may also preserve historic genetic traits and that they provide habitat for wild flora and fauna that may be difficult or impossible to recreate in zoos , arboretums , or laboratories .

Life Life timeline This box: view talk edit −4500 — – — – −4000 — – — – −3500 — – — – −3000 — – — – −2500 — – — – −2000 — – — – −1500 — – — – −1000 — – — – −500 — – — – 0 — Water Single-celled life Photosynthesis Multicellular life Plants Arthropods Molluscs Flowers Dinosaurs Mammals Birds Primates Hadean Archean Proterozoic Phanerozoic ← Earth formed ← Earliest water ← LUCA ← Earliest fossils ← Atmospheric oxygen ← Sexual reproduction ← Earliest fungi ← Neoproterozoic oxygenation event ← Ediacaran biota ← Cambrian explosion ← Earliest tetrapods ← Earliest hominoid ( million years ago ) Female mallard and ducklings – reproduction is essential for continuing life.

Main articles: Life , Biology , and Biosphere Although there is no universal agreement on the definition of life, scientists generally accept that the biological manifestation of life is characterized by organization , metabolism , growth , adaptation , response to stimuli , and reproduction .

[ 48 ] Life may also be said to be simply the characteristic state of organisms .

Present day organisms from viruses to humans possess a self-replicating informational molecule (genome), either DNA or RNA (as in some viruses), and such an informational molecule is probably intrinsic to life. It is likely that the earliest forms of life were based on a self-replicating informational molecule ( genome ), perhaps RNA [ 49 ] [ 50 ] or a molecule more primitive than RNA or DNA. The specific deoxyribonucleotide / ribonucleotide sequence in each currently extant individual organism contains sequence information that functions to promotes survival, reproduction , and the capacity to acquire resources necessary for reproduction, and such sequences probably emerged early in the evolution of life.  Survival functions present early in the evolution of life likely also included genomic sequences that promote the avoidance of damage to the self-replicating molecule and also the capability to repair such damages that do occur.  Repair of some genome damages may have involved using information from another similar molecule by a process of recombination (a primitive form of sexual interaction ).

[ 51 ] Properties common to terrestrial organisms (plants, animals, fungi , protists , archaea , and bacteria) are that they are cellular, carbon-and-water-based with complex organization, having a metabolism, a capacity to grow, respond to stimuli, and reproduce. An entity with these properties is generally considered life. However, not every definition of life considers all of these properties to be essential. Human-made analogs of life may also be considered to be life.

The biosphere is the part of Earth's outer shell—including land, surface rocks, water, air and the atmosphere—within which life occurs, and which biotic processes in turn alter or transform. From the broadest geophysiological point of view, the biosphere is the global ecological system integrating all living beings and their relationships, including their interaction with the elements of the lithosphere (rocks), hydrosphere (water), and atmosphere (air). The entire Earth contains over 75 billion tons (150 trillion pounds or about 6.8×10 13 kilograms) of biomass (life), which lives within various environments within the biosphere.

[ 52 ] Over nine-tenths of the total biomass on Earth is plant life, on which animal life depends very heavily for its existence.

[ 53 ] More than 2 million species of plant and animal life have been identified to date, [ 54 ] and estimates of the actual number of existing species range from several million to well over 50 million.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] The number of individual species of life is constantly in some degree of flux, with new species appearing and others ceasing to exist on a continual basis.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] The total number of species is in rapid decline.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Evolution An area of the Amazon Rainforest shared between Colombia and Brazil . The tropical rainforests of South America contain the largest diversity of species on Earth .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Main article: Evolution The origin of life on Earth is not well understood, but it is known to have occurred at least 3.5 billion years ago, [ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] during the hadean or archean eons on a primordial Earth that had a substantially different environment than is found at present.

[ 68 ] These life forms possessed the basic traits of self-replication and inheritable traits. Once life had appeared, the process of evolution by natural selection resulted in the development of ever-more diverse life forms.

Species that were unable to adapt to the changing environment and competition from other life forms became extinct. However, the fossil record retains evidence of many of these older species. Current fossil and DNA evidence shows that all existing species can trace a continual ancestry back to the first primitive life forms.

[ 68 ] When basic forms of plant life developed the process of photosynthesis the sun's energy could be harvested to create conditions which allowed for more complex life forms.

[ 69 ] The resultant oxygen accumulated in the atmosphere and gave rise to the ozone layer . The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of yet more complex cells called eukaryotes .

[ 70 ] Cells within colonies became increasingly specialized, resulting in true multicellular organisms. With the ozone layer absorbing harmful ultraviolet radiation , life colonized the surface of Earth.

Microbes A microscopic mite Lorryia formosa Main article: Microbe The first form of life to develop on the Earth were unicellular , and they remained the only form of life until about a billion years ago when multi-cellular organisms began to appear.

[ 71 ] Microorganisms or microbes are microscopic , and smaller than the human eye can see.

[ 72 ] Microorganisms can be single-celled , such as Bacteria , Archaea , many Protista , and a minority of Fungi .

[ 73 ] These life forms are found in almost every location on the Earth where there is liquid water, including in the Earth's interior.

[ 74 ] Their reproduction is both rapid and profuse. The combination of a high mutation rate and a horizontal gene transfer [ 75 ] ability makes them highly adaptable, and able to survive in new and sometimes very harsh environments, including outer space .

[ 76 ] They form an essential part of the planetary ecosystem. However, some microorganisms are pathogenic and can post health risk to other organisms.

Viruses are infectious agents , but they are not autonomous life forms , as it is the case for viroids , satellites , DPIs and prions .

[ 77 ] Plants and animals Main articles: Plant and Animal A selection of diverse plant species A selection of diverse animal species Originally Aristotle divided all living things between plants, which generally do not move fast enough for humans to notice, and animals. In Linnaeus ' system, these became the kingdoms Vegetabilia (later Plantae ) and Animalia . Since then, it has become clear that the Plantae as originally defined included several unrelated groups, and the fungi and several groups of algae were removed to new kingdoms. However, these are still often considered plants in many contexts. Bacterial life is sometimes included in flora, [ 78 ] [ 79 ] and some classifications use the term bacterial flora separately from plant flora .

Among the many ways of classifying plants are by regional floras , which, depending on the purpose of study, can also include fossil flora , remnants of plant life from a previous era. People in many regions and countries take great pride in their individual arrays of characteristic flora, which can vary widely across the globe due to differences in climate and terrain .

Regional floras commonly are divided into categories such as native flora or agricultural and garden flora . Some types of "native flora" actually have been introduced centuries ago by people migrating from one region or continent to another, and become an integral part of the native, or natural flora of the place to which they were introduced. This is an example of how human interaction with nature can blur the boundary of what is considered nature.

Another category of plant has historically been carved out for weeds . Though the term has fallen into disfavor among botanists as a formal way to categorize "useless" plants, the informal use of the word "weeds" to describe those plants that are deemed worthy of elimination is illustrative of the general tendency of people and societies to seek to alter or shape the course of nature. Similarly, animals are often categorized in ways such as domestic , farm animals , wild animals , pests , etc. according to their relationship to human life.

Animals as a category have several characteristics that generally set them apart from other living things. Animals are eukaryotic and usually multicellular , which separates them from bacteria, archaea , and most protists . They are heterotrophic , generally digesting food in an internal chamber, which separates them from plants and algae . They are also distinguished from plants, algae, and fungi by lacking cell walls .

With a few exceptions—most notably the two phyla consisting of sponges and placozoans —animals have bodies that are differentiated into tissues . These include muscles , which are able to contract and control locomotion, and a nervous system , which sends and processes signals. There is also typically an internal digestive chamber. The eukaryotic cells possessed by all animals are surrounded by a characteristic extracellular matrix composed of collagen and elastic glycoproteins . This may be calcified to form structures like shells , bones , and spicules , a framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized during development and maturation, and which supports the complex anatomy required for mobility.

[ citation needed ] Human interrelationship Hominin timeline This box: view talk edit −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Miocene Pliocene Pleistocene Hominini Nakalipithecus Samburupithecus Ouranopithecus ( Ou. turkae ) ( Ou. macedoniensis ) Chororapithecus Oreopithecus Sivapithecus Sahelanthropus Graecopithecus Orrorin ( O. praegens ) ( O. tugenensis ) Ardipithecus ( Ar. kadabba ) ( Ar. ramidus ) Australopithecus ( Au. africanus ) ( Au. afarensis ) ( Au. anamensis ) H. habilis ( H. rudolfensis ) ( Au. garhi ) H. erectus ( H. antecessor ) ( H. ergaster ) ( Au. sediba ) H. heidelbergensis Homo sapiens Neanderthals Denisovans ← Earlier apes ← Gorilla split ← Chimpanzee split ← Earliest bipedal ← Earliest sign of Ardipithecus ← Earliest sign of Australopithecus ← Earliest stone tools ← Earliest sign of Homo ← Dispersal beyond Africa ← Earliest fire / cooking ← Earliest rock art ← Earliest clothes ← Modern humans H o m i n i d s P a r a n t h r o p u s ( million years ago ) Despite their natural beauty, the secluded valleys along the Na Pali Coast in Hawaii are heavily modified by introduced invasive species such as She-oak .

Human impact Although humans comprise a minuscule proportion of the total living biomass on Earth, the human effect on nature is disproportionately large. Because of the extent of human influence, the boundaries between what humans regard as nature and "made environments" is not clear cut except at the extremes. Even at the extremes, the amount of natural environment that is free of discernible human influence is diminishing at an increasingly rapid pace. A 2020 study published in Nature found that anthropogenic mass (human-made materials) outweighs all living biomass on earth, with plastic alone exceeding the mass of all land and marine animals combined.

[ 80 ] And according to a 2021 study published in Frontiers in Forests and Global Change , only about 3% of the planet's terrestrial surface is ecologically and faunally intact, with a low human footprint and healthy populations of native animal species.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Philip Cafaro, professor of philosophy at the School of Global Environmental Sustainability at Colorado State University , wrote in 2022 that "the cause of global biodiversity loss is clear: other species are being displaced by a rapidly growing human economy." [ 83 ] The development of technology by the human race has allowed the greater exploitation of natural resources and has helped to alleviate some of the risk from natural hazards . In spite of this progress, however, the fate of human civilization remains closely linked to changes in the environment. There exists a highly complex feedback loop between the use of advanced technology and changes to the environment.

[ 84 ] Human-made threats to the Earth's natural environment include pollution , deforestation , and disasters such as oil spills. Humans have contributed to the extinction of many plants and animals, [ 85 ] with roughly 1 million species threatened with extinction within decades.

[ 86 ] The loss of biodiversity and ecosystem functions over the last half century have impacted the extent that nature can contribute to human quality of life, [ 87 ] and continued declines could pose a major threat to the existence of human civilization, unless a rapid course correction is made.

[ 88 ] The value of natural resources to society is often poorly reflected in market prices , because whilst there are extraction costs, natural resources themselves are typically available free of charge. This distorts market pricing of natural resources and at the same time leads to underinvestment in our natural assets. The annual global cost of public subsidies that damage nature is conservatively estimated at $4–6 trillion (million million). Institutional protections of these natural goods, such as the oceans and rainforests, are lacking. Governments have not prevented these economic externalities .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Humans employ nature for both leisure and economic activities. The acquisition of natural resources for industrial use remains a sizable component of the world's economic system .

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] Some activities, such as hunting and fishing, are used for both sustenance and leisure, often by different people.

Agriculture was first adopted around the 9th millennium BCE . Ranging from food production to energy, nature influences economic wealth.

Although early humans gathered uncultivated plant materials for food and employed the medicinal properties of vegetation for healing, [ 93 ] most modern human use of plants is through agriculture . The clearance of large tracts of land for crop growth has led to a significant reduction in the amount available of forestation and wetlands , resulting in the loss of habitat for many plant and animal species as well as increased erosion .

[ 94 ] Aesthetics and beauty Aesthetically pleasing flowers Beauty in nature has historically been a prevalent theme in art and books, filling large sections of libraries and bookstores. That nature has been depicted and celebrated by so much art, photography, poetry, and other literature shows the strength with which many people associate nature and beauty. Reasons why this association exists, and what the association consists of, are studied by the branch of philosophy called aesthetics . Beyond certain basic characteristics that many philosophers agree about to explain what is seen as beautiful, the opinions are virtually endless.

[ 95 ] Nature and wildness have been important subjects in various eras of world history. An early tradition of landscape art began in China during the Tang Dynasty (618–907). The tradition of representing nature as it is became one of the aims of Chinese painting and was a significant influence in Asian art.

Although natural wonders are celebrated in the Psalms and the Book of Job , wilderness portrayals in art became more prevalent in the 1800s, especially in the works of the Romantic movement .

British artists John Constable and J. M. W. Turner turned their attention to capturing the beauty of the natural world in their paintings. Before that, paintings had been primarily of religious scenes or of human beings.

William Wordsworth 's poetry described the wonder of the natural world, which had formerly been viewed as a threatening place. Increasingly the valuing of nature became an aspect of Western culture.

[ 96 ] This artistic movement also coincided with the Transcendentalist movement in the Western world. A common classical idea of beautiful art involves the word mimesis , the imitation of nature. Also in the realm of ideas about beauty in nature is that the perfect is implied through perfect mathematical forms and more generally by patterns in nature . As David Rothenburg writes, "The beautiful is the root of science and the goal of art, the highest possibility that humanity can ever hope to see".

[ 97 ] : 281 Matter and energy The first few hydrogen atom electron orbitals shown as cross-sections with color-coded probability density Main articles: Matter and Energy The natural sciences view matter as obeying certain laws of nature which scientists seek to understand.

[ 98 ] Matter is commonly defined as the substance of which physical objects are composed. It constitutes the observable universe . The visible components of the universe are now believed to compose only 4.9 percent of the total mass. The remainder is believed to consist of 26.8 percent cold dark matter and 68.3 percent dark energy .

[ 99 ] The exact arrangement of these components is still unknown and is under intensive investigation by physicists.

The behaviour of matter and energy throughout the observable universe appears to follow well-defined physical laws . These laws have been employed to produce cosmological models that successfully explain the structure and the evolution of the universe we can observe. The mathematical expressions of the laws of physics employ a set of twenty physical constants [ 100 ] that appear to be static across the observable universe.

[ 101 ] The values of these constants have been carefully measured, but the reason for their specific values remains a mystery.

Beyond Earth Main articles: Outer space , Universe , and Extraterrestrial life Planets of the Solar System (sizes to scale, distances and illumination not to scale) NGC 4414 is a spiral galaxy in the constellation Coma Berenices about 56,000 light-years in diameter and approximately 60 million light-years from Earth .

Outer space, also simply called space , refers to the relatively empty regions of the Universe outside the atmospheres of celestial bodies.

Outer space is used to distinguish it from airspace (and terrestrial locations). There is no discrete boundary between Earth's atmosphere and space, as the atmosphere gradually attenuates with increasing altitude. Outer space within the Solar System is called interplanetary space , which passes over into interstellar space at what is known as the heliopause .

Outer space is sparsely filled with several dozen types of organic molecules discovered to date by microwave spectroscopy , blackbody radiation left over from the Big Bang and the origin of the universe, and cosmic rays , which include ionized atomic nuclei and various subatomic particles . There is also some gas, plasma and dust , and small meteors . Additionally, there are signs of human life in outer space today, such as material left over from previous crewed and uncrewed launches which are a potential hazard to spacecraft. Some of this debris re-enters the atmosphere periodically.

Although Earth is the only body within the Solar System known to support life, evidence suggests that in the distant past the planet Mars possessed bodies of liquid water on the surface.

[ 102 ] For a brief period in Mars' history, it may have also been capable of forming life. At present though, most of the water remaining on Mars is frozen.
If life exists at all on Mars, it is most likely to be located underground where liquid water can still exist.

[ 103 ] Conditions on the other terrestrial planets, Mercury and Venus , appear to be too harsh to support life as we know it. But it has been conjectured that Europa , the fourth-largest moon of Jupiter , may possess a sub-surface ocean of liquid water and could potentially host life.

[ 104 ] Astronomers have discovered extrasolar Earth analogs – planets that lie in the habitable zone of space surrounding a star , and therefore could possibly host life. However the requirements for life are not completely known and astronomical observations provide limited information.

[ 105 ] See also Animals portal Astronomy portal Biology portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Science portal Solar System portal Stars portal Trees portal Water portal Weather portal World portal Biophilic design Force of nature Human nature Natural building Natural history Natural landscape Natural law Natural resource Natural science Natural theology Naturalism Nature reserve Nature versus nurture Nature worship Nature-based solutions Naturism Political representation of nature Rewilding Media: National Wildlife , a publication of the National Wildlife Federation Natural History , by Pliny the Elder Natural World (TV series) Nature , by Ralph Waldo Emerson Nature , a prominent scientific journal Nature (TV series) The World We Live In (Life magazine) Organizations: Nature Detectives The Nature Conservancy Philosophy: Balance of nature (biological fallacy), a discredited concept of natural equilibrium in predator–prey dynamics Mother Nature Naturalism , any of several philosophical stances, typically those descended from materialism and pragmatism that do not distinguish the supernatural from nature; [ 106 ] this includes the methodological naturalism of natural science, which makes the methodological assumption that observable events in nature are explained only by natural causes, without assuming either the existence or non-existence of the supernatural Nature (philosophy) Notes and references ^ "Definition of NATURE" .

Merriam-Webster . January 2, 2024.

Archived from the original on January 2, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 .

^ a b c d Ducarme, Frédéric; Couvet, Denis (2020).

"What does 'nature' mean?" .

Palgrave Communications .

6 (14).

Springer Nature .

doi : 10.1057/s41599-020-0390-y .

^ Isaac Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica (1687), for example, is translated "Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy", and reflects the then-current use of the words " natural philosophy ", akin to "systematic study of nature" ^ The etymology of the word "physical" shows its use as a synonym for "natural" in about the mid-15th century: Harper, Douglas.

"physical" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved September 20, 2006 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"nature" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ An account of the pre-Socratic use of the concept of φύσις may be found in Naddaf, Gerard (2006) The Greek Concept of Nature , SUNY Press, and in Ducarme, Frédéric; Couvet, Denis (2020).

"What does 'nature' mean?" .

Palgrave Communications .

6 (14).

Springer Nature .

doi : 10.1057/s41599-020-0390-y .

. The word φύσις, while first used in connection with a plant in Homer, occurs early in Greek philosophy, and in several senses. Generally, these senses match rather well the current senses in which the English word nature is used, as confirmed by Guthrie, W.K.C.

Presocratic Tradition from Parmenides to Democritus (volume 2 of his History of Greek Philosophy ), Cambridge UP, 1965.

^ The first known use of physis was by Homer in reference to the intrinsic qualities of a plant: ὣς ἄρα φωνήσας πόρε φάρμακον ἀργεϊφόντης ἐκ γαίης ἐρύσας, καί μοι φύσιν αὐτοῦ ἔδειξε. (So saying, Argeiphontes [=Hermes] gave me the herb, drawing it from the ground, and showed me its nature .) Odyssey 10.302–303 (ed. A.T. Murray). (The word is dealt with thoroughly in Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon Archived March 5, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .) For later but still very early Greek uses of the term, see earlier note.

^ "World Climates" .

Blue Planet Biomes .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2008 . Retrieved September 21, 2006 .

^ "Calculations favor reducing atmosphere for early Earth" .

Science Daily . September 11, 2005.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2006 . Retrieved January 6, 2007 .

^ "Past Climate Change" . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. October 19, 2006. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Hugh Anderson; Bernard Walter (March 28, 1997).

"History of Climate Change" . NASA. Archived from the original on January 23, 2008 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Weart, Spencer (June 2006).

"The Discovery of Global Warming" . American Institute of Physics. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Dalrymple, G. Brent (1991).

The Age of the Earth . Stanford: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-1569-0 .

^ Morbidelli, A.; et al. (2000).

"Source Regions and Time Scales for the Delivery of Water to Earth" .

Meteoritics & Planetary Science .

35 (6): 1309– 1320.

Bibcode : 2000M&PS...35.1309M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2000.tb01518.x .

^ "Earth's Oldest Mineral Grains Suggest an Early Start for Life" . NASA Astrobiology Institute. December 24, 2001. Archived from the original on September 28, 2006 . Retrieved May 24, 2006 .

^ a b Margulis, Lynn ; Dorian Sagan (1995).

What is Life?

. New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-81326-4 .

^ Murphy, J.B.; R.D. Nance (2004).

"How do supercontinents assemble?" .

American Scientist .

92 (4): 324.

doi : 10.1511/2004.4.324 . Archived from the original on January 28, 2011 . Retrieved August 23, 2010 .

^ Kirschvink, J.L. (1992).

"Late Proterozoic Low-Latitude Global Glaciation: The Snowball Earth" (PDF) . In J.W. Schopf; C. Klein (eds.).

The Proterozoic Biosphere . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-0-521-36615-1 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 9, 2014 . Retrieved September 22, 2006 .

^ Raup, David M.; J. John Sepkoski Jr. (March 1982). "Mass extinctions in the marine fossil record".

Science .

215 (4539): 1501– 1503.

Bibcode : 1982Sci...215.1501R .

doi : 10.1126/science.215.4539.1501 .

PMID 17788674 .

S2CID 43002817 .

^ Margulis, Lynn; Dorian Sagan (1995).

What is Life?

. New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

145 .

ISBN 978-0-684-81326-4 .

^ Diamond J; Ashmole, N. P.; Purves, P. E. (1989). "The present, past and future of human-caused extinctions".

Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci .

325 (1228): 469– 476, discussion 476–477.

Bibcode : 1989RSPTB.325..469D .

doi : 10.1098/rstb.1989.0100 .

PMID 2574887 .

^ Novacek M; Cleland E (2001).

"The current biodiversity extinction event: scenarios for mitigation and recovery" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA .

98 (10): 5466– 5470.

Bibcode : 2001PNAS...98.5466N .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.091093698 .

PMC 33235 .

PMID 11344295 .

^ Wick, Lucia; Möhl, Adrian (2006).

"The mid-Holocene extinction of silver fir (Abies alba) in the Southern Alps: a consequence of forest fires? Palaeobotanical records and forest simulations" (PDF) .

Vegetation History and Archaeobotany .

15 (4): 435– 444.

Bibcode : 2006VegHA..15..435W .

doi : 10.1007/s00334-006-0051-0 .

S2CID 52953180 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 15, 2018 . Retrieved November 15, 2018 .

^ The Holocene Extinction Archived September 25, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Park.org. Retrieved on November 3, 2016.

^ Mass Extinctions Of The Phanerozoic Menu Archived September 25, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Park.org. Retrieved on November 3, 2016.

^ Patterns of Extinction Archived September 25, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Park.org. Retrieved on November 3, 2016.

^ Miller; Spoolman, Scott (September 28, 2007).

Environmental Science: Problems, Connections and Solutions . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-495-38337-6 .

^ Stern, Harvey; Davidson, Noel (May 25, 2015).

"Trends in the skill of weather prediction at lead times of 1–14 days" .

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society .

141 (692): 2726– 2736.

Bibcode : 2015QJRMS.141.2726S .

doi : 10.1002/qj.2559 .

S2CID 119942734 .

^ "Tropical Ocean Warming Drives Recent Northern Hemisphere Climate Change" .

Science Daily . April 6, 2001.

Archived from the original on April 21, 2006 . Retrieved May 24, 2006 .

^ "Water for Life" . Un.org. March 22, 2005.

Archived from the original on May 14, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2011 .

^ "World" .

CIA – World Fact Book .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2008 .

^ Water Vapor in the Climate System , Special Report, American Geophysical Union, December 1995.

^ Vital Water .

UNEP .

^ " Ocean Archived January 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ".

The Columbia Encyclopedia.

2002. New York: Columbia University Press ^ " Distribution of land and water on the planet Archived May 31, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ".

UN Atlas of the Oceans Archived September 15, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Spilhaus, Athelstan F (1942). "Maps of the whole world ocean".

Geographical Review .

32 (3): 431– 435.

Bibcode : 1942GeoRv..32..431S .

doi : 10.2307/210385 .

JSTOR 210385 .

^ Britannica Online.

"Lake (physical feature)" .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2008 . Retrieved June 25, 2008 .

[a Lake is] any relatively large body of slowly moving or standing water that occupies an inland basin of appreciable size. Definitions that precisely distinguish lakes, ponds, swamps, and even rivers and other bodies of nonoceanic water are not well established. It may be said, however, that rivers and streams are relatively fast moving; marshes and swamps contain relatively large quantities of grasses, trees, or shrubs; and ponds are relatively small in comparison to lakes. Geologically defined, lakes are temporary bodies of water.

^ "Lake Definition" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on September 5, 2016 . Retrieved September 6, 2016 .

^ River {definition} Archived February 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine from Merriam-Webster. Accessed February 2010.

^ USGS – U.S. Geological Survey – FAQs Archived July 1, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , No. 17 What is the difference between mountain, hill, and peak ; lake and pond; or river and creek ?

^ Adams, C.E. (1994).

"The fish community of Loch Lomond, Scotland: its history and rapidly changing status" .

Hydrobiologia .

290 ( 1– 3): 91– 102.

Bibcode : 1994HyBio.290...91A .

doi : 10.1007/BF00008956 .

S2CID 6894397 .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2012 . Retrieved January 5, 2007 .

^ Pidwirny, Michael (2006).

"Introduction to the Biosphere: Introduction to the Ecosystem Concept" .

Fundamentals of Physical Geography (2nd Edition) .

Archived from the original on July 18, 2011 . Retrieved September 28, 2006 .

^ Odum, EP (1971) Fundamentals of ecology , 3rd edition, Saunders New York ^ Pidwirny, Michael (2006).

"Introduction to the Biosphere: Organization of Life" .

Fundamentals of Physical Geography (2nd edition) .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2011 . Retrieved September 28, 2006 .

^ Khan, Firdos Alam (2011).

Biotechnology Fundamentals . CRC Press.

ISBN 978-1-4398-2009-4 .

^ Bailey, Robert G. (April 2004).

"Identifying Ecoregion Boundaries" (PDF) .

Environmental Management .

34 (Supplement 1): S14 – S26 .

Bibcode : 2004EnMan..34S..14B .

doi : 10.1007/s00267-003-0163-6 .

PMID 15883869 .

S2CID 31998098 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 1, 2009.

^ Botkin, Daniel B. (2000) No Man's Garden , Island Press, pp. 155–157, ISBN 1-55963-465-0 .

^ "Definition of Life" . California Academy of Sciences. 2006. Archived from the original on February 8, 2007 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Neveu M, Kim HJ, Benner SA (April 2013). "The "strong" RNA world hypothesis: fifty years old".

Astrobiology .

13 (4): 391– 403.

Bibcode : 2013AsBio..13..391N .

doi : 10.1089/ast.2012.0868 .

PMID 23551238 .

^ Cech TR (July 2012).

"The RNA worlds in context" .

Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol .

4 (7): a006742.

doi : 10.1101/cshperspect.a006742 .

PMC 3385955 .

PMID 21441585 .

^ Bernstein H, Byerly HC, Hopf FA, Michod RE (September 1985). "Genetic damage, mutation, and the evolution of sex".

Science .

229 (4719): 1277– 81.

Bibcode : 1985Sci...229.1277B .

doi : 10.1126/science.3898363 .

PMID 3898363 .

^ The figure "about one-half of one percent" takes into account the following (See, e.g., Leckie, Stephen (1999).

"How Meat-centred Eating Patterns Affect Food Security and the Environment" .

For hunger-proof cities: sustainable urban food systems . Ottawa: International Development Research Centre.

ISBN 978-0-88936-882-8 . Archived from the original on November 13, 2010.

, which takes global average weight as 60 kg.), the total human biomass is the average weight multiplied by the current human population of approximately 6.5 billion (see, e.g.

, "World Population Information" . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved September 28, 2006 .

[ permanent dead link ] ): Assuming 60–70 kg to be the average human mass (approximately 130–150 lb on the average), an approximation of total global human mass of between 390 billion (390×10 9 ) and 455 billion kg (between 845 billion and 975 billion lb, or about 423 million–488 million short tons ). The total biomass of all kinds on earth is estimated to be in excess of 6.8 x 10 13 kg (75 billion short tons). By these calculations, the portion of total biomass accounted for by humans would be very roughly 0.6%.

^ Sengbusch, Peter V.

"The Flow of Energy in Ecosystems – Productivity, Food Chain, and Trophic Level" .

Botany online . University of Hamburg Department of Biology. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ Pidwirny, Michael (2006).

"Introduction to the Biosphere: Species Diversity and Biodiversity" .

Fundamentals of Physical Geography (2nd Edition) .

Archived from the original on July 18, 2011 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ "How Many Species are There?" .

Extinction Web Page Class Notes . Archived from the original on September 9, 2006 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ "Animal." World Book Encyclopedia. 16 vols. Chicago: World Book, 2003. This source gives an estimate of from 2 to 50 million.

^ "Just How Many Species Are There, Anyway?" .

Science Daily . May 2003.

Archived from the original on February 11, 2007 . Retrieved September 26, 2006 .

^ Withers, Mark A.; et al. (1998).

"Changing Patterns in the Number of Species in North American Floras" .

Land Use History of North America . Archived from the original on September 23, 2006 . Retrieved September 26, 2006 .

Website based on the contents of the book: Sisk, T.D., ed. (1998).

Perspectives on the land use history of North America: a context for understanding our changing environment (Revised September 1999 ed.). U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division. USGS/BRD/BSR-1998-0003.

^ "Tropical Scientists Find Fewer Species Than Expected" .

Science Daily . April 2002.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2006 . Retrieved September 27, 2006 .

^ Bunker, Daniel E.; et al. (November 2005). "Species Loss and Aboveground Carbon Storage in a Tropical Forest".

Science .

310 (5750): 1029– 1031.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...310.1029B .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.465.7559 .

doi : 10.1126/science.1117682 .

PMID 16239439 .

S2CID 42696030 .

^ Wilcox, Bruce A. (2006). "Amphibian Decline: More Support for Biocomplexity as a Research Paradigm".

EcoHealth .

3 (1): 1– 2.

doi : 10.1007/s10393-005-0013-5 .

S2CID 23011961 .

^ Clarke, Robin; Robert Lamb; Dilys Roe Ward, eds. (2002).

"Decline and loss of species" .

Global environment outlook 3: past, present and future perspectives . London; Sterling, VA: Nairobi, Kenya: UNEP.

ISBN 978-92-807-2087-7 .

^ "Why the Amazon Rainforest is So Rich in Species: News" . Earthobservatory.nasa.gov. December 5, 2005. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2011 .

^ "Why The Amazon Rainforest Is So Rich in Species" . Sciencedaily.com. December 5, 2005. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011 . Retrieved May 14, 2011 .

^ Schopf, J. William; Kudryavtsev, Anatoliy B.; Czaja, Andrew D.; Tripathi, Abhishek B. (2007). "Evidence of Archean life: Stromatolites and microfossils".

Precambrian Research .

158 ( 3– 4): 141– 155.

Bibcode : 2007PreR..158..141S .

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2007.04.009 .

^ Schopf, JW (2006).

"Fossil evidence of Archaean life" .

Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci .

361 (1470): 869– 885.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2006.1834 .

PMC 1578735 .

PMID 16754604 .

^ Raven, Peter Hamilton; Johnson, George Brooks (2002).

Biology . McGraw-Hill Education. p.

68 .

ISBN 978-0-07-112261-0 . Retrieved July 7, 2013 .

^ a b Line, M. (January 1, 2002).

"The enigma of the origin of life and its timing" .

Microbiology .

148 (Pt 1): 21– 27.

doi : 10.1099/00221287-148-1-21 .

PMID 11782495 .

^ "Photosynthesis more ancient than thought, and most living things could do it" .

Phys.org .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ Berkner, L. V.; L. C. Marshall (May 1965).

"On the Origin and Rise of Oxygen Concentration in the Earth's Atmosphere" .

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

22 (3): 225– 261.

Bibcode : 1965JAtS...22..225B .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0469(1965)022<0225:OTOARO>2.0.CO;2 .

^ Schopf J (1994).

"Disparate rates, differing fates: tempo and mode of evolution changed from the Precambrian to the Phanerozoic" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA .

91 (15): 6735– 42.

Bibcode : 1994PNAS...91.6735S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.91.15.6735 .

PMC 44277 .

PMID 8041691 .

^ Microorganism at the Encyclopædia Britannica ^ "Unicellular" .

BiologyOnline.com . Retrieved August 5, 2008 .

^ Szewzyk U; Szewzyk R; Stenström T (1994).

"Thermophilic, anaerobic bacteria isolated from a deep borehole in granite in Sweden" .

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA .

91 (5): 1810– 1813.

Bibcode : 1994PNAS...91.1810S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.91.5.1810 .

PMC 43253 .

PMID 11607462 .

^ Wolska K (2003). "Horizontal DNA transfer between bacteria in the environment".

Acta Microbiol Pol .

52 (3): 233– 243.

PMID 14743976 .

^ Horneck G (1981). "Survival of microorganisms in space: a review".

Adv Space Res .

1 (14): 39– 48.

doi : 10.1016/0273-1177(81)90241-6 .

PMID 11541716 .

^ Solomon, Eldra; Martin, Charles; Martin, Diana W.; Berg, Linda R. (2019).

Biology .

Cengage Learning . pp. 408, 420– 422.

ISBN 978-1305179899 .

^ "flora" .

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary . Merriam-Webster. Archived from the original on April 30, 2006 . Retrieved September 27, 2006 .

^ "Glossary" .

Status and Trends of the Nation's Biological Resources . Reston, VA: Department of the Interior, Geological Survey. 1998. SuDocs No. I 19.202:ST 1/V.1-2. Archived from the original on July 15, 2007.

^ Elhacham, Emily; Ben-Uri, Liad; et al. (2020). "Global human-made mass exceeds all living biomass".

Nature .

588 (7838): 442– 444.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.588..442E .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-3010-5 .

PMID 33299177 .

S2CID 228077506 .

^ Carrington, Damian (April 15, 2021).

"Just 3% of world's ecosystems remain intact, study suggests" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2021 . Retrieved April 16, 2021 .

^ Plumptre, Andrew J.; Baisero, Daniele; et al. (2021).

"Where Might We Find Ecologically Intact Communities?" .

Frontiers in Forests and Global Change .

4 : 626635.

Bibcode : 2021FrFGC...4.6635P .

doi : 10.3389/ffgc.2021.626635 .

hdl : 10261/242175 .

^ Cafaro, Philip (2022).

"Reducing Human Numbers and the Size of our Economies is Necessary to Avoid a Mass Extinction and Share Earth Justly with Other Species" .

Philosophia .

50 (5): 2263– 2282.

doi : 10.1007/s11406-022-00497-w .

S2CID 247433264 .

^ "Feedback Loops in Global Climate Change Point to a Very Hot 21st Century" .

Science Daily . May 22, 2006. Archived from the original on December 8, 2006 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Kolbert, Elizabeth (2014).

The Sixth Extinction: An Unnatural History . New York City: Henry Holt and Company .

ISBN 978-0805092998 .

^ Stokstad, Erik (May 5, 2019). "Landmark analysis documents the alarming global decline of nature".

Science .

doi : 10.1126/science.aax9287 .

S2CID 166478506 .

^ Brauman, Kate A.; Garibaldi, Lucas A. (2020).

"Global trends in nature's contributions to people" .

PNAS .

117 (51): 32799– 32805.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11732799B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2010473117 .

PMC 7768808 .

PMID 33288690 .

^ Bradshaw, Corey J. A.; Ehrlich, Paul R.; Beattie, Andrew; Ceballos, Gerardo; Crist, Eileen; Diamond, Joan; Dirzo, Rodolfo; Ehrlich, Anne H.; Harte, John; Harte, Mary Ellen; Pyke, Graham; Raven, Peter H.; Ripple, William J.; Saltré, Frédérik; Turnbull, Christine; Wackernagel, Mathis; Blumstein, Daniel T. (2021).

"Underestimating the Challenges of Avoiding a Ghastly Future" .

Frontiers in Conservation Science .

1 .

Bibcode : 2021FrCS....1.5419B .

doi : 10.3389/fcosc.2020.615419 .

^ UK Government Official Documents, February 2021, "The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review Headline Messages" Archived May 20, 2022, at the Wayback Machine p. 2 ^ Carrington, Damian (February 2, 2021).

"Economics of biodiversity review: what are the recommendations?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2021 .

^ "Natural Resources contribution to GDP" .

World Development Indicators (WDI) . November 2014. Archived from the original on December 23, 2014.

^ "GDP – Composition by Sector" .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on May 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 19, 2017 .

^ "Plant Conservation Alliance – Medicinal Plant Working Groups Green Medicine" . US National Park Services. Archived from the original on October 9, 2006 . Retrieved September 23, 2006 .

^ Oosthoek, Jan (1999).

"Environmental History: Between Science & Philosophy" . Environmental History Resources.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2007 . Retrieved December 1, 2006 .

^ "On the Beauty of Nature" . The Wilderness Society. Archived from the original on September 9, 2006 . Retrieved September 29, 2006 .

^ History of Conservation Archived July 8, 2006, at the Wayback Machine BC Spaces for Nature. Accessed: May 20, 2006.

^ Rothenberg, David (2011).

Survival of the Beautiful: Art, Science and Evolution . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-60819-216-8 .

^ Feynman, Richard (1965).

The Character of Physical Law . Modern Library.

ISBN 978-0-679-60127-2 .

^ Ade, P. A. R.; Aghanim, N.

; Armitage-Caplan, C.; et al. (Planck Collaboration) (March 22, 2013). "Planck 2013 results. I. Overview of products and scientific results – Table 9".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

571 : A1.

arXiv : 1303.5062 .

Bibcode : 2014A&A...571A...1P .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/201321529 .

S2CID 218716838 .

^ Taylor, Barry N. (1971).

"Introduction to the constants for nonexperts" . National Institute of Standards and Technology. Archived from the original on January 7, 2007 . Retrieved January 7, 2007 .

^ Varshalovich, D.A.; Potekhin, A.Y. & Ivanchik, A.V. (2000). "Testing cosmological variability of fundamental constants".

AIP Conference Proceedings .

506 : 503.

arXiv : physics/0004062 .

Bibcode : 2000AIPC..506..503V .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.43.6877 .

doi : 10.1063/1.1302777 .

^ Bibring, J; et al. (2006). "Global mineralogical and aqueous mars history derived from OMEGA/Mars Express data".

Science .

312 (5772): 400– 404.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...312..400B .

doi : 10.1126/science.1122659 .

PMID 16627738 .

S2CID 13968348 .

^ Malik, Tariq (March 8, 2005).

"Hunt for Mars life should go underground" . Space.com via NBC News. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013 . Retrieved September 4, 2006 .

^ Turner, Scott (March 2, 1998).

"Detailed Images From Europa Point To Slush Below Surface" . NASA. Archived from the original on September 29, 2006 . Retrieved September 28, 2006 .

^ Winn, Joshua N.; Fabrycky, Daniel C. (August 18, 2015).

"The Occurrence and Architecture of Exoplanetary Systems" .

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

53 (1): 409– 447.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-astro-082214-122246 .

ISSN 0066-4146 .

^ Papineau, David (2016) "Naturalism" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Archived April 1, 2019, at the Wayback Machine > Further reading Droz, Layna; et al. (May 31, 2022).

"Exploring the diversity of conceptualizations of nature in East and South-East Asia" .

Humanities and Social Sciences Communications .

9 (1): 1– 12.

doi : 10.1057/s41599-022-01186-5 .

ISSN 2662-9992 .

Ducarme, Frédéric; Couvet, Denis (2020).

"What does 'nature' mean?" .

Palgrave Communications .

6 (14).

Springer Nature .

doi : 10.1057/s41599-020-0390-y .

Emerson, Ralph W. (1836).

Nature . Boston: James Munroe & Co.

Farber, Paul Lawrence (2000), Finding Order in Nature: The Naturalist Tradition from Linnaeus to E. O. Wilson . Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore.

Lynch, Derek (October 17, 2023).

"Have we reached the end of nature? Our relationship with the environment is in crisis" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2023.

Naddaf, Gerard (2006).

The Greek Concept of Nature . Albany: SUNY Press.

Piccolo, John J.; Taylor, Bron; Washington, Haydn; Kopnina, Helen; Gray, Joe; Alberro, Heather; Orlikowska, Ewa (2022).

" "Nature's contributions to people" and peoples' moral obligations to nature" .

Biological Conservation .

270 : 109572.

Bibcode : 2022BCons.27009572P .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2022.109572 .

S2CID 248769087 .

Worster, D. (1994).

Nature's Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

External links Nature at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (iucnredlist.org) Archived June 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Ducarme, Frédéric (January 3, 2021).

"What is nature?" .

Encyclopedia of the Environment .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021.

v t e Earth Outline History Atmosphere Atmosphere of Earth Prebiotic atmosphere Troposphere Stratosphere Mesosphere Thermosphere Exosphere Weather Climate Climate system Energy balance Climate change Climate variability and change Climatology Paleoclimatology Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Culture and society List of sovereign states dependent territories In culture Earth Day Flag Symbol World economy Etymology World history Time zones World Environment Biome Biosphere Biogeochemical cycles Ecology Ecosystem Human impact on the environment Evolutionary history of life Nature Geodesy Cartography Computer cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity Navigation Remote Sensing Geopositioning Virtual globe Geophysics Earth structure Fluid dynamics Geomagnetism Magnetosphere Mineral physics Seismology Plate tectonics Signal processing Tomography Geology Age of Earth Earth science Extremes on Earth Future Geological history Geologic time scale Geologic record History of Earth Oceans Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Ocean Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Oceanography Planetary science The Moon Evolution of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets Location in the Universe Solar System Category v t e Elements of nature Universe Space Time Energy Matter chemical elements particles Change Earth Earth science History geological Structure Geology Plate tectonics Oceans Gaia hypothesis Future Weather Meteorology Atmosphere (Earth) Climate Clouds Moonlight Rain Snow Sunlight Tides Wind tornado tropical cyclone Natural environment Ecology Ecosystem Field Radiation Wilderness Wildfires Life Origin (abiogenesis) Evolutionary history Biosphere Hierarchy Biology astrobiology Biodiversity Organism Eukaryota fauna animals flora plants fungi protista Prokaryotes archaea bacteria Viruses See also Nature-based solutions Category v t e Natural science Outline Earth science Life sciences Physical science Space science Category Science Portal Commons v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Poland Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐xgnkw
Cached time: 20250814232015
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.555 seconds
Real time usage: 1.724 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13092/1000000
Revision size: 92178/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 557203/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6738/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 47/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 439460/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.961/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12965161/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1405.609      1 -total
 51.11%  718.357      1 Template:Reflist
 19.96%  280.552     39 Template:Cite_web
 19.67%  276.532     38 Template:Cite_journal
 11.50%  161.587      3 Template:Graphical_timeline
  7.56%  106.242     18 Template:Cite_book
  5.23%   73.583      1 Template:Human_timeline
  4.91%   69.009      1 Template:Nature_timeline
  4.03%   56.670      6 Template:Navbox
  3.90%   54.874      1 Template:Sister_project_links Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21830:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232015 and revision id 1305931546. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nature&oldid=1305931546 " Categories : Nature Environmental science Environmental social science concepts Main topic articles Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from September 2018 Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 23:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nature 169 languages Add topic

