Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 2.1 Socioeconomics 2.2 Religions 2.3 Language 3 Vietnamese-Australian to Vietnam relationship Toggle Vietnamese-Australian to Vietnam relationship subsection 3.1 Media 4 Culture 5 Notable Australians of Vietnamese ancestry 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Vietnamese Australians 5 languages Azərbaycanca 日本語 Simple English Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Ethnic group Vietnamese Australians Người Úc gốc Việt Total population 334,781 by ancestry ( 2021 census ) [ 1 ] ( 1.3% of the Australian population) [ 1 ] 268,170 born in Vietnam ( 2021 census ) [ 2 ] Regions with significant populations Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane , Perth , Adelaide , and other urban areas Languages Australian English , Vietnamese , Chinese Religion Vietnamese folk religion , Mahayana Buddhism , Roman Catholic Vietnamese Australians ( Vietnamese : Người Úc gốc Việt ) are Australians of Vietnamese descent. Vietnamese Australians are one of the largest groups within the global Vietnamese diaspora .

At the 2021 census, 334,781 people stated that they had Vietnamese ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.3% of the Australian population.

[ 3 ] In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 268,170 Australian residents who were born in Vietnam.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] See also: Boat People Up until 1975 there were fewer than 2,000 Vietnam-born people in Australia.

[ 5 ] Following the takeover of South Vietnam by the North Vietnamese communist government in April 1975, Australia, being a signatory to the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , agreed to resettle its share of Vietnam-born refugees under a refugee resettlement plan between 1975 and 1985.  After the initial intake of refugees in the late 1970s, there was a second immigration peak in 1983–84, most likely a result of the 1982 agreement between the Australian and Vietnamese governments (the Orderly Departure Program ) which allowed relatives of Vietnamese Australians to leave Vietnam and migrate to Australia.  A third immigration peak in the late 1980s seems to have been mainly due to Australia's family reunion scheme.

[ 6 ] Demographics [ edit ] At the 2021 census, 334,781 people stated that they had Vietnamese ancestry (whether alone or in combination with another ancestry), representing 1.3% of the Australian population.

[ 1 ] In 2021, the Australian Bureau of Statistics estimated that there were 268,170 Australian residents who were born in Vietnam.

[ 2 ] In 2021, Vietnamese Australians were the fourth largest Asian Australian ancestry after Chinese Australians , Indian Australians and Filipino Australians .

[ 7 ] In 2021, Vietnam was the sixth most common foreign country of birth.

[ 2 ] In the 2001 census , first generation Australians of Vietnamese ancestry outnumbered second generation Australians with Vietnamese ancestry (74% to 26%) Relatively few people of Vietnamese ancestry stated another ancestry (6%). Among the leading ancestries, the proportion of people who spoke a language other than English at home was highest for those of Vietnamese (96%).

[ 8 ] In Melbourne the suburbs of Richmond , Footscray , Springvale , Sunshine and St Albans have a significant proportion of Vietnamese Australians, while in Sydney they are concentrated in Cabramatta , Cabramatta West , Canley Vale , Canley Heights , Bankstown , St Johns Park and Fairfield . In Brisbane they are concentrated in Darra and Inala . There are also significant Vietnamese Australian communities in Adelaide, Canberra and Perth.

Number of permanent migrants arriving from Vietnam to Australia monthly between 1991 and 2017.

Socioeconomics [ edit ] Vietnamese Australians used to vary in income and social class levels. Australian born Vietnamese Australians are highly represented in Australian universities and many professions (particularly as information technology workers, optometrists, engineers, doctors and pharmacists), whilst in the past, some members in the community were subjected to poverty and crime.

[ 9 ] Religions [ edit ] According to the 2016 census , 40.46% of Vietnamese Australians are Buddhist , 28.77% are Christian , and 26.46% follow secular or no religious beliefs.

[ 10 ] As of the 2021 census, 44.7% of Vietnamese Australians are Buddhist, 29.2% are unaffiliated, 23.5% are Christian (with 19.8% Catholic ), 0.7% are other religion and 2.5% are not stated.

[ 11 ] Language [ edit ] In the 2001 census, the Vietnamese language was spoken at home by 174,236 people in Australia, making it the sixth most widely spoken language after English , Italian , Greek , Cantonese ,  and Arabic .

According to the 2021 census, the Vietnamese language was spoken at home by 320,760 people in Australia, making it the fourth most widely spoken language after English, Mandarin and Arabic.

[ 1 ] Vietnamese-Australian to Vietnam relationship [ edit ] Media [ edit ] During October 2003, government owned SBS TV began airing a Vietnamese news program called Thoi Su ('News'). The stated purpose was to provide a news service to cater for Australia's Vietnamese population. This was received poorly by the significant portion of the older generations of the Vietnamese community had previously fled after the fall of South Vietnam and still harboured resentment to the ruling government and its institutions, including the state-controlled media, such as Thoi Su.

The program was also claimed to lack reports that include political arrests or religious oppression in Vietnam.  A large protest was convened outside SBS's offices.

[ 12 ] SBS decided to drop Thoi Su (which was being provided at no cost to SBS through a satellite connection).  SBS subsequently began broadcasting disclaimers before each foreign news program stating it does not endorse their contents.

Culture [ edit ] Besides local Vietnamese news from SBS Australia, variety shows such as Paris by Night , a mostly overseas Vietnamese production, has become well-renowned amongst Vietnamese-Australians and well as Vietnamese content from Vietnam. Figures from the show such as Nguyen Ngoc Ngan and Nguyen Cao Ky Duyen are beloved personalities by Vietnamese at large as well as many other figures such as the late Chi Tai and Hoai Linh .

Notable Australians of Vietnamese ancestry [ edit ] Anh Do – Comedian, actor, author of The Happiest Refugee and brother of Khoa Do Khoa Do – Young Australian of the Year in 2005, writer, director and brother of Anh Do Kim-Anh Do – Mathematician Alexandra Huynh – Soccer player, member of the Australia national women's football team Tien Kieu – ALP politician, member of the Legislative Council of Victoria, physicist Charles Tran Van Lam – Former Foreign Minister of South Vietnam (1969–1972), first Vietnamese Ambassador to Australia (late 1950s), President of the Senate of South Vietnam (1973), one of signatories of the Paris Peace Accord (1973) Hieu Van Le , AO – 35th governor of South Australia and Chairman of the South Australian Multicultural and Ethnic Affairs Commission (SAMEAC) Dai Le – Liberal Party-turned independent politician, first refugee and Vietnamese Australian to be elected to federal parliament .

Nam Le – author of The Boat , winner of the 2008 Dylan Thomas Prize for The Boat Tan Le – 1998 Young Australian of the Year Giang Le-Huy – Actor Tony Le-Nguyen – Actor, writer, director and producer Martin Lo – Soccer player Trung Ly – Martial artist/action director Phuong Ngo – ALP politician (member of Fairfield Council, NSW), Catholic community leader convicted for the homicide of John Paul Newman , and suspected drug lord Thang Ngo – Fairfield councillor (1999–2008), cast member of Once Upon a Time in Cabramatta documentary, food writer and publisher of Noodlies food blog Tung Ngo – ALP politician, member of the Legislative Council of South Australia Giang Nguyen – Mathematician and chess player Jillian Nguyen – actress Jordan Nguyen – engineer Luke Nguyen – chef and owner of Red Lantern in Surry Hills, Sydney and host of Luke Nguyen's Vietnam on SBS Nam-Trung Nguyen – Scientist Peter Nguyen Van Hung – Catholic priest and human rights activist on Taiwan Martin Nguyen – MMA Featherweight World Champion [ 13 ] Rob Nguyen – Formula 3000 driver Sang Nguyen – Victorian ALP Upper House politician Tach Duc Thanh Nguyen – Convicted drug smuggler and member of the Bali Nine Tai Nguyen – Actor Van Tuong Nguyen – Executed drug trafficker Vincent Long Van Nguyen – Roman Catholic bishop of Parramatta Ngan Phan-Koshnitsky – chess player Anathan 'Ana' Pham – professional video game player Batong Pham – ALP Upper House politician in Western Australia Hanni Pham – member of South Korean group NewJeans Hoa Pham – Writer Helen Quach – Music conductor Hoan Ton-That – Computer programmer and start-up entrepreneur Caroline Tran – Triple J announcer Maria Tran – actress and filmmaker Natalie Tran – YouTuber , actress, comedian, television presenter and writer Andy Trieu – Actor and martial artist Huong Truong – Australian Greens former politician, MLC in Victoria Van Thanh Rudd – Political artist, nephew of Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd Vico Thai – Television and Film Actor San Hoa Thang , AC – Polymer chemist Tran My Van – Academic Catherine Van-Davies – Actress Tracy Vo – Journalist and newsreader Tri Vo – Lawyer and politician Quan Yeomans – Lead singer and guitarist of Regurgitator Jayden Nguyen – Essendon AFL player See also [ edit ] Vietnam portal Australia portal Asian Australians Australia–Vietnam relations Immigration to Australia Vietnamese diaspora Vietnamese New Zealanders References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "General Community Profile - Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

^ a b c "Table 5.1 - Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

^ "Australia's Population by Country of Birth, 2021 | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . 26 April 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

^ "Permanent migration from Vietnam" .

www.homeaffairs.gov.au . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

^ Note however, that before 1976 Vietnam was not separately recorded as a country of birth for settlers so the Australian Bureau of Statistics is unable to provide an exact picture of settler intake prior to this time.

^ "4102.0 – Australian Social Trends, 1994 : Population Growth: Birthplaces of Australia's settlers" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 27 May 1994 . Retrieved 14 March 2008 .

^ "Australia's Population by Country of Birth, 2021 | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . 26 April 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

^ "4102.0 – Australian Social Trends, 2003 : Population characteristics: Ancestry of Australia's population" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 3 June 2003 . Retrieved 14 March 2008 .

In the 2001 census, almost all people of Vietnamese ancestry were first or second generation Australians, consistent with the timing of Vietnamese immigration which essentially began in the mid-1970s and increased over the 1980s.

^ "Cracking the cultures of crime" . 7 March 2011.

^ "Census TableBuilder  - Guest Users Log in" .

guest.censusdata.abs.gov.au .

^ "Vietnamese Culture - Population Statistics" .

^ Gibbs, Stephen (2 December 2003).

"Crunch time for SBS over Vietnamese news bulletin" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 14 March 2008 .

Thousands of members of Sydney's Vietnamese community will today protest against SBS's continued broadcast of a Hanoi news service that former refugees say contains offensive and distressing communist propaganda.

^ "Martin "The Situ-Asian" Nguyen" .

ONE Championship – The Home Of Martial Arts .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vietnamese diaspora in Australia .

Vietnamese Community in Australia The Vietnamese in Australia Gold & Silver: Vietnamese migration and relationships with environments in Vietnam and Sydney Vietnamese Queenslanders . Short (3-4mins) digital stories from 5 Vietnamese Queenslanders, a project from the Queensland Vietnamese community and the State Library of Queensland.

Ashley Carruthers – Australian National University (2008).

"Vietnamese" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Dictionary of Sydney Trust . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

[ CC-By-SA ] (History of Vietnamese in Sydney) v t e Overseas Vietnamese Africa Angola [ vi ] Senegal Americas Brazil [ pt ] Canada Toronto United States by city Asia Cambodia China migrant brides Hong Kong Israel Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Singapore Taiwan migrant brides Europe Belarus [ vi ] Belgium Bulgaria Cyprus Czech Republic Finland France Paris Germany Berlin Hungary [ vi ] Italy [ vi ] Netherlands Norway Poland Russia Slovakia [ vi ] Switzerland [ vi ] Ukraine [ vi ; zh ; uk ] United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Vanuatu Related International marriage of Vietnamese women Vietnamese boat people v t e Asian Australians Central Asia Afghan Hazara Armenian Azeri Georgian Kazakh Kyrgyz Pathan Tatar Tajik Turkmen Uzbek Uyghur East Asia Chinese Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hakka Hoklo Hong Konger Tibetan Japanese Korean Mongolian Taiwanese South Asia Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Indian Indo-Fijian Bengali Gujarati Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Maldivian Nepalese Pakistani Baloch Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Sri Lankan Tamil Southeast Asia Burmese Mon Chin Cambodian East Timorese Filipino Hmong Indonesian Javanese Madurese Sundanese Acehnese Balinese Karen Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Mien Singaporean Thai Vietnamese History General Immigration Topics Organized crime Politics Stereotypes East Asians South Asians According to Australian Standard Classification of Cultural and Ethnic Groups (ASCCEG) [1] Category Commons v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vietnamese_Australians&oldid=1306170059 " Categories : Australian people of Vietnamese descent Asian diaspora in Australia Vietnamese diaspora by country Australia–Vietnam relations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from December 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from November 2017 Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 09:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vietnamese Australians 5 languages Add topic

