Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Andrew Ramsay (geologist) 6 languages Cymraeg Deutsch Français مصرى Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Andrew Crombie Ramsay ) Scottish geologist Andrew Ramsay (geologist) Born ( 1814-01-31 ) 31 January 1814 Glasgow Died 9 December 1891 (1891-12-09) (aged 77) Beaumaris, Wales Awards Wollaston Medal (1871) Royal Medal (1879) Sir Andrew Crombie Ramsay - signature.

Sir Andrew Crombie Ramsay (sometimes spelt Ramsey ) (31 January 1814 – 9 December 1891) was a Scottish geologist .

Biography [ edit ] Ramsay was born at Glasgow . He started working in a textile business in the city's Candleriggs, but from spending his holidays in Arran he became interested in the study of the rocks of that island, and was thus led to acquire the rudiments of geology . A 3D papier mache geological model of Arran, made by him on the scale of two inches to the mile, was exhibited at the meeting of the British Association at Glasgow in 1840 [ 1 ] , and attracted the notice of Roderick Murchison , with the result that he received, from Sir Henry De la Beche , an appointment on the Geological Survey , on which he served for forty years, from 1841 to 1881.

[ 2 ] He was first stationed at Tenby , and to that circumstance may be attributed the fact that so much of his geological work dealt with Wales . His first book, The Geology of the Isle of Arran , was published in 1841. In 1845 he became local director for Great Britain, but he continued to carry on a certain amount of field-work until 1854. To the first volume of the Memoirs of the Geological Survey (1846) he contributed a now classic essay, On the Denudation of South Wales and the Adjacent Counties of England , in which he advocated the power of the sea to form great plains of denudation, although at the time he underestimated the influence of subaerial agents in sculpturing the scenery. In 1866 he published The Geology of North Wales (vol. iii. of the Memoirs), assisted by John William Salter who contributed the palaeontological portion to this work and of which a second edition was published in 1881.

[ 2 ] He was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in 1862.

[ 3 ] He was chosen as a professor of geology at University College, London , in 1848, and afterwards as a lecturer in the same subject at the Royal School of Mines in 1851. Eleven years later he was elected to the presidential chair of the Geological Society of London , and in 1872 he succeeded Murchison as director-general of the Geological Survey. In 1880 he acted as president of the British Association at Swansea , and in the following year retired from the public service, receiving at the same time the honour of knighthood. In 1860 he published a book entitled The Old Glaciers of Switzerland and North Wales . The study of this subject led him to discuss the Glacial Origin of Certain Lakes in Switzerland, the Black Forest, &c . He dealt also with the origin of The Red Rocks of England (1871) and The River Courses of England and Wales (1872).

[ 2 ] He was especially interested in tracing out the causes which have determined the physical configuration of a district, and he devoted much attention to the effects produced by ice, his name being identified with the hypothesis, which, however, has never commanded general assent, that in some cases lake basins have been scooped out by glaciers . A master in the broader questions of stratigraphy and physical geology, he was a deal exponent of facts, but rather impatient of details, while his original and often bold theories, expressed both in lectures and in writings, stirred others with enthusiasm and undoubtedly exercised great influence on the progress of geology.

[ 2 ] His lectures to working men, given in 1863 in the Museum of Practical Geology, formed the nucleus of his Physical Geology and Geography of Great Britain (5th ed., 1878; [ 4 ] 6th ed., by H. B. Woodward, 1894 [ 5 ] ). He received a Royal medal in 1880 from the Royal Society , of which he became a fellow in 1862; he was also the recipient of the Neil prize of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1866, of the Wollaston medal of the Geological Society of London in 1871, [ 2 ] and was elected  to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society , in 1886.

[ 6 ] He died at Beaumaris in Anglesey and is buried at St Sadwrn's church in Llansadwrn where his grave is marked by a glacial erratic boulder.

[ 7 ] Sir A.C. Ramsay's erratic boulder headstone in the graveyard at Sadwrn's Church, Llansadwrn, Anglesey.

See also [ edit ] Clan Ramsay References [ edit ] ^ "The Hunterian" . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ a b c d e One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Ramsay, Sir Andrew Crombie ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 879.

This cites Geikie (1895).

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 16 April 2021 .

^ Ramsay, A. C. (1878).

Physical geology and geography of Great Britain (5th ed.). London: Edward Stanford.

^ Ramsay, A. C. (1894).

Woodward, Horace B.

(ed.).

Physical geology and geography of Great Britain (6th ed.). London: Edward Stanford.

^ Memoirs and proceedings of the Manchester Literary & Philosophical Society FOURTH SERIES  Eighth  VOLUME   1894 ^ Perkins, Donald.

"Where is Llansadwrn?" . llansadwrn-wx.info . Retrieved 22 April 2012 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Andrew Crombie Ramsay Geike, A.(1895) Memoir of Sir Andrew Crombie Ramsay v t e Presidents of the Geological Society of London 19th century George Bellas Greenough Henry Grey Bennet William Blake John MacCulloch George Bellas Greenough Earl Compton William Babington William Buckland John Bostock William Fitton Adam Sedgwick Roderick Murchison George Bellas Greenough Charles Lyell William Whewell William Buckland Roderick Murchison Henry Warburton Leonard Horner Henry De la Beche William Hopkins Edward Forbes William Hamilton Daniel Sharpe Joseph Ellison Portlock John Phillips Leonard Horner Andrew Crombie Ramsay William Hamilton Warington Wilkinson Smyth Thomas Henry Huxley Joseph Prestwich George Douglas Campbell John Evans Peter Martin Duncan Henry Clifton Sorby Robert Etheridge John Whitaker Hulke Thomas Bonney John Wesley Judd William Blanford Archibald Geikie Wilfred Hudleston Henry Woodward Henry Hicks William Whitaker 20th century Jethro Teall Charles Lapworth John Marr Archibald Geikie William Sollas William Watts Aubrey Strahan Arthur Smith Woodward Alfred Harker George Lamplugh Richard Oldham Albert Seward John Evans Francis Bather John Gregory Edmund Garwood Thomas Holland John Green Owen Thomas Jones Henry Hurd Swinnerton Percy Boswell Herbert Leader Hawkins William Fearnsides Arthur Trueman Herbert Harold Read Cecil Tilley Owen Thomas Jones George Lees William King Walter Campbell Smith Leonard Hawkes James Stubblefield Sydney Hollingworth Oliver Bulman Frederick Shotton Kingsley Dunham Neville George William Alexander Deer Thomas Westoll Percy Kent Wallace Pitcher Percival Allen Howel Francis Janet Watson Charles Holland Bernard Leake Derek Blundell Anthony Harris Charles Curtis Steve Sparks Richard Hardman Robin Cocks 21st century Ronald Oxburgh Mark Moody-Stuart Peter Styles Richard Fortey Lynne Frostick Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Greece Sweden Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andrew_Ramsay_(geologist)&oldid=1305988257 " Categories : 1814 births 1891 deaths Scientists from Glasgow Scottish geologists Academics of University College London Fellows of the Royal Society Royal Medal winners Wollaston Medal winners Presidents of the Geological Society of London British Geological Survey Directors of the British Geological Survey International members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2018 Use British English from January 2018 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 07:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andrew Ramsay (geologist) 6 languages Add topic

