Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Contemporary philosophy 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Aevum 3 languages Français Italiano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Scholastic philosophy Saint Albert the Great In scholastic philosophy , the aevum (also called aeviternity ) is the temporal mode of existence experienced by angels and by the saints in heaven . In some ways, it is a state that logically lies between the eternity (timelessness) of God and the temporal experience of material beings . It is sometimes referred to as "improper eternity" [ 1 ] or "participated eternity".

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word aevum is Latin , originally signifying "age", " aeon ", or "everlasting time".

[ 3 ] It comes from the Greek term "αἰών" meaning eternity in the atemporal sense.

[ 2 ] Before the 13th century, the term aevum was used synonymously with eternity.

[ 2 ] The word aeviternity comes from the Medieval Latin neologism aeviternitas .

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Both Plato and Aristotle recognized two modes of duration: Time and Eternity.

[ 4 ] Plato said that the soul must be in time while Aristotle said that the soul must be in eternity.

[ 4 ] The Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius of Cilicia , said there must be a third mode to describe celestial bodies and souls which are everlasting but still change.

[ 4 ] In his exegesis of the Book of Genesis , Augustine of Hippo also recognized a mode of duration distinct from time and eternity. In Augustine's view, Heaven and earth, taken to mean formless matter, were created before time, and thus had existence in a participated eternity.

[ 2 ] In the beginning of the 13th century, independently of direct influence from Simplicius, a doctrine of three measures of duration was developing at the University of Paris .

[ 4 ] These were known as eternity, sempiternity (or perpetuity), and time.

[ 4 ] In the Summa attributed to Alexander of Hales , this middle measure of duration was used to describe angels, souls, and celestial spheres, all of which have a beginning but no end.

[ 4 ] The concept of the aevum, using the term as distinct from eternity, dates back at least to Albertus Magnus 's first systematic study of time, De quattuor coaequaevis .

[ 1 ] In contrast to the concept of sempiternity, Albertus notes that even if something has no beginning and no end, its mode of duration would be distinct from the eternity of God.

[ 4 ] To Albertus, eternity is pure actuality while aevum is always actual, but only the actuality of some potency.

[ 4 ] A description of aevum is found in the Summa theologica of Thomas Aquinas . Aquinas identifies the aevum as the measure of the existence of beings that "recede less from permanence of being, forasmuch as their being neither consists in change, nor is the subject of change; nevertheless they have change annexed to them either actually, or potentially". As examples, he cites the heavenly bodies (which, in medieval science, were considered changeless in their nature, though variable in their position.

[ 4 ] ) and the angels, which "have an unchangeable being as regards their nature with changeableness as regards choice".

[ 5 ] At the end of the 13th century, in De mensuris , Theodoric of Freiberg , further developed the philosophy of time. Theodoric distinguishes five measures of duration: [ 4 ] Superaetenitas - the measure of divine being; beyond eternity Aeternitas - the measure of the being of divine intelligences "if such beings exist" Aevum - the measure of angelic beings, which have a beginning, an everlasting existence, with no change in their substance but change in their accidents Aeviternitas - the measure of celestial bodies, which have a beginning and are everlasting but inferior in perfection to angels Time - the measure of beings with limited period of existence In the 14th century, both Berthold of Moosburg and William of Ockham rejected the concept of aevum. Berthold held that there were only two measures of duration: eternity and time.

[ 4 ] William did not even believe eternity could be properly called a measure and held that time was the only measure of duration.

[ 4 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] Frank Sheed , in his book Theology and Sanity , said that the aevum is also the measure of existence for the saints in heaven: "Aeviternity is the proper sphere of every created spirit, and therefore of the human soul... At death, [the body's] distracting relation to matter's time ceases to affect the soul, so that it can experience its proper aeviternity." [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy of space and time Temporal finitism Physics (Aristotle) Proclus References [ edit ] ^ a b Anzulewicz, Henryk (2001-06-21). Porro, Pasquale (ed.).

"Aeternitas - Aevum - Tempus: The Concept of Time in the System of Albert the Great" .

The Medieval Concept of Time .

doi : 10.1163/9789004453197_006 .

ISBN 9789004453197 .

^ a b c d Porro, Pasquale (2001-06-21).

"Angelic Measures: Aevum and Discrete Time" .

The Medieval Concept of Time .

Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/9789004453197_007 .

ISBN 9789004453197 .

^ Charlton T. Lewis and Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1879), 64–65.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Steel, Carlos (2001-06-21). Porro, Pasquale (ed.).

"The Neoplatonic Doctrine of Time and Eternity and its Influence on Medieval Philosophy" .

The Medieval Concept of Time .

doi : 10.1163/9789004453197_003 .

ISBN 9789004453197 .

^ Thomas Aquinas , Summa Theologica , First Part, Question 10, Article 5.

[1] ^ Sheed, Frank (1993).

Theology and Sanity (2nd ed.).

Ignatius Press .

ISBN 978-1684221004 .

Look up aevum or aeviternity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aevum&oldid=1292278971 " Categories : Angels in Christianity Concepts in metaphysics Christian saints Heaven in Christianity Infinity Philosophy of time Scholasticism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aevum 3 languages Add topic

