Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 War on terror rhetoric 2 Historic persecution Toggle Historic persecution subsection 2.1 Safavid period 3 Modern times Toggle Modern times subsection 3.1 Iraq 3.1.1 Barwana massacre 3.1.2 Hay al Jihad massacre 3.1.3 Musab bin Umair mosque massacre 3.2 Iran 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Anti-Sunnism 5 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prejudice towards Sunni Muslims Part of a series on Sunni Islam Beliefs God Prophets and Messengers Holy books Succession to Muhammad Angels Judgement Day Predestination Sahaba Five Pillars Declaration of Faith Prayer Charity Fasting Pilgrimage Rashidun Caliphs Abu Bakr Umar Uthman Ali Others Hasan ibn Ali Mu'awiya I Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz Schools of law Hanafi Maliki Shafi'i Hanbali Others Farahi Zahiri Awza'i Thawri Laythi Jariri Schools of theology Ash'arism and Maturidism ( Ahl al-Ra'y ) Atharism ( Ahl al-Hadith ) In terms of Ihsan : Sufis (Ahl al-Wijdan wa al-Kashf ) Contemporary movements Barelvi movement Deobandi movement Salafism Wahhabism Ahl-i Hadith Modernism Neo-traditionalism Holy sites Mecca Medina Jerusalem Lists Literature Kutub al-Sittah History Persecution Islam portal v t e Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be unbalanced towards certain viewpoints .

Please help improve it by adding information on neglected viewpoints. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( April 2025 ) The political neutrality of this article is disputed . This article may contain biased or partisan political opinions about a political party, event, person, or government stated as facts.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in Medina , where the Islamic prophet Muhammad and caliphs Abu Bakr and Omar are buried, is one of the holiest Sunni sites .

Anti-Sunnism , also described as Anti-Sunni sentiment , or Sunniphobia ; the "fear or hatred of Sunnism and Sunnites" [ 1 ] is hatred , prejudice , discrimination , persecution , or violence against Sunni Muslims .

[ 2 ] War on terror rhetoric [ edit ] Muhammad ibn Abdul Wahhab claimed to be a Sunni Muslim reformer of 18th century Arabia.

[ 3 ] The religious clergy of the Ottoman Empire considered him and his supporters to be heretics and apostates.

[ 4 ] They were labelled with the term Wahhabi . During the 19th century, the British colonial government in India placed anti-colonial Sunni scholars on trial in what became known as the "Great Wahhabi Trials" to suppress an imagined "Wahhabi conspiracy".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] To be a Wahhabi is officially a crime in Russia .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In Russian aligned Central Asian dictatorships, the term "Wahhabi" is used to refer to any unsanctioned religious activity. As a result, any Sunni Muslim, whether modernist, conservative, political or apolitical, is a potential target.

[ 9 ] In response to 9/11 World Trade Centre Bombings , the United States and its allies launched a controversial policy of an unprecedented counter-terrorism effort on an international scale dubbed as the War on Terror .

[ 10 ] It was characterised by the infamous words "You are either with us or against us".

[ 11 ] Both this approach, as well as the purpose of a War on Terror has been questioned.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] It has also been accused of inciting various forms of Islamophobia on a global scale.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The "War on Terror" rhetoric has been adopted by other authoritarian regimes.

[ 16 ] Russia has frequently invoked the "Wahhabi" label to target Sunni Muslims.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Russia has employed its own "War on Terror" in the Second Chechen War , in the insurgency in the North Caucasus, and currently in the Russian intervention in the Syrian Civil War .

[ 20 ] In a sectarian twist, War on Terror rhetoric has also been weaponised by Shiite rulers of Iran [ 21 ] [ 22 ] who adhere to Khomeinism , even frequently cooperating with the US.

[ 23 ] Iranian officials commonly invoke the "Wahhabi" label to further its sectarian identity politics in the region.

[ 24 ] Even prior to the War on Terror, Iranian leaders like Ayatollah Khomeini and Rafsanjani had invoked the Wahhabi label describing Sunnis as "heretics" to stir up Sunniphobia and Iran's policy of exporting its Khomeinist revolutions .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The curriculum of Khomeinist seminaries in Iran are known for their sectarian depictions against Sunni Muslims , often portraying Sunnis and revered figures in Sunni history as "Wahhabis".

[ 27 ] Omair Anas argues that after the War on Terror, an imagined Wahhabi conspiracy replaced the United States as Iran's " Great Satan ".

[ 28 ] In this vein, Qassem Soleimani , the former chief of Iran's IRGC , said that Wahhabism had Jewish roots.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Hassan Nasrallah , the Secretary General of Hezbollah labelled "Wahhabism" as "more evil than Israel".

[ 31 ] In 2016, Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif wrote an article in The New York Times entitled "Let Us Rid the World of Wahhabism", wherein he described Wahhabism as a "theological perversion" and "a death cult" that has "wrought havoc", and argued that "virtually every terrorist group abusing the name of Islam" was inspired by Wahhabism.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Historic persecution [ edit ] Safavid period [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Safavid conversion of Iran to Shia Islam In response to the growth of the Sunni Islam , the Safavid dynasty killed many Sunnis, attempted to convert them to Shi'ism, many of the burials of the Sunni saints were burnt by the orders of Safavid shahs, the Sunni states were also occupied.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] They also cursed the first three caliphs of Sunni Muslims, and also Aisha and Hafsa , the daughters of first two caliphs and the wives of the Islamic prophet.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Ismail I made new laws for Iran and the lands he controlled: Imposing Shiism as the state and mandatory religion for the whole nation and much forcible conversion of Iranian Sufi Sunnis to Shiism.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] He reintroduced the sadr (Arabic, leader) – an office that was responsible for supervising religious institutions and endowments. With a view to transforming Iran into a Shiite state, the sadr was also assigned the task of disseminating Twelver doctrine.

[ 42 ] He destroyed Sunni mosques and massacred many Sunni civilians in Iran and Iraq . This was even noted by Tomé Pires , the Portuguese ambassador to China who visited Iran in 1511–12, who when referring to Ismail noted: "He (i.e. Ismail) reforms our churches, destroys the houses of all Moors who follow (the Sunnah of) Muhammad..." [ 43 ] He enforced the ritual and compulsory cursing of the first three Sunni caliphs ( Abu Bakr , Umar , and Uthman ) as usurpers, from all mosques, disbanded Sunni Tariqahs and seized their assets, used state patronage to develop Shia shrines, institutions and religious art and imported Shia scholars to replace Sunni scholars.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] He killed Sunnis and destroyed and desecrated their graves and mosques. This caused the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid II (who initially congratulated Ismail on his victories) to advise and ask the young monarch (in a "fatherly" manner) to stop the anti-Sunni actions. However, Ismail was strongly anti-Sunni, ignored the Sultan's warning, and continued to spread the Shia faith by the sword.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] He persecuted, imprisoned, exiled, and executed stubbornly resistant Sunnis.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] When they resisted, he mostly did not have them killed outright, but had them arrested and violently forced their families to accept Shi'a Islam in front of their eyes, and in the end, whether they did it or not, they were killed and beheaded anyway and theirs heads placed in the gates for display.

With the establishment of Safavid rule, there was a very raucous and colourful, almost carnival-like holiday on 26 Dhu al-Hijjah (or alternatively, 9 Rabi' al-awwal ) celebrating the assassination of Caliph Omer. The highlight of the day was making an effigy of Umar to be cursed, insulted, and finally burned. However, as relations between Iran and Sunni countries improved, the holiday was no longer observed (at least officially).

[ 51 ] In 1501, Ismail invited all the Shia living outside Iran to come to Iran and be assured of protection from the Sunni majority.

[ 52 ] Modern times [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Iraq [ edit ] Main article: Sunni Islam in Iraq The post-Saddam government installed after the 2003 invasion of Iraq has been responsible for systematic discrimination of Sunni Muslims in bureaucracy , politics, military, police, as well as allegedly massacring Sunni Muslim prisoners in a sectarian manner.

[ 53 ] The De-Ba'athification policy implemented after the toppling of the Baathist regime has mostly been targeting Sunni civil servants, politicians and military officials; leading to anti-Sunni discrimination in the bureaucracy and worsening of the sectarian situation in Iraq .

[ 54 ] Many Sunnis were killed following the 2006 al-Askari mosque bombing during the Iraqi civil war .

International organizations like the Human Rights Watch have condemned Iraqi government and Iran-backed militant groups of committing sectarian massacres against the Sunni minority in Iraq, stating that these atrocities constituted " crimes against humanity ".

[ 55 ] Barwana massacre [ edit ] Main article: Barwana massacre The massacre was allegedly committed by Shia militants, as a revenge for ISIS atrocities, in the Sunni village of Barwana, allegedly killing 70 boys and men.

[ 56 ] Hay al Jihad massacre [ edit ] Main article: Hay al Jihad massacre On 9 July 2006, in the Hay al-Jihad area of Baghdad , the capital of Iraq , an estimated 40 Sunni civilians were killed in revenge attacks carried out by Shia militants from the Mahdi Army .

[ 57 ] Musab bin Umair mosque massacre [ edit ] Main article: Musab bin Umair mosque massacre On 22 August 2014, Shia militants killed at least 73 people in an attack on the Sunni Mus`ab ibn `Umair mosque in the Imam Wais village of Iraq , the attack occurred during the Friday prayers , where many of the Sunnis were attending their prayers.

[ 58 ] At the time of the attack, there were about 150 worshippers at the mosque. The Iran-backed Asaib Ahl al-Haq militant group, a splinter group of the Imam Ali Brigades , are suspected to be the perpetrators.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Iran [ edit ] See also: 2022 Zahedan massacre Sunni-majority provinces in Iran are neglected by the government, leading to socio-economic disenfranchisement and high rates of poverty.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Iran's first Supreme Leader Khomeini had held anti-Sunni religious views, which was also reflected in the geo-political strategy he outlined in his " Last Will and Testament ".

[ 64 ] During the events of 1979 Revolution, Sunni-majority cities in Khuzestan , Western Azerbaijan and Golestan provinces were targets of sectarian attacks by Khomeinist militants. Many Sunni religious leaders and intellectuals who had initially backed the revolution were imprisoned during the 1980s.

[ 65 ] Political discriminations have since been normalized, with Sunnis being denied representation in government bodies such as the Guardian Council and the Expediency Council which are reserved for the Shias.

[ 66 ] It has also been argued that Sunnis are marginalized by the Iranian Majlis , with less than 6% of the seats being permitted for Sunnis since the establishment of the parliamentary body in 1980; [ 67 ] [ 68 ] the percentage of Sunnis in Iran is usually estimated to be 5-10%, [ 69 ] but some Sunni leaders have claimed it to be "between 12 and 25 percent".

[ 70 ] After Khomeini's death in 1989, Iran began publicly exporting Anti-Sunni rhetoric through propaganda and Khomeinist media outlets across the Islamic World , in increasing proportions particularly since the 2000s.

[ 71 ] Ethnic minorities that are predominantly Sunni, such as the Kurds , Balochs , and Turkmens suffer the brunt of religious persecutions and numerous Masajid (mosques) of these communities are routinely destroyed by the security forces.

[ 72 ] In 2007, government tightened restrictions on Sunni religious schools and universities; and forced Sunni religious students to study in Khomeinist institutes.

[ 73 ] In 2011, Iran imposed restrictions that blocked Sunni Muslims from holding their own separate Eid prayers at the city of Tehran .

[ 74 ] Discrimination against Sunnis had increased since 2021, due to authoritarian policies of hardline Former President Ibrahim Raisi .

[ 75 ] In a brutal massacre known as " Bloody Friday " conducted in September 2022, IRGC and Basij forces opened fired and killed over 90 Sunni protesters during Jumu'ah prayers near Jameh Mosque of Makki in Sistan-Balochistan , the largest Sunni mosque in Iran. Some worshippers had gone out of the mosque and marched on the police station across the street in protest against the recent alleged rape of a Baloch girl by a policeman, throwing stones and molotov cocktails; the security forces responded with fire and continued to shoot at the worshippers as some of them retreated back into the mosque. As of October 2022, the massacre is the deadliest incident that occurred as part of the military crackdown on 2022 Iranian protests .

Molwi Abdolhamid Ismaeelzahi , popular Baloch Islamic scholar and spiritual leader of Iran's Sunni Muslim minority, who led the prayers, denounced the regime for the massacre and its "absolute lies" stereotyping the regular Sunni worshippers as Baloch separatists.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] In an unusual speech condemning Ali Khamenei and Iranian army for the violence and bloodshed, Abdul Hamid declared: "The supreme leader of the Islamic Republic, as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces , as well as other officials are all responsible, and no one can evade this responsibility.." [ 79 ] In May 2023 alone, Iran executed at least 142 individuals (78, or 55% of them, on drug-related charges), its highest monthly rate since 2015. At least 30 of those executed were from the Sunni Baluch minority .

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Islamism Anti-Shi'ism Persecution of Hazara people Persecution of minority Muslim groups Persecution of Muslims Persecution of Sufis References [ edit ] ^ "Meaning of Sunniphobia" .

Words Look .

^ John Richard Thackrah (2013).

Dictionary of Terrorism (2nd revised ed.). Routledge. p. 252.

ISBN 978-1-135-16595-6 .

^ "Ibn Abd al-Wahhab, Muhammad (d. 1791)" .

Oxford Islamic Studies online . Archived from the original on 12 July 2016.

^ SAUDI ARABIA WAHHÂBÎSM & THE SALAFÎ SECT: UNDERSTANDING THE GREAT CONSPIRACY . Johannesburg, South Africa: Dar al Ahnaf. p. 81.

Shaykh Muhammad Ibn Sulaymân al-Madanî ash-Shâfi'î, as quoted in the book 'Ashadd ul-Jihâd', declared his belief a heresy and formally excommunicated him by issuing a fatwâ, the text of which said:  " This man is leading the ignoramuses of the present age to a heretical path. He is attempting to extinguish Allah's light, but Allah will not permit His light to be extinguished.

^ Stephens, Julia (January 5, 2009).

"The "Great Wahabi Trial": The Legal Construction and Deconstruction of the Muslim Jihadi in British India, 1869–71" .

American Historical Association .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2020.

^ Stephens, Julia (January 2013).

"The Phantom Wahhabi: Liberalism and the Muslim fanatic in mid-Victorian India" .

Modern Asian Studies .

47 (1): 22– 52.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X12000649 .

JSTOR 23359778 .

S2CID 145092951 .

Abstract:  In the late 1860s and early 1870s the British colonial government in India suppressed an imagined Wahhabi conspiracy, which it portrayed as a profound threat to imperial security.

^ "Совет муфтиев России выступил против запрета ваххабизма" . 2 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2018.

^ "Attack on Wahhabi Islam divides Russian Muslims: Council of Muftis of Russia Speaks Out Against Ban of Wahhabism - "While deeply aware of the vital importance of combating the ideology of intolerance and devoting great efforts in this direction, we nevertheless consider that the introduction of the principle of prosecution of believers for their convictions and not for specific illegal actions will have a most harmful effect both on the Muslim community of Russia and inter-ethnic harmony and on the legal culture of the Russia state," the statement of the Council of Muftis says, which was posted on Monday on its website" .

stetson.edu .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021.

^ Commins, David (2006).

The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London, New York: I.B. Tauris & Co Ltd. p. 192.

In Russia and Central Asia, public figures and the media see Wahhabism as the inspiration for religious revival and Islamic political movements. During the Soviet era, official apprehensions emerged about an 'Islamic threat' posed by Sufi orders as nests of secret conspiracies against the communist system. In the post-Soviet era, Sufism has assumed a positive connotation as a moderate form of Islam opposed to Wahhabism, which has become a sort of bogeyman in public discourse. Pejorative use of the term cropped up in the late Soviet era, when members of the official religious establishment castigated proponents of expunging ritual of non-scriptural elements for 'importing' Wahhabism, thus implying that it is alien to the region's heritage. Many Russians believe that after the Afghan war, Wahhabis infiltrated Central Asia to spread their version of Islam. Thus, in 1998, political leaders of Russia, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan declared their readiness to confront 'a threat of aggressive fundamentalism, aggressive extremism and above all Wahhabism. This is what we have currently in Afghanistan and in troubled Tajikistan.' The government of Uzbekistan tags unsanctioned religious activity with the Wahhabi label. The problem with this outlook is that it conflates differences among a variety of Muslim religious movements, which include militant and reformist political tendencies alongside utterly apolitical ones. Thus, a leading Tajik modernist who favours a blend of democracy and Islam has been branded a Wahhabi even though he has ties to Sufi circles ^ H. Daddler; M Lindsay, Ivo, James (Dec 1, 2001).

"Nasty, Brutish and Long: America's War on Terrorism" .

BROOKINGS .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2020.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ " 'You are either with us or against us' " .

CNN . November 6, 2001.

Archived from the original on 24 January 2016.

^ Odom, William (27 February 2014).

"American Hegemony: How to Use It, How to Lose It" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2016.

^ K Albright, Madeleine (June 2, 2009).

"Obama's Muslim Speech "According to Muslim speakers at such events, one fact stands out: When the cold war ended, America needed an enemy to replace Communism and chose Islam...Mr. Obama's dilemma is that no speech, however eloquent, can disentangle U.S.-Muslim relations from the treacherous terrain of current events in places such as Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran and the Middle East...Muslims desire respect and respect demands frankness. We cannot pretend that American soldiers and aircraft are not attacking Muslims." " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2016.

^ A. Beydoun, Khalid (2020).

"Exporting Islamophobia in the Global "War On Terror" " (PDF) .

NEW YORK UNIVERSITY LAW REVIEW ONLINE .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 April 2020.

^ Carrington, Kerry; Ball, Matthew; O'Brien, Erin; Tall, Juan (2013).

Crime, Justice and Social Democracy: International Perspectives . UK: PALGRAVE MACMILLAN. pp.

133– 144.

doi : 10.1057/9781137008695_9 .

ISBN 978-1-137-00868-8 . Archived from the original on 27 March 2020.

When, in September 2001, the right-wing Republican president of the US proclaimed the 'war on terrorism', which he also dubbed a 'crusade', George W. Bush was soon joined in such battle by his staunch British ally Tony Blair, a Labour prime minister. A populist prime minister of the conservative coalition in Australia, John Howard faithfully entered the fray on behalf of this nation, which likewise imagines itself to have a special relationship with the USA. All these allies participated in the unlawful invasion of Afghanistan the following month, in the name of this war on terrorism, and of Iraq eighteen months later. The forces of all three countries are still in Afghanistan, with very little difference to this fact having been made by the now Democratic presidency in the US, the now Tory-led coalition in the UK, or the now Labor government in Australia. Really, existing labour parties - when in government, that is - have taken a very similar stance in relation to securing militarily the US-led global empire to that of their conservative opponents. All have participated similarly in state crime in the 'war on terror'; indeed all have been comparably complicit in what I call 'empire crime' ^ A Beydoun, Khaled (2020).

"Exporting Islamophobia inf the Global 'War on Terror' " .

New York University Law Review Online .

95 (81): 84.

Beyond genuine national security threats, countries across the world  capitalized on the conflation of Islam with terrorism to serve discrete  national interests. This American War on Terror furnished nations with  license, and more importantly, a policing template and language to profile  and persecute their Muslim minority populations. American Islamophobia, buoyed by swift state action including the War in Afghanistan and the USA  PATRIOT Act, manifested in a surge of vigilante violence against Muslims  and "Muslim-looking" groups and had global impact ^ Delong-Bas, Natana J. (2004).

Wahhabi Islam:From Revival and Reform to Global Jihad . New York: OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS. pp.

123– 124.

ISBN 0199883548 .

Many of the regimes and movements labeled as Wahhabi in the contemporary era do not necessarily share the same theological and legal orientations. The reality is that Wahhabism has become such a blanket term for any Islamic movement that has an apparent tendency toward misogyny, militantism, extremism, or strict and literal interpretation of the Quran and hadith that the designation of a regime or movement as Wahhabi or Wahhabi-like tells us little about its actual nature. Furthermore, these contemporary interpretations of Wahhabism do not nec- essarily reflect the writings or teachings of Ibn Abd al-Wahhab ^ Atkin, Muriel.

"The Rhetoric of Islamophobia" .

CA&C Press AB . Archived from the original on 2012-01-25 . Retrieved 2021-01-21 .

In political, as well as religious matters, any Muslim who challenges the status quo is at risk of being labeled a Wahhabi. This is how the KGB and its post-Soviet successors have used the term. In fact, the KGB may have played a large role in promoting its use ^ Commins, David (2006).

The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia . London: I.B. Tauris. p. 192.

Pejorative use of the term cropped up in the late Soviet era, when members of the official religious establishment castigated proponents of expunging ritual of non-scriptural elements for 'importing' Wahhabism, thus implying that it is alien to the region's heritage.Many Russians believe that after the Afghan war, Wahhabis infiltrated Central Asia to spread their version of Islam. Thus, in 1998, political leaders of Russia, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan declared their readiness to confront 'a threat of aggressive fundamentalism, aggressive extremism and above all Wahhabism. This is what we have currently in Afghanistan and in troubled Tajikistan. The government of Uzbekistan tags unsanctioned religious activity with the Wahhabi label. The problem with this outlook is that it conflates differences among a variety of Muslim religious movements, which include militant and reformist political tendencies alongside utterly apolitical ones. Thus, a leading Tajik modernist who favours a blend of democracy and Islam has been branded a Wahhabi even though he has ties to Sufi circles.

^ Shuster, Simon (September 19, 2011).

"How the War on Terrorism Did Russia a Favor" .

Time . Archived from the original on May 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2021 .

^ Zammit, Wael (30 August 2015).

"US–Iran "Special" Relations Between 2001 and 2003: Friends or Foes? "The "war on terror" created a rare opportunity for Iran and U.S. to come together" .

E-International Relations . p. 14.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2017.

In one of their meetings, the member of the Iranian delegation had a message for the American government: "Iran was prepared to work unconditionally with the United States in the "war on terror" and if they could work with [the Americans] on this issue, it had the potential to fundamentally transform U.S.-Iranian relations." Commenting on this, reporter John Richardson said that such a statement had "seismic diplomatic implications" ... Hilary Mann, who had just joined the National Security Council staff as its resident Iran expert and Ryan Crocker, a senior State Department official, sit with Iranian officials who expressed their will to cooperate with the Americans and re-establish diplomatic relations." Pg.16 "I an interview with Barbara Slavin in 2005, former Iran Revolutionary Guards Corps' chief commander, Mohsen Rezaie, stated that the Islamic Republic played an "important role" in capturing Kabul as members of IRGC "fought alongside and advised the Afghan rebels who helped U.S. forces topple Afghanistan's Taliban regime" in the months after the September 11 terrorist attacks. Such a stance is further emphasized by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld who discussed the war on Afghanistan on CBS on November 11, 2001, two days before the fall of Kabul and asserted that "there [were] some Iranian liaison people, as well as some American liaison people working with the same Afghan forces." Besides, Slavin confirms the Iranian role and argues that members of the IRG Qods Brigade were on the field when the Alliance, with U.S. air support, took control of Kabul."... "The American-Iranian cooperation did not end after the successful overthrow of the Taliban regime. The rapprochement between the two arch-foes was further illustrated in their collaboration to create an interim post-Taliban government in Afghanistan. Whereas, Iran's role in the "war on terror" was largely secret, its role in forming a "broad-based, multiethnic, politically balanced, freely chosen" government was rather direct as the American and Iranian diplomats met and collaborated via the Six plus Two group.

^ Sebnem Oruc, Merve (25 February 2020).

"How did the world buy Assad's 'war on terror' narrative?" .

Daily Sabah . p. While the Assad regime and its most loyal backer Iran provided an opportunity for the rise of al-Qaida and Daesh in Syria, Damascus also allowed the radicals to travel abroad freely to confuse the Westerners. The extremists went abroad and recruited sympathizers, brought them to Syria for training and then sent them back. Assad's clerics had already threatened the West; they kept their promise and made Daesh bombings happen in the Western countries. It was a "shock and awe" tactic that actually worked. The Western leaders who were against Assad's rule became the targets of far-right and leftist political groups in Europe. And finally, Islamophobia – Sunniphobia is the right word actually – started to rise in the West as every Sunni was seen as a threat by the white supremacists and their circles of influence.

^ N. (((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((Katz))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))), Mark (4 January 2011).

"Iran and the "War on Terror" " .

Middle East Policy Council .

^ Ostovar, Afshon (30 November 2016).

"Sectarian Dilemmas in Iranian Foreign Policy: When Strategy and Identity Politics Collide" .

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2018.

However, by equating takfirism and Wahhabism, Iran further muddies the water of identity politics. It is a way of confusing the sectarian dynamic in Iraq and Syria, by asserting that the other side is not actually Sunni, but rather an extreme ideological movement (takfirism) that is beyond the pale of Islam and, therefore, not even Islamic. Like the case of the Saudi grand mufti, such rhetoric allows Iranian officials to indulge in their own game of takfir—articulating who is and who is not a Muslim and justifying actions accordingly. To neutral observers of Wahhabism, such accusations might touch on truth, but as a foreign policy tool, they only beget further acrimony from Iran's Sunni neighbors.

^ Kramer, Martin (11 October 2010).

"Khomeini's Messengers in Mecca" .

MartinKramer.org .

Khomeini declared that the Saudi rulers, "these vile and ungodly Wahhabis, are like daggers which have always pierced the heart of the Muslims from the back," and announced that Mecca was in the hands of "a band of heretics."32 Once more, the Saudis were transformed into what the speaker of the parliament, Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani, called "Wahhabi hooligans." Rafsanjani recalled the nineteenth-century Wahhabi massacres (of Shi'ites) in Najaf and Karbala, the Wahhabi destruction of Islamic monuments in Medina (venerated by Shi'ites), and the Wahhabi burning of libraries (containing Shi'ite works). The Wahhabis "will commit any kind of crime. I ask you to pay more attention to the history of that evil clique so that you can see what kind of creatures they have been in the course of their history."33 This represented a deliberate attempt to fuel a present crisis with the memory of past sectarian hatreds." ^ (((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((Rabinovich))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))), Itamar; Shaked, (((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((Haim))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))), eds. (1989).

Middle East Contemporary Survey . Vol. XI 1987. Boulder, San Francisco, London: Westview Press. p. 174.

ISBN 0-8133-0925-5 .

Iranian statements pandered to the belief still held by Shi'ites that the fanatic Saudis were driven by their own misguided beliefs to kill innocent Shi'ite pilgrims. Khomeini declared that the Saudi rulers, "these vile and ungodly Wahhabis, are like daggers which have always pierced the heart of the Muslims from the back," and announced that Mecca was in the hands of "a band of heretics." Once more, the Saudis were transformed into what the speaker of the parliament, Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani, called "Wahhabi hooligans." Rafsanjani recalled the nineteenth-century Wahhabi massacres (of Shi'ites) in Najaf and Karbala, the Wahhabi destruction of Islamic monuments in Medina (venerated by Shi'ites), and the Wahhabi burning of libraries (containing Shi'ite works). The Wahhabis "will commit any kind of crime. I ask you to pay more attention to the history of that evil clique so that you can see what kind of creatures they have been in the course of their history." This represented a deliberate attempt to fuel a present crisis with the memory of past sectarian hatreds.

^ Luz, Anwar (28 February 2023).

"How Two Months at an Iranian Seminary Changed My Life" .

New Lines Magazine . Archived from the original on 9 March 2023.

^ Anas, Omair (September 17, 2016).

"Iran's new Great Satan: Saudi Arabia and its Wahhabi ideology" .

FirstPost . Archived from the original on 21 March 2020.

^ "Soleimani: Wahhabism Has Jewish Roots" .

Iran International . 23 February 2019.

^ J. Frantzman, Seth (February 22, 2019).

"IRGC General Soleimani says roots of Wahhabism are Jewish, linked to ISIS" .

The Jerusalem Post .

^ Williams, Jennifer (27 September 2016).

"The head of Hezbollah has found someone he hates even more than Israelis" .

Vox .

Hassan Nasrallah, the secretary general of a group that has been fighting Israel for decades, declared on Tuesday that "Wahhabism is more evil than Israel," Lebanon's Al Akhbar newspaper reported."... "In other words, things have gotten so bad that Hezbollah, Israel's mortal enemy, now considers Wahhabis — that is, fellow Muslims — to be worse than Israel. Bear in mind, this is coming from the same man who has described Israel as "a cancerous entity and the root of all the crises and wars" and pledged that Israel's destiny "is manifested in our motto: ' Death to Israel .' ^ Javad Zarif, Mohammad (13 September 2016).

"Mohammad Javad Zarif: Let Us Rid the World of Wahhabism" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020.

Since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, militant Wahhabism has undergone a series of face-lifts, but underneath, the ideology remains the same — whether it's the Taliban, the various incarnations of Al Qaeda or the so-called Islamic State, which is neither Islamic nor a state."...... "Over the past three decades, Riyadh has spent tens of billions of dollars exporting Wahhabism through thousands of mosques and madrasas across the world. From Asia to Africa, from Europe to the Americas, this theological perversion has wrought havoc. As one former extremist in Kosovo told The Times, "The Saudis completely changed Islam here with their money." Though it has attracted only a minute proportion of Muslims, Wahhabism has been devastating in its impact. Virtually every terrorist group abusing the name of Islam — from Al Qaeda and its offshoots in Syria to Boko Haram in Nigeria — has been inspired by this death cult.

^ OSTOVAR, AFSHON PAPER Source: Getty Summary (30 November 2016).

"Sectarian Dilemmas in Iranian Foreign Policy: When Strategy and Identity Politics Collide" .

Carnegie Endowment for International Peace .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2019.

In September, the New York Times published an op-ed by Iran's foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, entitled "Let Us Rid the World of Wahhabism." Zarif contends that Wahhabist Islam has become a plague, unleashing terrorism and murderous tumult across the Middle East and throughout the world. He calls Wahhabism a "theological perversion" that has "wrought havoc" and had a "devastating" impact in Islamic communities. The violence committed by jihadist groups such as al-Qaeda is a direct result of "Riyadh's persistent sponsorship of extremism," he argues, and this violence is at the root of the current conflicts in the Middle East. He accuses Saudi Arabia of "playing the 'Iran card'" to induce its allies to take part in the Syrian and Yemeni wars, and he concludes that "concrete action against extremism is needed." Even though Riyadh caused the mess, Zarif "invite[s]" Saudi Arabia to be part of the solution. That gesture rings hollow given the accusatory tone of the piece. It is clearly a polemic against Iran's neighbor and archrival, another salvo in their ongoing cold war.

^ El-Bar, Karim (5 October 2016).

"Analysts slam Iran's Zarif for blasting Wahhabism but ignoring own record" .

Middle East Eye .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2020.

^ Keita, Maghan (2002).

Conceptualizing/Re-Conceptualizing Africa: The Construction of African Historical Identity . Brill. p. 90.

ISBN 9789004124202 . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

^ Iran: a short history : from Islamization to the present, By Monika Gronke, pg.90 ^ Encyclopaedic Historiography of the Muslim World .  NK Singh, A Samiuddin, p. 90.

^ The Cambridge illustrated history of the Islamic world .  Francis Robinson, p. 72.

^ Modern Iran: roots and results of revolution. Nikki R Keddie, Yann Richard, pp. 13, 20 ^ The Encyclopedia of world history: ancient, medieval, and modern [ permanent dead link ] .  Peter N. Stearns, William Leonard Langer, p. 360.

^ Immortal: A Military History of Iran and Its Armed Forces . Steven R Ward, p. 43 ^ Iran: a short history: from Islamization to the present .  Monika Gronke, p. 91.

^ The Judeo-Persian poet 'Emrānī and his "Book of treasure": 'Emrānī's Ganǰ...

'Emrānī, David Yeroushalmi, p. 20.

^ A new introduction to Islam . Daniel W Brown, p. 191.

^ Encyclopaedic Historiography of the Muslim World .  NK Singh, A Samiuddin, p. 90.

^ The Cambridge illustrated history of the Islamic world .  Francis Robinson, p. 72.

^ Immortal: A Military History of Iran and Its Armed Forces . Steven R. Ward, p. 44.

^ Iran and America: re-kindling a love lost]. Badi Badiozamani, pp. 174–175.

^ ..The Cambridge illustrated history of the Islamic world... Francis Robinson, p. 72.

^ Iraq: Old Land, New Nation in Conflict .  William Spencer, p. 51.

^ Culture and customs of Iran .  Elton L Daniel, 'Alī Akbar Mahdī, p. 185.

^ Iraq: Old Land, New Nation in Conflict . William Spencer, p. 51.

^ "Human Rights Watch says Iraq forces killed 250 Sunni prisoners" .

Hindustan Times . July 13, 2014.

^ Harris, William (2018). "Glossary".

Quicksilver War: Syria, Iraq and the Spiral of Conflict . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 176.

ISBN 9780190874872 .

^ "Iraq: Pro-Government Militias' Trail of Death" .

Human Rights Watch . 31 July 2014. Archived from the original on 22 December 2014.

^ Jane Arraf (29 Jan 2015).

"Iraq PM orders urgent probe into military 'massacre' " .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 16 March 2015 .

^ Urban, Mark, Task Force Black: The Explosive True Story of the Secret Special Forces War in Iraq , St. Martin's Griffin, 2012, ISBN 978-1250006967 , pp. 163–164.

^ Iraq conflict: Diyala Sunni mosque attack kills dozens , bbc.com.

^ "Preachers of Hate: Qais Al-Khazali" .

Arab News . Archived from the original on 16 July 2019.

^ "Asa'ib Ahl al-Haq" .

Stanford: CISAC . Archived from the original on 28 April 2019.

^ Malek, Caline (16 January 2019).

"From tourism to terrorism: How the revolution changed Iran" .

Arab News .

^ Hamidi, Lara (27 April 2023).

"Riyadh and Tehran – Does the promotion of religious tolerance truly respect the rights of citizens at home and aboard?" .

euromedmonitor.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2023.

^ "If the "Republic" Preserved, there would be no Protests for a Centaury" .

abdolhamid.net . 3 April 2023. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023.

^ Kazemzadeh, Masoud (2020). "5: The sources of the Middle East's crises and American grand strategy".

Iran's Foreign Policy: Elite Factionalism, Ideology, the Nuclear Weapons Program, and the United States . New York: Routledge. pp.

75– 76.

ISBN 978-0-367-49545-9 .

^ Boroujerdi, Mehrzad (21 November 2022).

"Sunnis in Iran: Protesting Against Decades of Discrimination and Repression" .

The Washington Institute . Archived from the original on 21 November 2022.

^ Hamidi, Lara (Apr 27, 2023).

"Riyadh and Tehran – Does the promotion of religious tolerance truly respect the rights of citizens at home and aboard?" .

Euro-Med Human Rights Monitor .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2023.

12 out of the 277 members of the Assembly of Religious Experts are Sunni ^ Boroujerdi, Mehrzad (21 November 2022).

"Sunnis in Iran: Protesting Against Decades of Discrimination and Repression" .

The Washington Institute . Archived from the original on 21 November 2022.

^ Hamidi, Lara (27 April 2023).

"Riyadh and Tehran – Does the promotion of religious tolerance truly respect the rights of citizens at home and aboard?" .

euromedmonitor.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2023.

^ "Iran. People and Society".

The World Factbook . CIA . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Faramarzi, Scheherezade (6 April 2018).

"Iran's Sunnis resist extremism, but for how long?" .

Atlantic Council . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Nasr, Vali (2006). "8: The Rise of Iran".

The Shia Revival: How Conflicts within Islam Will Shape the Future (1st ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-393-06211-3 .

^ Kazemzadeh, Masoud (2020).

Iran's Foreign Policy: Elite Factionalism, Ideology, the Nuclear Weapons Program, and the United States . New York: Routledge. pp. 52, 62, 67– 77.

ISBN 978-0-367-49545-9 .

^ Boroujerdi, Mehrzad (21 November 2022).

"Sunnis in Iran: Protesting Against Decades of Discrimination and Repression" .

The Washington Institute . Archived from the original on 21 November 2022.

^ Kamali Dehghan, Saeed (31 August 2011).

"Sunni Muslims banned from holding own Eid prayers in Tehran" .

Guardian . Archived from the original on 12 November 2014.

^ Hamidi, Lara (27 April 2023).

"Riyadh and Tehran – Does the promotion of religious tolerance truly respect the rights of citizens at home and aboard?" .

euromedmonitor.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2023.

^ "Iran security forces massacred Sunni Balochi minority, sources confirm" .

Middle East Monitor . 16 October 2022. Archived from the original on 17 October 2022.

^ "Iran maintains silence on 'massacre' in Sunni-majority city" .

Al-Monitor . 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022.

^ Engelbrecht, Tabrizy, Jhaveri, Cora, Nilo, Ishaan (14 October 2022).

" 'It Was a Massacre': How Security Forces Cracked Down in Southeastern Iran" .

New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 October 2022.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Iran maintains silence on 'massacre' in Sunni-majority city" .

Al-Monitor . 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022.

^ "At Least 142 Executed in May; 307 Executions in 2023" . 1 June 2023. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023.

^ "Iran executed over 300 people in 2023, highest in May since 2015" .

Al Arabiya News . 1 June 2023. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023.

v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Sunnism&oldid=1302471974 " Categories : Anti-Sunnism Sectarian violence Shia–Sunni sectarian violence Persecution by Muslims Violence against Muslims Persecution of Muslims Islam-related controversies Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from April 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles that may contain original research from April 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing more viewpoints from April 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Sunnism 5 languages Add topic

