Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Environment 2 Fauna 3 Conservation 4 Recreation 5 Literature 6 Wadden Sea Region 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Wadden Sea 68 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malti Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intertidal zone in the southeastern part of the North Sea Wadden Sea UNESCO World Heritage Site The Wadden Sea at Süderoog in north Germany Location North Sea in Denmark , Germany and the Netherlands Criteria Natural: viii, ix, x Reference 1314 Inscription 2009 (33rd Session ) Extensions 2011, 2014 1 2 3 4 5 class=notpageimage| Wadden Sea: Lauwersmeer National Park , Netherlands Lower Saxon Wadden Sea National Park , Germany Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park , Germany Schleswig-Holstein Wadden Sea National Park , Germany Wadden Sea National Park , Denmark The Wadden Sea ( Dutch : Waddenzee [ˈʋɑdə(n)zeː] ⓘ ; German : Wattenmeer [ˈvatn̩ˌmeːɐ̯] ⓘ ; Low German : Wattensee or Waddenzee ; Danish : Vadehavet ; West Frisian : Waadsee ; North Frisian : di Heef ) is an intertidal zone in the southeastern part of the North Sea . It lies between the coast of northwestern continental Europe and the range of low-lying Frisian Islands , forming a shallow body of water with tidal flats and wetlands . It has a high biological diversity and is an important area for both breeding and migrating birds. In 2009, the Dutch and German parts of the Wadden Sea were inscribed on UNESCO 's World Heritage List and the Danish part was added in June 2014.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Wadden Sea stretches from Den Helder , in the northwest of the Netherlands , past the great river estuaries of Germany to its northern boundary at Skallingen in Denmark along a total coastline of some 500 km (310 mi) and a total area of about 10,000 km 2 (3,900 sq mi). Within the Netherlands, it is bounded from the IJsselmeer by the Afsluitdijk . Historically, the coastal regions were often subjected to large floods, resulting in thousands of deaths, including the Saint Marcellus' floods of 1219 and 1362, Burchardi flood of 1634 and Christmas Flood of 1717 . Some of these also significantly changed the coastline.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Numerous dikes [ 5 ] and several causeways have been built, [ 6 ] and as a result recent floods have resulted in few or no fatalities (even if some dikes rarely and locally have been overrun in recent history).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] This makes it among the most human-altered habitats on the planet.

[ 7 ] Environment [ edit ] Map showing the Wadden Sea in dark blue Salt marsh and mudflats in Westerhever , Germany The word wad is Frisian and Dutch for "mud flat" ( Low German and German : Watt , Danish : Vade ). The area is typified by extensive tidal mud flats , deeper tidal trenches ( tidal creeks ) and the islands that are contained within this, a region continually contested by land and sea.

[ 8 ] The landscape has been formed for a great part by storm tides in the 10th to 14th centuries, overflowing and carrying away former peat land behind the coastal dunes.

[ citation needed ] The present islands are a remnant of the former coastal dunes.

Towards the North Sea the islands are marked by dunes and wide sandy beaches, and towards the Wadden Sea a low, tidal coast. The impact of waves and currents carrying away sediments is slowly changing both land masses and coastlines. For example, the islands of Vlieland and Ameland have moved eastwards through the centuries, having lost land on one side and added it on the other.

[ 9 ] Sea level rise poses a significant threat to areas with low-lying coastal areas with small gradients, such as the tidal flats of the Wadden Sea. However, recent studies indicate that the current sea level rise (3.7 mm/yr) [ 10 ] is being exceeded by sediment accretion rates across most of these tidal flats, particularly along the German coastline. While tidal flats in the Dutch Wadden Sea are also accreting, they are doing so at a slower pace.

[ 11 ] Fauna [ edit ] The mudflats of the Pilsumer Watt near Greetsiel , Germany Harbor seals on Terschelling , Netherlands The Wadden Sea is famous for its rich flora and fauna , especially birds. Hundreds of thousands of waders , ducks , and geese use the area as a migration stopover or wintering site. It is also a rich habitat for gulls and terns , [ 12 ] as well as a few species of herons , Eurasian spoonbills and birds-of-prey , including a small and increasing breeding population of white-tailed eagles .

[ 13 ] However, the biodiversity of Wadden Sea is smaller today than it once was; for birds, greater flamingos and Dalmatian pelicans used to be common as well, at least during the Holocene climatic optimum when the climate was warmer.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Due to human activity and a changing environment, species have gone extinct, while others are expected to migrate in.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Larger fish including rays , Atlantic salmon and brown trout are still present in several sections of the Wadden Sea, but others like European sea sturgeon only survive in the region through a reintroduction project. The world's only remaining natural population of houting survives in the Danish part of the Wadden Sea and it has been used as a basis for reintroductions further south, but considerable taxonomic confusion remains over its status (whether it is the same as the houting that once lived further south in the Wadden Sea).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] European oyster once formed large beds in the region and was still present until a few decades ago, when extirpated due to a combination of disease and the continued spread of the invasive Pacific oyster , which now forms large beds in the Wadden Sea.

[ 20 ] Especially the southwestern part of the Wadden Sea has been greatly reduced. Historically, the Rhine was by far the most important river flowing into this section, but it has been greatly reduced due to dams. As a result, about 90% of all the species that historically inhabited that part of the Wadden Sea are at risk.

[ 21 ] The Wadden Sea is an important habitat for both harbour and grey seals .

Harbour porpoises and white-beaked dolphins are the sea's only resident cetaceans . They were once extinct in the southern part of the sea but have also re-colonized that area again.

[ 22 ] Many other cetaceans only visit seasonally, or occasionally.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In early history, North Atlantic right whales and gray whales (now extinct in the North Atlantic) [ 25 ] were present in the region, perhaps using the shallow, calm waters for feeding and breeding. It has been theorized that they were hunted to extinction in this region by shore-based whalers in medieval times.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] They are generally considered long-extinct in the region, but in the Netherlands, a possible right whale was observed close to beaches on Texel in the West Frisian Islands and off Steenbanken, Schouwen-Duiveland in July 2005.

[ 28 ] Recent increases in the number of North Atlantic humpback whales and minke whales might have resulted in more visits and possible re-colonization by the species to the areas especially around Marsdiep .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Future recovery of once-extinct local bottlenose dolphins is also expected.

[ 22 ] Conservation [ edit ] North Frisian Islands , ( Sylt ) A number of human-introduced invasive species , including algae , plants, and smaller organisms, are causing negative effects on native species.

[ 31 ] Each of the three countries has designated Ramsar sites in the region (see Wadden Sea National Parks ).

Although the Wadden Sea is not yet listed as a transboundary Ramsar site, a great part of the Wadden Sea is protected in cooperation of all three countries. The governments of the Netherlands, Denmark and Germany have been working together since 1978 on the protection and conservation of the Wadden Sea. Co-operation covers management, monitoring and research, as well as political matters. Furthermore, in 1982, a Joint Declaration on the Protection of the Wadden Sea was agreed upon to co-ordinate activities and measures for the protection of the Wadden Sea. In 1997, a Trilateral Wadden Sea Plan was adopted.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] In 1986, the Wadden Sea Area was declared a biosphere reserve by UNESCO .

[ 35 ] In June 2009, the Wadden Sea (comprising the Dutch Wadden Sea Conservation Area and the German Wadden Sea National Parks of Lower Saxony and Schleswig-Holstein) was placed on the World Heritage list by UNESCO .

[ 36 ] A minor boundary modification in 2011 added the Hamburg Wadden Sea National Park to the site, and the Danish part was added to in 2014.

[ 37 ] The state of Bremen , covering part of the Weser River estuary, is not participating. Conservation efforts are coordinated by the Common Wadden Sea Secretariat, seated in Wilhelmshaven .

Recreation [ edit ] People on the beach on Borkum , Germany Mudflat hiking near Pieterburen , Netherlands Many of the islands have been popular seaside resorts since the 19th century.

Mudflat hiking , i.e., walking on the sandy flats at low tide, has become popular in the Wadden Sea.

[ 38 ] It is also a popular region for pleasure boating.

Literature [ edit ] The German part of the Wadden Sea was the setting for the 1903 Erskine Childers novel The Riddle of the Sands and Else Ury 's 1915 novel Nesthäkchen in the Children's Sanitorium .

Wadden Sea Region [ edit ] The area bordering the Wadden Sea, including the Frisian islands and the mainland coastal marshes , is also called the Wadden Coast. In Germany the area is referred to as North Sea Coast ( Nordseeküste ). The embanked polderlands and saltmarshes in the Wadden Sea area – including the Elbe Marshes – are referred to in Germany as North Sea coastal marshes ( Nordseemarschen ).

More recent are terms such as Waddenland, Wadden Sea area and Wadden Sea Region. The latter term is generally understood to include all coastal regions around the Wadden Sea that participate in the trilateral cooperation between Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. The entire area is known for its rich cultural heritage, dating back to  the Roman Iron Age and the Middle Ages, and largely coincides with the area internationally referred to as Frisia .

[ 39 ] Between 2002 and 2023 stakeholder organizations and NGOs from the Wadden Sea Region cooperated in a platform or association called the Wadden Sea Forum (WSF).

[ 40 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Wadden Sea World Heritage Site" .

waddensea-worldheritage.org . Retrieved 29 April 2010 .

^ "Six new sites inscribed on World Heritage List" .

UNESCO . Retrieved 23 June 2014 .

^ a b "Tusinder af omkomne: Se listen over historiens værste stormfloder" .

Fyens Stiftstidende . 8 January 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ a b "Stormfloder i Vadehavet" . Nationalpark Vadehavet. Archived from the original on 7 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ "cultural-landscape" (PDF) .

waddensea-forum.org . Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 .

^ "Poster" (PDF) . 1998.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 May 2017 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 .

^ C. Michael Hogan (2011).

"Wadden Sea" . In P. Saundry; C. Cleveland (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Earth . Washington DC: National Council for Science and the Environment.

^ Scheffel, Richard L.; Wernet, Susan J., eds. (1980).

Natural Wonders of the World . United States of America: Reader's Digest Association, Inc. pp.

408– 409.

ISBN 0-89577-087-3 .

^ @NatGeoNL (18 December 2018).

"Wandelende waddeneilanden: hoelang blijven 'onze' eilanden nog bij ons?" [Walking Wadden Islands: how long will 'our' islands stay with us?].

National Geographic (in Dutch) . Retrieved 8 September 2022 .

^ Fox-Kemper, B. et al. Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change. in Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds. Masson-Delmotte, V. et al.) 1211–1362 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2021).

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896.011 .

^ Pineda Leiva, D., Lorenz, M., Kösters, F. et al. Asymmetric morphodynamics of the Wadden Sea. Commun Earth Environ 6, 354 (2025).

https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-025-02340-y ^ Couzens, Dominic (2008).

Top 100 Birding Sites of the World .

University of California Press . pp.

27– 29.

ISBN 978-0-520-25932-4 .

^ "Havørne sætter ny rekord i Danmark" .

DR . 20 November 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ Alanna Mitchel (2009).

"6-Reading the vital signs: life force" .

The fate of the fish. Seasick: Ocean Change and the Extinction of Life on Earth . Halifax, Canada: University of Chicago Press . p. 78.

ISBN 978-0-226-53258-5 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

right whale.

^ Nikulina, E.A.; U. Schmölcke (2015). "First archaeogenetic results verify the mid-Holocene occurrence of Dalmatian pelican Pelecanus crispus far out of present range".

Journal of Avian Biology .

46 (4): 344– 351.

doi : 10.1111/jav.00652 .

^ "Regional Species Extinctions – Examples of regional species extinctions over the last 1000 years and more" (PDF) .

archive-it.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2011.

^ Karsten Reise, A natural history of the Wadden Sea – Riddled by contingencies ( presentation slides [ usurped ] ). Wadden Sea Station Sylt – AWI. accessed on 29 July 2014 ^ Carl, R. and P.R. Møller (2012). Atlas over Danske Ferskvandsfisk.

Natural History Museum of Denmark , University of Copenhagen, and DTU Aqua.

ISBN 9788787519748 ^ Borcherding, J.; M. Heynen; T. Jäger-Kleinicke; H. V. Winter; and R. Eckmann (2010). Re-establishment of the North Sea houting in the River Rhine. Fisheries Management and Ecology 17(3): 291–293.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2400.2009.00710.x ^ "Vi gider ikke spise unikke danske østers" .

Politiken . 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ MacKinnon B.J., 2013.

The Nature of Nature . The Once and Future World: Nature as It Was, as It Is, as It Could Be. pp.100. accessed on 29 July 2014 ^ a b Kees (C.J.) Camphuysen.

"NZG Marine Mammal Database – Sightings of cetaceans in The Netherlands and the Southern North sea" . Archived from the original on 24 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ metatags generator.

"Cetaceans" . Archived from the original on 5 April 2014.

^ Lotze K.H. (2005).

"Radical changes in the Wadden Sea fauna and flora over the last 2,000 years" .

Helgoland Marine Research .

59 (1): 71.

Bibcode : 2005HMR....59...71L .

doi : 10.1007/s10152-004-0208-0 .

^ Mead JG, Mitchell ED (1984). "Atlantic gray whales". In Jones ML, Swartz SL, Leatherwood S (eds.).

The Gray Whale . London: Academic Press. pp.

33– 53.

^ Szaro C.R., Johnston W.D., Wolff. J.W. et al. 1996.

Biodiversity of the Wadden Sea . Biodiversity in Managed Landscapes: Theory and Practice. pp.539.

Oxford University Press . accessed on 29 July 2014 ^ Wolff W. J., 2000. The south-east North Sea: losses of vertebrate fauna during the past 2000 years. Biological Conservation 95: 209–21. accessed on 29 July 2014 ^ Kees (C.J.) Camphuysen.

"WHO HAS AN IDEA WHAT ANIMAL WE ARE LOOKING AT HERE?" . Archived from the original on 22 October 2021 . Retrieved 1 June 2013 .

^ Kees (C.J.) Camphuysen (2007).

"Foraging humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae)in the Marsdiep area (Wadden Sea), May 2007 and a review of sightings and strandings in the southern North Sea, 2003–2007" (PDF) (Lutra 2007 50 (1): 31–42 ed.).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 August 2014 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

^ "Springende walvis gezien bij Texel" [Jumping whale seen at Texel]. www.zeezoogdieren.org. 2008 . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ Wolff W.J., Dankers N., Dilemma' K.S., Reijnders P.J.H., Smit C.J., Chapter 17: Biodiversity of the Wadden Sea (Denmark, Germany, The Netherlands): recent changes and future projections . pp.342. DLO – Institute for Forestry and Nature Research. accessed on 29 July 2014 ^ "20th Anniversary of the Wadden Sea Plan | Wadden Sea" .

waddensea-secretariat.org .

^ "Trilateral Monitoring and Assessment Programme (TMAP) | Wadden Sea" .

waddensea-secretariat.org .

^ "The Trilateral Wadden Sea Cooperation" .

waddensea-secretariat.org . Archived from the original on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 29 April 2010 .

^ UNESCO MAB Biosphere reserves directory [ usurped ] (last updated May 2012; accessed 19 July 2016) ^ Kennedy, Maev (26 June 2009).

"World heritage sites: slave outpost and Buddhist mountain on the list – but Wales has to wait" .

Guardian.co.uk . Retrieved 7 July 2009 .

^ "Hamburg's Wadden Sea National Park turned 30 | Wadden Sea" .

waddensea-secretariat.org .

^ "Tidal flat walking" .

Wadden Sea World Heritage . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ Linde Egberts and Meindert Schroor (ed.), Waddenland Outstanding. History, Landscape and Cultural Heritage of the Wadden Sea Region , Amsterdam 2018.

^ "Wadden Sea Forum" . Wadden Sea Forum e.V. 2023. Archived from the original on 20 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 April 2024 .

The Forum of the Wadden Sea Region, called Wadden Sea Forum (WSF) was an independent multi-stakeholder, multi-actor platform from Denmark, Germany and The Netherlands and contributed to an advanced and sustainable development.

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Wadden Sea .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wadden Sea .

Wadden Sea UNESCO Collection on Google Arts and Culture Vollmer, M.; Guldberg, M.; Maluck, M.; Marrewijk, D.; Schlicksbier, G. (2001).

"Landscape and Cultural Heritage in the Wadden Sea Region – Project Report" (PDF) .

Wadden Sea Ecosystem .

12 .

Knottnerus, Otto S. (2005).

"History of human settlement, cultural change and interference with the marine environment" .

Secretariat of The Trilateral Cooperation on the Protection of the Wadden Sea Visit Vesterhavet – tourist information for the Danish North Sea and Wadden Sea Official Tourist Information [ usurped ] for the westernmost part of the German National Park The Wadden Sea at the UNESCO World Heritage Centre Wadden Sea World Heritage LancewadPlan: Integrated Landscape and Cultural Heritage Management and Development Plan for the Wadden Sea Region [ usurped ] (A collection of studies on the cultural history of the Wadden Sea Region 2004–2007, internet archive) v t e Frisian Islands West Frisian Islands ( Netherlands ) Noorderhaaks Texel Vlieland Richel Terschelling Griend Ameland Rif Engelsmanplaat Schiermonnikoog Simonszand Rottumerplaat Rottumeroog Zuiderduintjes Former islands Eierland Wieringen Monnikenlangenoog Bosch East Frisian Islands ( Germany ) Borkum Lütje Hörn Kachelotplate Memmert Juist Norderney Baltrum Langeoog Spiekeroog Wangerooge Minsener-Oldoog Mellum Former islands Buise Heligoland Bight ( Germany ) Langlütjen I & II Großer Knechtsand Heligoland Düne Neuwerk Scharhörn Nigehörn Trischen Tertius Blauort North Frisian Islands ( Germany ) Barrier Island Pellworm Amrum Föhr Sylt Uthörn Halligen Gröde Habel Hamburger Hallig Hooge Langeneß Norderoog Nordstrandischmoor Oland Süderoog Südfall Former islands Hainshallig Nordstrand Strand Danish Wadden Sea Islands ( Denmark ) Rømø Koresand Fanø Halligen Langli Mandø Former islands Jordsand v t e World Heritage Sites in Germany For official site names, see each article or the List of World Heritage Sites in Germany .

Northern ADGB Trade Union School Berlin Modernism Housing Estates Bremen Town Hall and Roland on the Marketplace Fagus Factory in Alfeld Hedeby and the Danevirke Archaeological Border Complex St. Mary's Cathedral and St. Michael's Church at Hildesheim Museumsinsel (Museum Island), Berlin Hanseatic City of Lübeck Palaces and Parks of Potsdam and Berlin Mines of Rammelsberg , Historic Town of Goslar and Upper Harz Water Management System Schwerin Castle Speicherstadt and Kontorhaus District with Chilehaus in Hamburg Historic Centres of Stralsund and Wismar Central Bauhaus and its Sites in Weimar, Dessau and Bernau Dessau-Wörlitz Garden Realm Dresden Elbe Valley (delisted in 2009) Jewish-Medieval Heritage of Erfurt Erzgebirge/Krušnohoří Mining Region 1 Luther Memorials in Eisleben and Wittenberg Moravian Church Settlements: 9 Herrnhut Muskauer Park / Park Mużakowski 2 Naumburg Cathedral Collegiate Church, Castle, and Old Town of Quedlinburg Wartburg Castle Classical Weimar Western Aachen Cathedral Castles of Augustusburg and Falkenlust at Brühl Bergpark Wilhelmshöhe Cologne Cathedral Princely Abbey of Corvey Lower Germanic Limes 6 Upper Middle Rhine Valley Roman Monuments , Cathedral of St. Peter and Church of Our Lady in Trier Speyer Cathedral ShUM cities of Speyer , Worms and Mainz Great Spa Towns of Europe 8 Völklingen Ironworks Zollverein Coal Mine Industrial Complex in Essen Southern Abbey and Altenmünster of Lorsch The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier 10 Augsburg Water Management System Town of Bamberg Caves and Ice Age Art in the Swabian Jura Mathildenhöhe Darmstadt Frontiers of the Roman Empire in Bavaria 7 Frontiers of the Roman Empire : 3 Upper Germanic & Rhaetian Limes Maulbronn Monastery Complex Margravial Opera House Monastic Island of Reichenau Old Town of Regensburg with Stadtamhof Palaces of Ludwig II: Neuschwanstein , Linderhof , Schachen , Herrenchiemsee Pilgrimage Church of Wies Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps 4 Würzburg Residence with the Court Gardens and Residence Square Natural Messel Pit Fossil Site Ancient Beech Forests 5 Wadden Sea 6 1 Shared with the Czech Republic 2 Shared with Poland 3 Shared with the United Kingdom 4 Shared with Austria , France , Italy , Slovenia and Switzerland 5 Shared with Albania , Austria , Belgium , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Croatia , Czech Republic , France , Italy , North Macedonia , Poland , Romania , Slovakia , Slovenia , Spain , Switzerland and Ukraine 6 Shared with the Netherlands and Denmark 7 Shared with Austria and Slovakia 8 Shared with France , Austria , Belgium , Czechia , Italy , UK 9 Shared with Denmark, UK, United States 10 Shared with Argentina , Belgium, France, India , Japan , Switzerland v t e World Heritage Sites in the Netherlands North Colonies of Benevolence 1 Eisinga Planetarium in Franeker D.F. Wouda Steam Pumping Station Wadden Sea 2 Flag of the Netherlands East Lower Germanic Limes 3 Schokland and Surroundings West Beemster Polder Canals of Amsterdam Defence Line of Amsterdam Lower Germanic Limes 3 Mill Network at Kinderdijk-Elshout Rietveld Schröder House Van Nelle Factory Wadden Sea 2 Caribbean Historic Area of Willemstad 1 Shared with Belgium 2 Shared locally with other region/s and with Germany and Denmark 3 Shared locally with other region/s and with Germany v t e World Heritage Sites in the Kingdom of Denmark Denmark Christiansfeld Jelling Mounds, Runic Stones and Church Kronborg Castle Par force hunting landscape in North Zealand Roskilde Cathedral Stevns Klint Wadden Sea Greenland Ilulissat Icefjord Kujataa Greenland: Norse and Inuit Farming at the Edge of the Ice Cap Aasivissuit – Nipisat: Inuit Hunting Ground between Ice and Sea v t e Biosphere reserves in Germany Berchtesgaden Alps Black Forest Bliesgau Middle Elbe Palatinate Forest Rhön Mountains Rügen Schaalsee Schorfheide-Chorin Spreewald Swabian Jura Thuringian Forest Upper Lusatia Vesser Valley Thuringian Forest Vilm Wadden Sea Flag of Germany v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wadden_Sea&oldid=1301065241 " Categories : Wadden Sea Frisian Islands Bodies of water of the North Sea World Heritage Sites in Denmark World Heritage Sites in Germany World Heritage Sites in the Netherlands Natura 2000 in the Netherlands Natura 2000 in Denmark Natura 2000 in Germany Biosphere reserves of the Netherlands Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean European seas Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1: unfit URL CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 Articles containing Dutch-language text Pages with Dutch IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing German-language text Pages with German IPA Articles containing Low German-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing West Frisian-language text Articles containing North Frisian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 22:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wadden Sea 68 languages Add topic

