Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Funding 3 Findings 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 9 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Environmental impact assessment This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Millennium Ecosystem Assessment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment ( MA ) is a major assessment of the human impact on the environment , called for by the United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2000, launched in 2001 and published in 2005 with more than $14 million of grants. It popularized the term ecosystem services , the benefits gained by humans from ecosystems .

History [ edit ] During the 1990s, international conventions such as the UNEP Convention on Biological Diversity and the Convention to Combat Desertification identified the need for a global scientific ecosystem assessment. There had been advances in resource economics with little effect on environmental policy .

[ 1 ] In November 1998, UNEP , NASA , and the World Bank published a study called "Protecting our Planet, Securing our Future: Linkages Among Global Environmental Issues and Human Needs".

[ 1 ] In 2001, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment was launched with work over a period of four years.

[ 1 ] Over 1300 contributors from 95 countries were involved as authors.

[ 2 ] Funding [ edit ] In May 2000 the Global Environment Facility approved a $7 million grant, followed in July 2000 by a United Nations Foundation $4 million grant and financial support from the government of Norway for the first meeting of the Board of the MA in Trondheim , and in December 2000 a $2.4 million grant by the Packard Foundation for a total of more than $13.4 million, considered "75% of the full budget".

[ 1 ] Findings [ edit ] The MA was published in 2005 and made four main assessments: [ 2 ] Over the past 50 years, humans have changed ecosystems more rapidly and extensively than in any comparable period of time in human history, largely to meet rapidly growing demands for food, fresh water, timber, fiber and fuel. This has resulted in a substantial and largely irreversible loss in the diversity of life on Earth.

The changes to ecosystems have contributed to substantial net gains in human well-being and economic development , but these gains have been achieved at growing costs in the form of the degradation of many ecosystem services , increased risks of nonlinear changes, and the exacerbation of poverty for some groups of people. These problems, unless addressed, will substantially diminish the benefits that future generations obtain from ecosystems.

The degradation of ecosystem services could grow significantly worse during the first half of this century and is a barrier to achieving the Millennium Development Goals .

The challenge of reversing the degradation of ecosystem while meeting increasing demands for services can be partially met under some scenarios considered by the MA, but will involve significant changes in policies, institutions and practices that are not currently under way. Many options exist to conserve or enhance specific ecosystem services in ways that reduce negative trade-offs or that provide positive synergies with other ecosystem services.

The bottom line of the MA findings has been that human actions are depleting Earth’s natural capital , putting such strain on the environment that the ability of the planet’s ecosystems to sustain future generations can no longer be taken for granted. At the same time, the assessment shows that with appropriate actions it is possible to reverse the degradation of many ecosystem services over the next 50 years, but the changes in policy and practice required are substantial and not currently underway.

[ citation needed ] Legacy [ edit ] In 2008, a report calculated that the world's richest countries caused environmental damage to developing nations at more than the entire developing world debt of $1.8 trillion.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Environmental issue Conservation (ethic) Sustainability The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity Special Report on Climate Change and Land Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services The Limits to Growth , a 1972 book about the computer modeling of exponential economic and population growth with finite resource supplies References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "History of the Millennium Assessment" .

UNEP . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ a b Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005).

Ecosystems and human well-being : synthesis (PDF) . Washington, DC: Island Press.

ISBN 1-59726-040-1 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ James Randerson (20 January 2008) Rich countries owe poor a huge environmental debt The Guardian, retrieved 25 April 2016 Further reading [ edit ] Watson, Robert T.; United Nations Environment Programme; National Aeronautics and Space Administration (1999).

Protecting our planet, securing our future : linkages among global environmental issues and human needs . Nairobi, Kenya: United National Environment Programme. p. 95.

ISBN 9789280717525 .

Corvalan, Carlos; Hales, Simon; McMichael, Anthony (2006).

Ecosystems and human well-being : health synthesis: a report of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (PDF) . Geneva: WHO.

hdl : 10665/43354 .

ISBN 9241563095 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Human impact on the environment General Anthropocene Ecological footprint Environmental impact assessment Environmental issues list of issues Human impact on marine life List of global issues Impact assessment Planetary boundaries Social ecology (ethics) Causes Causes of climate change Agriculture animal agriculture cannabis cultivation irrigation meat production cocoa production palm oil (US) Bitcoin Corporate behavior Deforestation and climate change Energy industry biofuels biodiesel coal electricity energy fashion fracking (US) nuclear power oil shale petroleum reservoirs transport Genetic pollution Environmental crime Explosives Industrialisation Land use Manufacturing cleaning agents concrete fashion plastics nanotechnology paint paper pesticides pharmaceuticals and personal care Marine life fishing fishing down the food web marine pollution overfishing Mining Overconsumption Overdrafting Overexploitation Overgrazing Particulates Pollution Quarrying Reservoirs Tourism Transport aviation rail roads shipping Urbanization urban sprawl War Effects Biodiversity threats biodiversity loss decline in amphibian populations decline in insect populations Climate change runaway climate change in the United States Deforestation Defaunation Desertification Ecocide Ecological crisis Effects of climate change Effects of climate change on agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Effects of climate change on livestock Environmental insecurity Environmental issues in the United States Coral reefs Externality Forest dieback Environmental degradation Erosion Freshwater cycle Greenhouse gas emissions Habitat destruction Holocene extinction Nitrogen cycle Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Loss and damage Loss of green belts Phosphorus cycle Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Technofossilization Tropical cyclones and climate change Water degradation Water pollution Water scarcity Mitigation Alternative fuel vehicle propulsion Birth control Cleaner production Climate change mitigation Community resilience Cultured meat Decoupling Ecological engineering Environmental engineering Environmental mitigation Industrial ecology Mitigation banking Organic farming Recycling Reforestation urban Restoration ecology Sustainability Sustainable consumption Waste minimization Commons Category by country assessment mitigation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Millennium_Ecosystem_Assessment&oldid=1261858460 " Categories : Environmental impact assessment 2005 in the environment United Nations development policy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 This page was last edited on 8 December 2024, at 09:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 9 languages Add topic

