Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Philosophy of law Toggle Philosophy of law subsection 2.1 Analytical jurisprudence 2.2 Connection to morality and justice 3 History 4 Legal systems Toggle Legal systems subsection 4.1 Civil law 4.2 Common law and equity 4.3 Religious law 4.3.1 Canon law 4.3.2 Sharia law 4.4 Socialist law 5 Legal methods 6 Legal institutions Toggle Legal institutions subsection 6.1 Judiciary 6.2 Legislature 6.3 Executive 6.4 Law enforcement 6.5 Bureaucracy 6.6 Legal profession 6.7 Civil society 7 Areas of law Toggle Areas of law subsection 7.1 International law 7.2 Constitutional and administrative law 7.3 Criminal law 7.4 Contract law 7.5 Torts and delicts 7.6 Property law 7.7 Trusts 8 Intersection with other fields Toggle Intersection with other fields subsection 8.1 Economics 8.2 Sociology 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Law 188 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa Sardu Scots Seediq Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri IsiNdebele seSewula ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Legal ) System of enforceable rules "Legal" redirects here. For other uses, see Legal (disambiguation) .

For other uses, see Law (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Law Foundations and Philosophy Definition Philosophy History Legal theory Jurisprudence Judicial interpretation Positive law Law and economics Sociology of law Methodological background Normative Prescriptive Jurimetrics Legal debate Legal and judicial opinions v t e Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e Law is a set of rules that are created and are enforceable by social or governmental institutions to regulate behavior, [ 1 ] with its precise definition a matter of longstanding debate.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It has been variously described as a science [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and as the art of justice.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] State-enforced laws can be made by a legislature , resulting in statutes ; by the executive through decrees and regulations ; or by judges' decisions, which form precedent in common law jurisdictions. An autocrat may exercise those functions within their realm. The creation of laws themselves may be influenced by a constitution , written or tacit, and the rights encoded therein. The law shapes politics , economics , history and society in various ways and also serves as a mediator of relations between people.

Legal systems vary between jurisdictions , with their differences analysed in comparative law . In civil law jurisdictions, a legislature or other central body codifies and consolidates the law. In common law systems, judges may make binding case law through precedent, [ 10 ] although on occasion this may be overturned by a higher court or the legislature.

[ 11 ] Religious law is in use in some religious communities and states, and has historically influenced secular law.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] The scope of law can be divided into two domains: public law concerns government and society, including constitutional law , administrative law , and criminal law ; while private law deals with legal disputes between parties in areas such as contracts , property , torts , delicts and commercial law .

[ 17 ] This distinction is stronger in civil law countries, particularly those with a separate system of administrative courts ; [ 18 ] [ 19 ] by contrast, the public-private law divide is less pronounced in common law jurisdictions.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Law provides a source of scholarly inquiry into legal history , [ 22 ] philosophy , [ 23 ] economic analysis [ 24 ] and sociology .

[ 25 ] Law also raises important and complex issues concerning equality, fairness, and justice .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Etymology The word law , attested in Old English as lagu , comes from the Old Norse word lǫg . The singular form lag meant ' something laid or fixed ' while its plural meant ' law ' .

[ 28 ] Philosophy of law Main articles: Jurisprudence and Philosophy of law But what, after all, is a law? [...] When I say that the object of laws is always general, I mean that law considers subjects en masse and actions in the abstract, and never a particular person or action. [...] On this view, we at once see that it can no longer be asked whose business it is to make laws, since they are acts of the general will ; nor whether the prince is above the law, since he is a member of the State; nor whether the law can be unjust, since no one is unjust to himself; nor how we can be both free and subject to the laws, since they are but registers of our wills.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract , II, 6.

[ 29 ] The philosophy of law is commonly known as jurisprudence. Normative jurisprudence asks "what should law be?", while analytic jurisprudence asks "what is law?" Analytical jurisprudence Main article: Analytical jurisprudence There have been several attempts to produce "a universally acceptable definition of law". In 1972, Baron Hampstead suggested that no such definition could be produced.

[ 30 ] McCoubrey and White said that the question "what is law?" has no simple answer.

[ 31 ] Glanville Williams said that the meaning of the word "law" depends on the context in which that word is used. He said that, for example, " early customary law " and " municipal law " were contexts where the word "law" had two different and irreconcilable meanings.

[ 32 ] Thurman Arnold said that it is obvious that it is impossible to define the word "law" and that it is also equally obvious that the struggle to define that word should not ever be abandoned.

[ 33 ] It is possible to take the view that there is no need to define the word "law" (e.g. "let's forget about generalities and get down to cases ").

[ 34 ] One definition is that law is a system of rules and guidelines which are enforced through social institutions to govern behaviour.

[ 1 ] In The Concept of Law , H. L. A. Hart argued that law is a "system of rules"; [ 35 ] John Austin said law was "the command of a sovereign, backed by the threat of a sanction"; [ 36 ] Ronald Dworkin describes law as an "interpretive concept" to achieve justice in his text titled Law's Empire ; [ 37 ] and Joseph Raz argues law is an "authority" to mediate people's interests.

[ 38 ] Oliver Wendell Holmes defined law as "the prophecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious." [ 39 ] In his Treatise on Law , Thomas Aquinas argues that law is a rational ordering of things, which concern the common good, that is promulgated by whoever is charged with the care of the community.

[ 40 ] This definition has both positivist and naturalist elements.

[ 41 ] Connection to morality and justice See also: Rule according to higher law Definitions of law often raise the question of the extent to which law incorporates morality.

[ 42 ] John Austin 's utilitarian answer was that law is "commands, backed by threat of sanctions, from a sovereign, to whom people have a habit of obedience".

[ 36 ] Natural lawyers , on the other hand, such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau , argue that law reflects essentially moral and unchangeable laws of nature. The concept of "natural law" emerged in ancient Greek philosophy concurrently and in connection with the notion of justice, and re-entered the mainstream of Western culture through the writings of Thomas Aquinas , notably his Treatise on Law .

Hugo Grotius , the founder of a purely rationalistic system of natural law, argued that law arises from both a social impulse—as Aristotle had indicated—and reason.

[ 43 ] Immanuel Kant believed a moral imperative requires laws "be chosen as though they should hold as universal laws of nature".

[ 44 ] Jeremy Bentham and his student Austin, following David Hume , believed that this conflated the "is" and what "ought to be" problem. Bentham and Austin argued for law's positivism ; that real law is entirely separate from "morality".

[ 45 ] Kant was also criticised by Friedrich Nietzsche , who rejected the principle of equality, and believed that law emanates from the will to power , and cannot be labeled as "moral" or "immoral".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] In 1934, the Austrian philosopher Hans Kelsen continued the positivist tradition in his book the Pure Theory of Law .

[ 49 ] Kelsen believed that although law is separate from morality, it is endowed with "normativity", meaning we ought to obey it. While laws are positive "is" statements (e.g. the fine for reversing on a highway is €500); law tells us what we "should" do. Thus, each legal system can be hypothesised to have a ' basic norm ' ( German : Grundnorm ) instructing us to obey. Kelsen's major opponent, Carl Schmitt , rejected both positivism and the idea of the rule of law because he did not accept the primacy of abstract normative principles over concrete political positions and decisions.

[ 50 ] Therefore, Schmitt advocated a jurisprudence of the exception ( state of emergency ), which denied that legal norms could encompass all of the political experience.

[ 51 ] Later in the 20th century, H. L. A. Hart attacked Austin for his simplifications and Kelsen for his fiction in The Concept of Law .

[ 52 ] Hart argued law is a system of rules, divided into primary (rules of conduct) and secondary ones (rules addressed to officials to administer primary rules). Secondary rules are further divided into rules of adjudication (to resolve legal disputes), rules of change (allowing laws to be varied) and the rule of recognition (allowing laws to be identified as valid). Two of Hart's students continued the debate: In his book Law's Empire , Ronald Dworkin attacked Hart and the positivists for their refusal to treat law as a moral issue. Dworkin argues that law is an " interpretive concept" [ 37 ] that requires judges to find the best fitting and most just solution to a legal dispute, given their Anglo-American constitutional traditions.

Joseph Raz , on the other hand, defended the positivist outlook and criticised Hart's "soft social thesis" approach in The Authority of Law .

[ 38 ] Raz argues that law is authority, identifiable purely through social sources and without reference to moral reasoning. In his view, any categorisation of rules beyond their role as authoritative instruments in mediation is best left to sociology , rather than jurisprudence.

[ 53 ] History Main article: Legal history The Code of Hammurabi is an early code of laws, from ancient Babylon.

The history of law links closely to the development of civilization .

Ancient Egyptian law, dating as far back as 3000 BC, was based on the concept of Ma'at and characterised by tradition, rhetorical speech, social equality and impartiality.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] By the 22nd century BC, the ancient Sumerian ruler Ur-Nammu had formulated the first law code , which consisted of casuistic statements ("if … then ..."). Around 1760 BC, King Hammurabi further developed Babylonian law , by codifying and inscribing it in stone. Hammurabi placed several copies of his law code throughout the kingdom of Babylon as stelae , for the entire public to see; this became known as the Codex Hammurabi . The most intact copy of these stelae was discovered in the 19th century by British Assyriologists , and has since been fully transliterated and translated into various languages, including English, Italian, German, and French.

[ 57 ] The Old Testament dates back to 1280 BC and takes the form of moral imperatives as recommendations for a good society. The small Greek city-state, ancient Athens , from about the 8th century BC was the first society to be based on broad inclusion of its citizenry, excluding women and enslaved people . However, Athens had no legal science or single word for "law", [ 58 ] relying instead on the three-way distinction between divine law ( thémis ), human decree ( nómos ) and custom ( díkē ).

[ 59 ] Yet Ancient Greek law contained major constitutional innovations in the development of democracy .

[ 60 ] Roman law was heavily influenced by Greek philosophy, but its detailed rules were developed by professional jurists and were highly sophisticated.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Over the centuries between the rise and decline of the Roman Empire , law was adapted to cope with the changing social situations and underwent major codification under Theodosius II and Justinian I .

[ a ] Although codes were replaced by custom and case law during the Early Middle Ages , Roman law was rediscovered around the 11th century when medieval legal scholars began to research Roman codes and adapt their concepts to the canon law , giving birth to the jus commune . Latin legal maxims (called brocards ) were compiled for guidance. In medieval England, royal courts developed a body of precedent which later became the common law . A Europe-wide Law Merchant was formed so that merchants could trade with common standards of practice rather than with the many splintered facets of local laws. The Law Merchant, a precursor to modern commercial law, emphasised the freedom to contract and alienability of property.

[ 63 ] As nationalism grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, the Law Merchant was incorporated into countries' local law under new civil codes. The Napoleonic and German Codes became the most influential. In contrast to English common law, which consists of enormous tomes of case law, codes in small books are easy to export and easy for judges to apply. However, today there are signs that civil and common law are converging.

[ 64 ] EU law is codified in treaties, but develops through de facto precedent laid down by the European Court of Justice .

[ 65 ] The Constitution of India , ceremonially rendered as an illustrated and calligraphed manuscript.

Ancient India and China represent distinct traditions of law, and have historically had independent schools of legal theory and practice. The Arthashastra , probably compiled around 100 AD (although it contains older material), and the Manusmriti (c. 100–300 AD) were foundational treatises in India, and comprise texts considered authoritative legal guidance.

[ 66 ] Manu's central philosophy was tolerance and pluralism , and was cited across Southeast Asia.

[ 67 ] During the Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent , sharia was established by the Muslim sultanates and empires, most notably Mughal Empire 's Fatawa-e-Alamgiri , compiled by emperor Aurangzeb and various scholars of Islam.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] In India, the Hindu legal tradition, along with Islamic law, were both supplanted by common law when India became part of the British Empire .

[ 70 ] Malaysia, Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong also adopted the common law system. The Eastern Asia legal tradition reflects a unique blend of secular and religious influences.

[ 71 ] Japan was the first country to begin modernising its legal system along Western lines, by importing parts of the French , but mostly the German Civil Code.

[ 72 ] This partly reflected Germany's status as a rising power in the late 19th century.

Similarly, traditional Chinese law gave way to westernisation towards the final years of the Qing Dynasty in the form of six private law codes based mainly on the Japanese model of German law.

[ 73 ] Today Taiwanese law retains the closest affinity to the codifications from that period, because of the split between Chiang Kai-shek 's nationalists, who fled there, and Mao Zedong 's communists who won control of the mainland in 1949. The current legal infrastructure in the People's Republic of China was heavily influenced by Soviet Socialist law , which essentially prioritises administrative law at the expense of private law rights.

[ 74 ] Due to rapid industrialisation, today China is undergoing a process of reform, at least in terms of economic, if not social and political, rights. A new contract code in 1999 represented a move away from administrative domination.

[ 75 ] Furthermore, after negotiations lasting fifteen years, in 2001 China joined the World Trade Organization .

[ 76 ] Legal systems Main articles: Comparative law , List of national legal systems , and Comparative legal history In general, legal systems can be split between civil law and common law systems.

[ 77 ] Modern scholars argue that the significance of this distinction has progressively declined. The numerous legal transplants , typical of modern law, result in the sharing of many features traditionally considered typical of either common law or civil law.

[ 64 ] [ 78 ] The third type of legal system is religious law, based on scriptures . The specific system that a country is ruled by is often determined by its history, connections with other countries, or its adherence to international standards. The sources that jurisdictions adopt as authoritatively binding are the defining features of any legal system.

Colour-coded map of the legal systems around the world, showing civil, common law, religious, customary and mixed legal systems.

[ 79 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] Common law systems are shaded pink, and civil law systems are shaded blue/turquoise.

Civil law Main article: Civil law (legal system) First page of the 1804 edition of the Napoleonic Code Civil law is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. In civil law the sources recognised as authoritative are, primarily, legislation —especially codifications in constitutions or statutes passed by government—and custom .

[ b ] Codifications date back millennia, with one early example being the Babylonian Codex Hammurabi . Modern civil law systems essentially derive from legal codes issued by Byzantine Emperor Justinian I in the 6th century, which were rediscovered by 11th century Italy.

[ 80 ] Roman law in the days of the Roman Republic and Empire was heavily procedural, and lacked a professional legal class.

[ 81 ] Instead a lay magistrate , iudex , was chosen to adjudicate. Decisions were not published in any systematic way, so any case law that developed was disguised and almost unrecognised.

[ 82 ] Each case was to be decided afresh from the laws of the State, which mirrors the (theoretical) unimportance of judges' decisions for future cases in civil law systems today. From 529 to 534 AD the Byzantine Emperor Justinian I codified and consolidated Roman law up until that point, so that what remained was one-twentieth of the mass of legal texts from before.

[ 83 ] This became known as the Corpus Juris Civilis . As one legal historian wrote, "Justinian consciously looked back to the golden age of Roman law and aimed to restore it to the peak it had reached three centuries before." [ 84 ] The Justinian Code remained in force in the East until the fall of the Byzantine Empire . Western Europe, meanwhile, relied on a mix of the Theodosian Code and Germanic customary law until the Justinian Code was rediscovered in the 11th century, which scholars at the University of Bologna used to interpret their own laws.

[ 85 ] Civil law codifications based closely on Roman law, alongside some influences from religious laws such as canon law , continued to spread throughout Europe until the Enlightenment . Then, in the 19th century, both France, with the Code Civil , and Germany, with the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch , modernised their legal codes. Both these codes heavily influenced not only the law systems of the countries in continental Europe but also the Japanese and Korean legal traditions.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] A central doctrine in continental European legal thinking, originating in German jurisprudence , is the cocpet of a Rechtsstaat , meaning that everyone is subjected to the law, especially governments.

[ 88 ] Today, countries that have civil law systems range from Russia and Turkey to most of Central and Latin America .

[ 89 ] Common law and equity Main articles: Common law and Equity (law) King John of England signs Magna Carta .

In common law legal systems, decisions by courts are explicitly acknowledged as "law" on equal footing with legislative statutes and executive regulations . The "doctrine of precedent", or stare decisis (Latin for "to stand by decisions") means that decisions by higher courts bind lower courts to assure that similar cases reach similar results. In contrast , in civil law systems, legislative statutes are typically more detailed, and judicial decisions are shorter and less detailed because the adjudicator is only writing to decide the single case, rather than to set out reasoning that will guide future courts.

Common law originated from England and has been inherited by almost every country once tied to the British Empire (except Malta, Scotland , the U.S. state of Louisiana , and the Canadian province of Quebec ). In medieval England during the Norman Conquest , the law varied shire-to-shire based on disparate tribal customs. The concept of a "common law" developed during the reign of Henry II during the late 12th century, when Henry appointed judges who had the authority to create an institutionalised and unified system of law common to the country. The next major step in the evolution of the common law came when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document limiting his authority to pass laws. This "great charter" or Magna Carta of 1215 also required that the King's entourage of judges hold their courts and judgments at "a certain place" rather than dispensing autocratic justice in unpredictable places about the country.

[ 90 ] A concentrated and elite group of judges acquired a dominant role in law-making under this system, and compared to its European counterparts the English judiciary became highly centralised. In 1297, for instance, while the highest court in France had fifty-one judges, the English Court of Common Pleas had five.

[ 91 ] This powerful and tight-knit judiciary gave rise to a systematised process of developing common law.

[ 92 ] The Court of Chancery , London, England, early 19th century As time went on, many felt that the common law was overly systematised and inflexible, and increasing numbers of citizens petitioned the King to override the common law. On the King's behalf, the Lord Chancellor started giving judgments to do what was equitable in a case. From the time of Sir Thomas More , the first lawyer to be appointed as Lord Chancellor, a systematic body of equity grew up alongside the rigid common law, and developed its own Court of Chancery . At first, equity was often criticised as erratic.

[ 93 ] Over time, courts of equity developed solid principles , especially under Lord Eldon .

[ 94 ] In the 19th century in England, and in 1937 in the U.S.

, the two systems were merged .

In developing the common law, academic writings have always played an important part, both to collect overarching principles from dispersed case law and to argue for change.

William Blackstone , from around 1760, was the first scholar to collect, describe, and teach the common law.

[ 95 ] But merely in describing, scholars who sought explanations and underlying structures slowly changed the way the law actually worked.

[ 96 ] Religious law Main article: Religious law See also: Law and religion Religious law is explicitly based on religious precepts. Examples include the Jewish Halakha and Islamic Sharia —both of which translate as the "path to follow". Christian canon law also survives in some church communities. Often the implication of religion for law is unalterability because the word of God cannot be amended or legislated against by judges or governments.

[ 97 ] Nonetheless, most religious jurisdictions rely on further human elaboration to provide for thorough and detailed legal systems. For instance, the Quran has some law, and it acts as a source of further law through interpretation, Qiyas (reasoning by analogy), Ijma (consensus) and precedent .

[ 98 ] This is mainly contained in a body of law and jurisprudence known as Sharia and Fiqh respectively. Another example is the Torah or Old Testament , in the Pentateuch or Five Books of Moses. This contains the basic code of Jewish law, which some Israeli communities choose to use. The Halakha is a code of Jewish law that summarizes some of the Talmud's interpretations.

A number of countries are sharia jurisdictions.

Israeli law allows litigants to use religious laws only if they choose. Canon law is only in use by members of the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion .

Canon law Main article: Canon law The Corpus Juris Canonici , the fundamental collection of canon law for over 750 years Canon law ( Ancient Greek : κανών , romanized : kanon , lit.

'a straight measuring rod; a ruler ') is a set of ordinances and regulations made by ecclesiastical authority , for the government of a Christian organisation or church and its members. It is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Oriental Orthodox Churches , and the individual national churches within the Anglican Communion .

[ 99 ] The way that such church law is legislated , interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was originally [ 100 ] a rule adopted by a church council ; these canons formed the foundation of canon law.

The Catholic Church has the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the western world , [ 101 ] [ 102 ] predating the evolution of modern European civil law and common law systems. The 1983 Code of Canon Law governs the Latin Church sui juris . The Eastern Catholic Churches, which developed different disciplines and practices, are governed by the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches .

[ 103 ] The canon law of the Catholic Church influenced the common law during the medieval period through its preservation of Roman law doctrine such as the presumption of innocence .

[ 104 ] [ c ] Roman Catholic canon law is a fully developed legal system, with all the necessary elements: courts , lawyers , judges, a fully articulated legal code, principles of legal interpretation, and coercive penalties, though it lacks civilly-binding force in most secular jurisdictions.

[ 106 ] Sharia law Main article: Sharia Further information: Sources of Sharia Until the 18th century, Sharia law was practiced throughout the Muslim world in a non-codified form, with the Ottoman Empire 's Mecelle code in the 19th century being a first attempt at codifying elements of Sharia law. Since the mid-1940s, efforts have been made, in country after country, to bring Sharia law more into line with modern conditions and conceptions.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] In modern times, the legal systems of many Muslim countries draw upon both civil and common law traditions as well as Islamic law and custom. The constitutions of certain Muslim states, such as Egypt and Afghanistan, recognise Islam as the religion of the state, obliging legislature to adhere to Sharia.

[ 109 ] Saudi Arabia recognises the Quran as its constitution , and is governed on the basis of Islamic law.

[ 110 ] Iran has also witnessed a reiteration of Islamic law into its legal system after 1979.

[ 111 ] During the last few decades, one of the fundamental features of the movement of Islamic resurgence has been the call to restore the Sharia, which has generated a vast amount of literature and affected world politics .

[ 112 ] Socialist law Main article: Socialist law Socialist law is the legal systems in communist states such as the former Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China.

[ 113 ] Academic opinion is divided on whether it is a separate system from civil law, given major deviations based on Marxist–Leninist ideology, such as subordinating the judiciary to the executive ruling party.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] Legal methods There are distinguished methods of legal reasoning (applying the law) and methods of interpreting (construing) the law. The former are legal syllogism , which holds sway in civil law legal systems, analogy , which is present in common law legal systems, especially in the US, and argumentative theories that occur in both systems. The latter are different rules (directives) of legal interpretation such as directives of linguistic interpretation, teleological interpretation or systemic interpretation as well as more specific rules, for instance, golden rule or mischief rule . There are also many other arguments and cannons of interpretation which altogether make statutory interpretation possible.

Law professor and former United States Attorney General Edward H. Levi noted that the "basic pattern of legal reasoning is reasoning by example"—that is, reasoning by comparing outcomes in cases resolving similar legal questions.

[ 116 ] In a U.S. Supreme Court case regarding procedural efforts taken by a debt collection company to avoid errors, Justice Sotomayor cautioned that "legal reasoning is not a mechanical or strictly linear process".

[ 117 ] Jurimetrics is the formal application of quantitative methods, especially probability and statistics , to legal questions. The use of statistical methods in court cases and law review articles has grown massively in importance in the last few decades.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Legal institutions It is a real unity of them all in one and the same person, made by covenant of every man with every man, in such manner as if every man should say to every man: I authorise and give up my right of governing myself to this man, or to this assembly of men, on this condition; that thou givest up, thy right to him, and authorise all his actions in like manner.

Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan , XVII The main institutions of law in industrialised countries are independent courts , representative parliaments, an accountable executive, the military and police, bureaucratic organisation, the legal profession and civil society itself. John Locke, in his Two Treatises of Government , and Baron de Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws , advocated for a separation of powers between the political, legislature and executive bodies.

[ 120 ] Their principle was that no person should be able to usurp all powers of the state , in contrast to the absolutist theory of Thomas Hobbes ' Leviathan .

[ 121 ] Sun Yat-sen 's Five Power Constitution for the Republic of China took the separation of powers further by having two additional branches of government—a Control Yuan for auditing oversight and an Examination Yuan to manage the employment of public officials.

[ 122 ] Max Weber and others reshaped thinking on the extension of state. Modern military, policing and bureaucratic power over ordinary citizens' daily lives pose special problems for accountability that earlier writers such as Locke or Montesquieu could not have foreseen. The custom and practice of the legal profession is an important part of people's access to justice , whilst civil society is a term used to refer to the social institutions, communities and partnerships that form law's political basis.

Judiciary This file is an excerpt from Judiciary .

[ edit ] The Supreme Court Building houses the Supreme Court of the United States , the highest court in the federal judiciary of the United States .

This section is an excerpt from Judiciary § Meaning .

[ edit ] The judiciary is the system of courts that interprets, defends, and applies the law in the name of the state . The judiciary can also be thought of as the mechanism for the resolution of disputes. Under the doctrine of the separation of powers , the judiciary generally does not make statutory law (which is the responsibility of the legislature ) or enforce law (which is the responsibility of the executive ), but rather interprets, defends, and applies the law to the facts of each case. However, in some countries the judiciary does make common law .

In many jurisdictions the judicial branch has the power to change laws through the process of judicial review . Courts with judicial review power may annul the laws and rules of the state when it finds them incompatible with a higher norm, such as primary legislation , the provisions of the constitution , treaties or international law . Judges constitute a critical force for judicial interpretation and constitutional review while avoiding political bias .

[ 123 ] Legislature Main article: Legislature The Chamber of the House of Representatives , the lower house in the National Diet of Japan Prominent examples of legislatures are the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington, D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow, the Parlamento Italiano in Rome and the Assemblée nationale in Paris. By the principle of representative government people vote for politicians to carry out their wishes. Although countries like Israel, Greece, Sweden and China are unicameral , most countries are bicameral , meaning they have two separately appointed legislative houses.

[ 124 ] In the 'lower house' politicians are elected to represent smaller constituencies . The 'upper house' is usually elected to represent states in a federal system (as in Australia, Germany or the United States) or different voting configuration in a unitary system (as in France). In the UK the upper house is appointed by the government as a house of review . One criticism of bicameral systems with two elected chambers is that the upper and lower houses may simply mirror one another. The traditional justification of bicameralism is that an upper chamber acts as a house of review. This can minimise arbitrariness and injustice in governmental action.

[ 124 ] To pass legislation, a majority of the members of a legislature must vote for a bill (proposed law) in each house. Normally there will be several readings and amendments proposed by the different political factions. If a country has an entrenched constitution, a special majority for changes to the constitution may be required, making changes to the law more difficult. A government usually leads the process, which can be formed from Members of Parliament (e.g. the UK or Germany). However, in a presidential system, the government is usually formed by an executive and his or her appointed cabinet officials (e.g. the United States or Brazil).

[ d ] Executive Main article: Executive (government) The G20 meetings are composed of representatives of each country's executive branch.

The executive in a legal system serves as the centre of political authority of the State . In a parliamentary system , as with Britain, Italy, Germany, India, and Japan, the executive is known as the cabinet, and composed of members of the legislature. The executive is led by the head of government , whose office holds power under the confidence of the legislature. Because popular elections appoint political parties to govern, the leader of a party can change in between elections.

[ 125 ] The head of state is apart from the executive, and symbolically enacts laws and acts as representative of the nation. Examples include the President of Germany (appointed by members of federal and state legislatures ), the Queen of the United Kingdom (an hereditary office ), and the President of Austria (elected by popular vote). The other important model is the presidential system , found in the United States and in Brazil . In presidential systems, the executive acts as both head of state and head of government, and has power to appoint an unelected cabinet. Under a presidential system, the executive branch is separate from the legislature to which it is not accountable.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Although the role of the executive varies from country to country, usually it will propose the majority of legislation, and propose government agenda. In presidential systems, the executive often has the power to veto legislation. Most executives in both systems are responsible for foreign relations , the law enforcement , and the bureaucracy.

Ministers or other officials head a country's public offices, such as a foreign ministry or defence ministry . The election of a different executive is therefore capable of revolutionising an entire country's approach to government.

Law enforcement Main articles: Law enforcement , Police , and Military Officers of the South African Police Service in Johannesburg , 2010 Max Weber famously argued that the state is that which controls the monopoly on the legitimate use of force .

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] The military and police carry out law enforcement at the request of the government or the courts. The term failed state refers to states that cannot implement or enforce policies; their police and military no longer control security and order and society moves into anarchy, the absence of government.

[ e ] While military organisations have existed as long as government itself, the idea of a standing police force is a relatively modern concept. For example, Medieval England 's system of travelling criminal courts , or assizes , used show trials and public executions to instill communities with fear to maintain control.

[ 129 ] The first modern police were probably those in 17th-century Paris, in the court of Louis XIV , [ 130 ] although the Paris Prefecture of Police claim they were the world's first uniformed policemen.

[ 131 ] Bureaucracy Main article: Bureaucracy The mandarins were powerful bureaucrats in imperial China (photograph shows a Qing dynasty official with mandarin square visible).

The etymology of bureaucracy derives from the French word for office ( bureau ) and the Ancient Greek for word power ( kratos ).

[ 132 ] [ better source needed ] Like the military and police, a legal system's government servants and bodies that make up its bureaucracy carry out the directives of the executive. One of the earliest references to the concept was made by Baron de Grimm , a German author who lived in France. In 1765, he wrote: The real spirit of the laws in France is that bureaucracy of which the late Monsieur de Gournay used to complain so greatly; here the offices, clerks, secretaries, inspectors and intendants are not appointed to benefit the public interest, indeed the public interest appears to have been established so that offices might exist.

[ 133 ] Cynicism over "officialdom" is still common, and the workings of public servants is typically contrasted to private enterprise motivated by profit .

[ 134 ] In fact private companies, especially large ones, also have bureaucracies.

[ 135 ] Negative perceptions of " red tape " aside, public services such as schooling, health care, policing or public transport are considered a crucial state function making public bureaucratic action the locus of government power.

[ 135 ] Writing in the early 20th century, Max Weber believed that a definitive feature of a developed state had come to be its bureaucratic support.

[ 136 ] Weber wrote that the typical characteristics of modern bureaucracy are that officials define its mission, the scope of work is bound by rules, and management is composed of career experts who manage top down, communicating through writing and binding public servants' discretion with rules.

[ 137 ] Legal profession Main article: Legal profession Judges presiding over the Nuremberg trials at the Palace of Justice in Nuremberg , Allied-occupied Germany , 1946 A corollary of the rule of law is the existence of a legal profession sufficiently autonomous to invoke the authority of the independent judiciary; the right to assistance of a barrister in a court proceeding emanates from this corollary—in England the function of barrister or advocate is distinguished from legal counselor.

[ 138 ] As the European Court of Human Rights has stated, the law should be adequately accessible to everyone and people should be able to foresee how the law affects them.

[ 139 ] In order to maintain professionalism, the practice of law is typically overseen by either a government or independent regulating body such as a bar association , bar council or law society . Modern lawyers achieve distinct professional identity through specified legal procedures (e.g. successfully passing a qualifying examination), are required by law to have a special qualification (a legal education earning the student a Bachelor of Laws , a Bachelor of Civil Law , or a Juris Doctor degree. Higher academic degrees may also be pursued. Examples include a Master of Laws , a Master of Legal Studies , a Bar Professional Training Course or a Doctor of Laws .), and are constituted in office by legal forms of appointment ( being admitted to the bar ). There are few titles of respect to signify famous lawyers, such as Esquire , to indicate barristers of greater dignity, [ 140 ] [ 141 ] and Doctor of law , to indicate a person who obtained a PhD in Law.

Many Muslim countries have developed similar rules about legal education and the legal profession, but some still allow lawyers with training in traditional Islamic law to practice law before personal status law courts.

[ 142 ] In China and other developing countries there are not sufficient professionally trained people to staff the existing judicial systems, and, accordingly, formal standards are more relaxed.

[ 143 ] Once accredited, a lawyer will often work in a law firm , in a chambers as a sole practitioner, in a government post or in a private corporation as an internal counsel . In addition a lawyer may become a legal researcher who provides on-demand legal research through a library, a commercial service or freelance work. Many people trained in law put their skills to use outside the legal field entirely.

[ 144 ] Significant to the practice of law in the common law tradition is the legal research to determine the current state of the law. This usually entails exploring case-law reports , legal periodicals and legislation. Law practice also involves drafting documents such as court pleadings , persuasive briefs , contracts, or wills and trusts. Negotiation and dispute resolution skills (including ADR techniques) are also important to legal practice, depending on the field.

[ 144 ] Civil society Main article: Civil society A march in Washington, D.C.

during the American civil rights movement in 1963 The Classical republican concept of "civil society" dates back to Hobbes and Locke.

[ 145 ] Locke saw civil society as people who have "a common established law and judicature to appeal to, with authority to decide controversies between them." [ 146 ] German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel distinguished the "state" from "civil society" ( German : bürgerliche Gesellschaft ) in Elements of the Philosophy of Right .

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Hegel believed that civil society and the state were polar opposites, within the scheme of his dialectic theory of history. The modern dipole state–civil society was reproduced in the theories of Alexis de Tocqueville and Karl Marx .

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] In post-modern theory, civil society is necessarily a source of law, by being the basis from which people form opinions and lobby for what they believe law should be. As Australian barrister and author Geoffrey Robertson QC wrote of international law, "one of its primary modern sources is found in the responses of ordinary men and women, and of the non-governmental organizations which many of them support, to the human rights abuses they see on the television screen in their living rooms." [ 151 ] Freedom of speech , freedom of association and many other individual rights allow people to gather, discuss, criticise and hold to account their governments, from which the basis of a deliberative democracy is formed. The more people are involved with, concerned by and capable of changing how political power is exercised over their lives, the more acceptable and legitimate the law becomes to the people. The most familiar institutions of civil society include economic markets, profit-oriented firms, families, trade unions, hospitals, universities, schools, charities, debating clubs , non-governmental organisations, neighbourhoods, churches, and religious associations. There is no clear legal definition of the civil society, and of the institutions it includes. Most of the institutions and bodies who try to give a list of institutions (such as the European Economic and Social Committee ) exclude the political parties.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Areas of law See also: List of areas of law All legal systems deal with the same basic issues, but jurisdictions categorise and identify their legal topics in different ways. A common distinction is that between " public law " (a term related closely to the state , and including constitutional, administrative and criminal law), and " private law " (which covers contract, tort and property).

[ f ] In civil law systems, contract and tort fall under a general law of obligations , while trusts law is dealt with under statutory regimes or international conventions . International, constitutional and administrative law, criminal law, contract, tort, property law and trusts are regarded as the "traditional core subjects", [ g ] although there are many further disciplines .

International law Further information: Sources of international law See also: Conflict of laws , European Union law , and Public international law Wikisource has original text related to this article: Consolidated version of the Treaty on European Union Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union This section is an excerpt from International law .

[ edit ] Bound volumes of the American Journal of International Law at the University of Münster in Germany International law , also known as public international law and the law of nations, is the set of rules , norms, legal customs and standards that states and other actors feel an obligation to, and generally do, obey in their mutual relations. In international relations, actors are simply the individuals and collective entities, such as states, international organizations , and non-state groups, which can make behavioral choices, whether lawful or unlawful. Rules are formal, typically written expectations that outline required behavior, while norms are informal, often unwritten guidelines about appropriate behavior that are shaped by custom and social practice.

[ 155 ] It establishes norms for states across a broad range of domains, including war and diplomacy , economic relations , and human rights .

International law differs from state-based domestic legal systems in that it operates largely through consent , since there is no universally accepted authority to enforce it upon sovereign states . States and non-state actors may choose to not abide by international law, and even to breach a treaty , but such violations, particularly of peremptory norms , can be met with disapproval by others and in some cases coercive action including diplomacy, economic sanctions , and war. The lack of a final authority in international law can also cause far reaching differences. This is partly the effect of states being able to interpret international law in a manner which they seem fit. This can lead to problematic stances which can have large local effects.

[ 156 ] Constitutional and administrative law Main articles: Administrative law and Constitutional law The 1789 French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen Constitutional and administrative law govern the affairs of the state. Constitutional law concerns both the relationships between the executive, legislature and judiciary and the human rights or civil liberties of individuals against the state. Most jurisdictions, like the United States and France , have a single codified constitution with a bill of rights . A few, like the United Kingdom , have no such document. A "constitution" is simply those laws which constitute the body politic , from statute , case law and convention .

The fundamental constitutional principle, inspired by John Locke , holds that the individual can do anything except that which is forbidden by law , and the state may do nothing except that which is authorised by law.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Administrative law is the chief method for people to hold state bodies to account. People (wheresoever allowed) may potentially have prerogative to legally challenge (or sue) an agency, local council, public service, or government ministry for judicial review of the offending edict (law, ordinance, policy order). Such challenge vets the ability of actionable authority under the law, and that the government entity observed required procedure. The first specialist administrative court was the Conseil d'État set up in 1799, as Napoleon assumed power in France.

[ 159 ] A sub-discipline of constitutional law is election law . It along with Elections commissions , councils, or committees deal with policy and procedures facilitating elections. These rules settle disputes or enable the translation of the will of the people into functioning democracies . Election law addresses issues who is entitled to vote , voter registration , ballot access , campaign finance and party funding , redistricting , apportionment , electronic voting and voting machines , accessibility of elections, election systems and formulas, vote counting , election disputes, referendums , and issues such as electoral fraud and electoral silence .

Criminal law Main article: Criminal law Criminal law, also known as penal law, pertains to crimes and punishment.

[ 160 ] It thus regulates the definition of and penalties for offences found to have a sufficiently deleterious social impact but, in itself, makes no moral judgment on an offender nor imposes restrictions on society that physically prevent people from committing a crime in the first place.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Investigating, apprehending, charging, and trying suspected offenders is regulated by the law of criminal procedure .

[ 163 ] The paradigm case of a crime lies in the proof, beyond reasonable doubt , that a person is guilty of two things. First, the accused must commit an act which is deemed by society to be criminal, or actus reus (guilty act).

[ 164 ] Second, the accused must have the requisite malicious intent to do a criminal act, or mens rea (guilty mind). However, for so called " strict liability " crimes, an actus reus is enough.

[ 165 ] Criminal systems of the civil law tradition distinguish between intention in the broad sense ( dolus directus and dolus eventualis ), and negligence. Negligence does not carry criminal responsibility unless a particular crime provides for its punishment.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Adolf Eichmann (standing in glass booth at left) being sentenced to death at the conclusion of his 1961 trial , an example of a criminal law proceeding Examples of crimes include murder, assault, fraud and theft. In exceptional circumstances defences can apply to specific acts, such as killing in self defence , or pleading insanity . Another example is in the 19th-century English case of R v Dudley and Stephens , which tested whether a defence of " necessity " could justify murder and cannibalism to survive a shipwreck.

[ 168 ] Criminal law offences are viewed as offences against not just individual victims, but the community as well.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] The state, usually with the help of police, takes the lead in prosecution, which is why in common law countries cases are cited as " The People v ..." or " R (for Rex or Regina ) v ...". Also, lay juries are often used to determine the guilt of defendants on points of fact: juries cannot change legal rules. Some developed countries still condone capital punishment for criminal activity, but the normal punishment for a crime will be imprisonment , fines , state supervision (such as probation), or community service . Modern criminal law has been affected considerably by the social sciences, especially with respect to sentencing , legal research, legislation, and rehabilitation .

[ 169 ] On the international field, 111 countries are members of the International Criminal Court , which was established to try people for crimes against humanity .

[ 170 ] Contract law Main article: Contract The famous Carbolic Smoke Ball advertisement to cure influenza was held to be a unilateral contract .

Contract law concerns enforceable promises, and can be summed up in the Latin phrase pacta sunt servanda (agreements must be kept).

[ 171 ] In common law jurisdictions, three key elements to the creation of a contract are necessary: offer and acceptance , consideration and the intention to create legal relations .

Consideration indicates the fact that all parties to a contract have exchanged something of value. Some common law systems, including Australia, are moving away from the idea of consideration as a requirement. The idea of estoppel or culpa in contrahendo , can be used to create obligations during pre-contractual negotiations.

[ 172 ] Civil law jurisdictions treat contracts differently in a number of respects, with a more interventionist role for the state in both the formation and enforcement of contracts.

[ 173 ] Compared to common law jurisdictions, civil law systems incorporate more mandatory terms into contracts, allow greater latitude for courts to interpret and revise contract terms and impose a stronger duty of good faith , but are also more likely to enforce penalty clauses and specific performance of contracts.

[ 173 ] They also do not require consideration for a contract to be binding.

[ 174 ] In France, an ordinary contract is said to form simply on the basis of a "meeting of the minds" or a "concurrence of wills".

Germany has a special approach to contracts, which ties into property law. Their ' abstraction principle ' ( Abstraktionsprinzip ) means that the personal obligation of contract forms separately from the title of property being conferred. When contracts are invalidated for some reason (e.g. a car buyer is so drunk that he lacks legal capacity to contract) [ 175 ] the contractual obligation to pay can be invalidated separately from the proprietary title of the car.

Unjust enrichment law, rather than contract law, is then used to restore title to the rightful owner.

[ 176 ] Torts and delicts Main articles: Delict and Tort Certain civil wrongs are grouped together as torts under common law systems and delicts under civil law systems.

[ 177 ] To have acted tortiously, one must have breached a duty to another person, or infringed some pre-existing legal right. A simple example might be unintentionally hitting someone with a ball.

[ 178 ] Under the law of negligence , the most common form of tort, the injured party could potentially claim compensation for their injuries from the party responsible. The principles of negligence are illustrated by Donoghue v Stevenson .

[ h ] A friend of Donoghue ordered an opaque bottle of ginger beer (intended for the consumption of Donoghue) in a café in Paisley . Having consumed half of it, Donoghue poured the remainder into a tumbler. The decomposing remains of a snail floated out. She claimed to have suffered from shock, fell ill with gastroenteritis and sued the manufacturer for carelessly allowing the drink to be contaminated. The House of Lords decided that the manufacturer was liable for Mrs Donoghue's illness.

Lord Atkin took a distinctly moral approach and said: The liability for negligence [...] is no doubt based upon a general public sentiment of moral wrongdoing for which the offender must pay. [...] The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in law, you must not injure your neighbour; and the lawyer 's question, Who is my neighbour? receives a restricted reply. You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your neighbour.

[ 179 ] This became the basis for the four principles of negligence, namely that: Stevenson owed Donoghue a duty of care to provide safe drinks; he breached his duty of care; the harm would not have occurred but for his breach; and his act was the proximate cause of her harm.

[ h ] Another example of tort might be a neighbour making excessively loud noises with machinery on his property.

[ 180 ] Under a nuisance claim the noise could be stopped. Torts can also involve intentional acts such as assault , battery or trespass . A better known tort is defamation , which occurs, for example, when a newspaper makes unsupportable allegations that damage a politician's reputation.

[ 181 ] More infamous are economic torts, which form the basis of labour law in some countries by making trade unions liable for strikes, [ 182 ] when statute does not provide immunity.

[ i ] Property law Main article: Property law The South Sea Bubble by Edward Matthew Ward . The South Sea Bubble in 1720, one of the world's first ever speculations and crashes, led to strict regulation on share trading.

[ 183 ] Property law governs ownership and possession.

Real property , sometimes called 'real estate', refers to ownership of land and things attached to it.

[ 184 ] Personal property , refers to everything else; movable objects, such as computers, cars, jewelry or intangible rights, such as stocks and shares . A right in rem is a right to a specific piece of property, contrasting to a right in personam which allows compensation for a loss, but not a particular thing back. Land law forms the basis for most kinds of property law, and is the most complex. It concerns mortgages , rental agreements , licences , covenants , easements and the statutory systems for land registration. Regulations on the use of personal property fall under intellectual property, company law , trusts and commercial law .

A representative example of property law is the 1722 suit of Armory v Delamirie , applying English law .

[ 185 ] A child was deprived of possession of the gemstones that had been set in piece of jewellery, by the businessperson entrusted to appraise the piece. The court articulated that, according to the view of property in common law jurisdictions, the person who can show the best claim to a piece of property, against any contesting party, is the owner.

[ 186 ] By contrast, the classic civil law approach to property, propounded by Friedrich Carl von Savigny , is that it is a right good against the world. Obligations, like contracts and torts, are conceptualised as rights good between individuals.

[ 187 ] The idea of property raises many further philosophical and political issues. Locke argued that our "lives, liberties and estates" are our property because we own our bodies and mix our labour with our surroundings.

[ 188 ] Trusts Main article: Trust law In historical English law , the common law did not permit dividing the ownership from the control of one piece of property—but the law of equity did recognize this through an arrangement known as a trust. Trustees control property whereas the beneficial, or equitable, ownership of trust property is held by people known as beneficiaries. Trustees owe duties to their beneficiaries to take good care of the entrusted property.

[ 189 ] Another example of a trustee's duty might be to invest property wisely or sell it.

[ 190 ] This is especially the case for pension funds, the most important form of trust, where investors are trustees for people's savings until retirement. But trusts can also be set up for charitable purposes .

Some international norms for the structure and regulation of trusts are set out in the Hague Trust Convention of 1985.

Intersection with other fields Economics Main article: Law and economics In the 18th century, Adam Smith presented a philosophical foundation for explaining the relationship between law and economics.

[ j ] The discipline arose partly out of a critique of trade unions and U.S.

antitrust law.

[ citation needed ] The most prominent economic analyst of law [ citation needed ] is Ronald Coase , whose first major article, The Nature of the Firm (1937), argued that the reason for the existence of firms (companies, partnerships, etc.) is the existence of transaction costs .

[ 191 ] Rational individuals trade through bilateral contracts on open markets until the costs of transactions mean that using corporations to produce things is more cost-effective. His second major article, The Problem of Social Cost (1960), argued that if we lived in a world without transaction costs, people would bargain with one another to create the same allocation of resources, regardless of the way a court might rule in property disputes. He contended that law ought to be pre-emptive, and be guided by the most efficient solution.

[ 192 ] Many members of the so-called Chicago School are generally advocates of deregulation and privatisation , and are hostile to state regulation or what they see as restrictions on the operation of free markets .

[ 193 ] Sociology Main article: Sociology of law The sociology of law examines the interaction of law with society and overlaps with jurisprudence, philosophy of law, social theory and more specialised subjects such as criminology .

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] It is a transdisciplinary and multidisciplinary study focused on the theorisation and empirical study of legal practices and experiences as social phenomena. The institutions of social construction , social norms , dispute processing and legal culture are key areas for inquiry in this knowledge field. In the United States, the field is usually called law and society studies; in Europe, it is more often referred to as socio-legal studies. At first, jurists and legal philosophers were suspicious of sociology of law. Kelsen attacked one of its founders, Eugen Ehrlich , who sought to make clear the differences and connections between positive law, which lawyers learn and apply, and other forms of 'law' or social norms that regulate everyday life, generally preventing conflicts from reaching lawyers and courts.

[ 196 ] Contemporary research in the sociology of law is concerned with the way that law develops outside discrete state jurisdictions, being produced through social interaction in social arenas, and acquiring a diversity of sources of authority in national and transnational communal networks.

[ 197 ] Max Weber , who began his career as a lawyer, and is regarded as one of the founders of sociology and sociology of law Around 1900, Max Weber defined his "scientific" approach to law, identifying the "legal rational form" as a type of domination, not attributable to personal authority but to the authority of abstract norms.

[ 198 ] Formal legal rationality was his term for the key characteristic of the kind of coherent and calculable law that was a precondition for modern political developments and the modern bureaucratic state. Weber saw this law as having developed in parallel with the growth of capitalism.

[ 194 ] [ 195 ] Another sociologist, Émile Durkheim , wrote in his classic work The Division of Labour in Society that as society becomes more complex, the body of civil law concerned primarily with restitution and compensation grows at the expense of criminal laws and penal sanctions.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] Other notable early legal sociologists included Hugo Sinzheimer , Theodor Geiger , Georges Gurvitch and Leon Petrażycki in Europe, and William Graham Sumner in the U.S.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] See also Law portal Library resources about Law Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By-law Justice Law dictionary Legal industry by country Legal research in the United States Legal treatise Outline of law Political science Pseudolaw Public interest law Social law Sources of law Translating "law" to other European languages Notes ^ As a legal system, Roman law has affected the development of law worldwide. It also forms the basis for the law codes of most countries of continental Europe and has played an important role in the creation of the idea of a common European culture (Stein, Roman Law in European History , 2, 104–107).

^ Civil law jurisdictions recognise custom as "the other source of law"; hence, scholars tend to divide the civil law into the broad categories of "written law" ( ius scriptum ) or legislation, and "unwritten law" ( ius non-scriptum ) or custom. Yet they tend to dismiss custom as being of slight importance compared to legislation (Georgiadis, General Principles of Civil Law , 19; Washofsky, Taking Precedent Seriously , 7).

^ «In one of his elaborate orations in the United States Senate Mr. Charles Sumner spoke of "the generous presumption of the common law in favor of the innocence of an accused person;" yet it must be admitted that such a presumption cannot be found in Anglo-Saxon law, where sometimes the presumption seems to have been the other way. And in a very recent case in the Supreme Court of the United States, the case of Coffin, 156 U. S. 432, it is pointed out that this presumption was fully established in the Roman law, and was preserved in the canon law.» [ 105 ] ^ About "cabinet accountability" in both presidential and parliamentary systems, see Shugart–Haggard, Presidential Systems , 67 etc.

^ In these cases sovereignty is eroded, and often warlords acquire excessive powers (Fukuyama, State-Building , 166–167).

^ Although many scholars argue that "the boundaries between public and private law are becoming blurred", and that this distinction has become mere "folklore" (Bergkamp, Liability and Environment , 1–2).

^ E.g. in England these seven subjects, with EU law substituted for international law, make up a "qualifying law degree". For criticism, see Peter Birks ' poignant comments attached to a previous version of the Notice to Law Schools Archived 20 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Donoghue v Stevenson ( [1932] A.C. 532, 1932 S.C. (H.L.) 31, [1932] All ER Rep 1 ). See the original text of the case in UK Law Online Archived 16 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ In the UK, Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992 ; cf. in the U.S., National Labor Relations Act ^ According to Malloy, Smith established "a classical liberal philosophy that made individuals the key referential sign while acknowledging that we live not alone but in community with others".( Law and Economics , 114) References ^ a b Robertson 2006 , p. 90.

^ Willis 1926 .

^ Gibbs, Jack P. (1968). "Definitions of Law and Empirical Questions".

Law & Society Review .

2 (3): 429– 446.

doi : 10.2307/3052897 .

ISSN 0023-9216 .

JSTOR 3052897 .

^ Akers, Ronald L. (1965).

"Toward a Comparative Definition of Law" .

Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology .

56 (3): 301– 306.

doi : 10.2307/1141239 .

ISSN 0022-0205 .

JSTOR 1141239 .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Spooner, Lysander (1882).

Natural Law; or The Science of Justice: A Treatise on Natural Law, Natural Justice, Natural Rights, Natural Liberty, and Natural Society; Showing that All Legislation Whatsoever is an Absurdity, a Usurpation, and a Crime. Part First . A. Williams & Co.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Núñez Vaquero, Álvaro (10 June 2013).

"Five Models of Legal Science" .

Revus. Journal for Constitutional Theory and Philosophy of Law / Revija za ustavno teorijo in filozofijo prava (19): 53– 81.

doi : 10.4000/revus.2449 .

ISSN 1581-7652 .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Cohen 1992 .

^ Rubin, Basha (13 January 2015).

"Is Law an Art or a Science?: A Bit of Both" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 3 November 2018.

^ Berger 1953 , p. 525.

^ Mason, Anthony (1996).

"The Judge as Law-maker" (PDF) .

James Cook University Mayo Lecture .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Devins, Neal (2008).

"Congressional Responses to Judicial Decisions" .

Encyclopedia of the Supreme Court . Gale MacMillan. pp.

400– 403.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Berman, Harold J. (1983). "Religious Foundations of Law in the West: An Historical Perspective".

Journal of Law and Religion .

1 (1). Cambridge University Press: 3– 43.

doi : 10.2307/1051071 .

JSTOR 1051071 .

S2CID 146933872 .

^ Fox, Jonathan; Sandler, Shmuel (1 April 2005). "Separation of Religion and State in the Twenty-First Century: Comparing the Middle East and Western Democracies".

Comparative Politics .

37 (3): 317.

doi : 10.2307/20072892 .

JSTOR 20072892 .

^ Cox, Noel (2001).

"Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Church of the Province of Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia" .

Deakin Law Review .

6 (2): 262.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Otto, Jan Michiel, ed. (2010).

Sharia incorporated: a comparative overview of the legal systems of twelve Muslim countries in past and present . Leiden University Press.

ISBN 9789087280574 .

^ Raisch, Marylin Johnson.

"Religious Legal Systems in Comparative Law: A Guide to Introductory Research – GlobaLex" . Hauser Global Law School Program. New York University School of Law.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Horwitz, Morton J. (1 June 1982).

"The History of the Public/Private Distinction" .

University of Pennsylvania Law Review .

130 (6): 1423– 1428.

doi : 10.2307/3311976 .

JSTOR 3311976 .

S2CID 51854776 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

[ dead link ] ^ Merryman, John Henry (1968).

"The Public Law-Private Law Distinction in European and American Law" .

Journal of Public Law .

17 : 3.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Saiman, Chaim N. (6 July 2008).

"Public Law, Private Law, and Legal Science" .

American Journal of Comparative Law .

56 (961). Social Science Research Network: 691– 702.

doi : 10.5131/ajcl.2007.0023 .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Harlow, Carol (1 May 1980).

" "Public" and "private" law: definition without distinction" .

The Modern Law Review .

43 (3): 241– 265.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2230.1980.tb01592.x .

ISSN 1468-2230 .

^ Samuel, Geoffrey (1 September 1983).

"Public And Private Law: A Private Lawyer's Response" .

The Modern Law Review .

46 (5): 558– 583.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2230.1983.tb02534.x .

ISSN 1468-2230 .

^ Gordley, James (16 November 2006). Reimann, Mathias; Zimmermann, Reinhard (eds.).

"Comparative Law and Legal History" .

The Oxford Handbook of Comparative Law : 752– 774.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199296064.013.0024 .

ISBN 9780199296064 .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Bor, Fredric L. (1974). "The nexus between philosophy and law".

Journal of Legal Education .

26 (4): 539– 543.

ISSN 0022-2208 .

JSTOR 42896964 .

^ Rubin, Paul H.

"Law and Economics" .

The Library of Economics and Liberty . Liberty Fund, Inc.

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ Banakar, Reza (2003).

Merging law and sociology : beyond the dichotomies in socio-legal research . Berlin/Wisconsin: Galda and Wilch Publishing.

ISBN 1-931255-13-X .

^ Pound, Roscoe (1914). "The End of Law as Developed in Legal Rules and Doctrines".

Harvard Law Review .

27 (3): 195– 234.

doi : 10.2307/1325958 .

ISSN 0017-811X .

JSTOR 1325958 .

^ Sarat, Austin; Kearns, Thomas, eds. (1996).

Justice and Injustice in Law and Legal Theory . University of Michigan Press. pp.

18– 19.

doi : 10.3998/mpub.10283 .

ISBN 9780472096251 .

JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.10283 .

^ "law, n." .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/OED/4864419306 .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Rousseau, The Social Contract , Book II: Chapter 6 (Law) ^ Dennis Lloyd, Baron Lloyd of Hampstead .

Introduction to Jurisprudence . Third Edition. Stevens & Sons. London. 1972. Second Impression. 1975. p. 39.

^ Mc Coubrey, Hilaire and White, Nigel D.

Textbook on Jurisprudence . Second Edition.

Blackstone Press Limited . 1996.

ISBN 1-85431-582-X . p. 2.

^ Williams, Glanville. International Law and the Controversy Concerning the Meaning of the Word "Law". Revised version published in Laslett (Editor), Philosophy, Politics and Society (1956) p. 134 et seq. The original was published in (1945) 22 BYBIL 146.

^ Arnold 1935 , p. 36.

^ Baron Lloyd of Hampstead .

Introduction to Jurisprudence . Third Edition. Stevens & Sons. London. 1972. Second Impression. 1975.

^ Campbell 1993 , p. 184.

^ a b Bix 2022 .

^ a b Dworkin 1986 , p. 410.

^ a b Raz 1979 , pp. 3–36.

^ Holmes, Oliver Wendell. "The Path of Law" (1897) 10 Harvard Law Review 457 at 461.

^ Aquinas, St Thomas.

Summa Theologica . 1a2ae, 90.4. Translated by J G Dawson. Ed d'Entreves. (Basil Blackwell). Latin: "nihil est aliud qau edam rationis ordinatio ad bonum commune, ab eo qi curam communitatis habet, promulgata".

^ McCoubrey, Hilaire and White, Nigel D.

Textbook on Jurisprudence . Second Edition. Blackstone Press Limited. 1996.

ISBN 1-85431-582-X . p. 73.

^ Taylor, T. W. (January 1896). "The Conception of Morality in Jurisprudence".

The Philosophical Review .

5 (1): 36– 50.

doi : 10.2307/2176104 .

JSTOR 2176104 .

^ Fritz Berolzheimer , The World's Legal Philosophies , 115–116 ^ Kant, Immanuel , Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals , 42 (par. 434) ^ Green, Leslie.

"Legal Positivism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 10 December 2006 .

^ Nietzsche, Zur Genealogie der Moral , Second Essay, 11 ^ Kazantzakis, Friedrich Nietzsche and the Philosophy of Law , 97–98 ^ Linarelli, Nietzsche in Law's Cathedral , 23–26 ^ Marmor, Andrei (1934).

"The Pure Theory of Law" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2007 . Retrieved 9 February 2007 .

^ Bielefeldt, Carl Schmitt's Critique of Liberalism , 25–26 ^ Finn 1991 , pp. 170–171.

^ Bayles 1992 , p. 21.

^ Raz 1979 , p. 37.

^ Théodoridés. "law".

Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt .

^ VerSteeg, Law in ancient Egypt ^ Lippert, Sandra (11 February 2016).

"Egyptian Law, Saite to Roman Periods" .

Oxford Handbooks Online . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199935390.013.48 .

ISBN 978-0-19-993539-0 .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Richardson 2004 , p. 11.

^ Kelly 1992 , pp. 5–6.

^ Mallory 1997 , p. 346.

^ Ober 1996 , p. 121.

^ Kelly 1992 , p. 39.

^ Stein 1999 , p. 1.

^ Clarke, M. A.; Hooley, R. J. A.; Munday, R. J. C.; Sealy, L. S.; Tettenborn, A. M.; Turner, P. G. (2017).

Commercial Law . Oxford University Press. p. 14.

ISBN 9780199692088 .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

^ a b Mattei 1997 , p. 71.

^ McAuliffe, Karen (21 February 2013). "Precedent at the Court of Justice of the European Union: The Linguistic Aspect". In Michael Freeman; Fiona Smith (eds.).

Law and Language: Current Legal Issues, Volume 15 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199673667 . Archived from the original on 1 January 2020 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ For discussion of the composition and dating of these sources, see Olivelle, Manu's Code of Law , 18–25.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 276.

^ Chapra, Muhammad Umer (2014).

Morality and Justice in Islamic Economics and Finance . Edward Elgar Publishing. pp.

62– 63.

ISBN 9781783475728 .

^ Jackson, Roy (2010).

Mawlana Mawdudi and Political Islam: Authority and the Islamic State . Routledge.

ISBN 9781136950360 .

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 273.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 287.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 304.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 305.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 307.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 309.

^ Farah 2006 , pp. 263–304.

^ Pejovic, Caslav (2001).

"Civil Law and Common Law: Two Different Paths Leading to the Same Goal" .

Victoria University of Wellington Law Review .

32 (3): 817.

doi : 10.26686/vuwlr.v32i3.5873 .

Archived from the original on 8 September 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ "Introduction to Civil Law Legal Systems" (PDF) . International Network to Promote the Rule of Law. May 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ "Alphabetical Index of the 192 United Nations Member States and Corresponding Legal Systems" .

JuriGlobe . University of Ottawa.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2016 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ "The Economist explains: What is the difference between common and civil law?" .

The Economist . 17 July 2013.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ Gordley & von Mehren 2006 , p. 18.

^ Gordley & von Mehren 2006 , p. 21.

^ Stein 1999 , p. 32.

^ Stein 1999 , p. 35.

^ Stein 1999 , p. 43.

^ Hatzis 2002 , pp. 253–263.

^ Demirgüç-Kunt & Levine 2001 , p. 204.

^ Carl Schmitt , The Concept of the Political , ch. 7; Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy ^ "The World Factbook – Field Listing – Legal system" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 October 2007 .

^ "Magna Carta" .

Fordham University .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2014 . Retrieved 10 November 2006 .

^ Gordley & von Mehren 2006 , p. 4.

^ Gordley & von Mehren 2006 , p. 3.

^ Pollock (ed) Table Talk of John Selden (1927) 43; "Equity is a roguish thing. For law we have a measure... equity is according to the conscience of him that is Chancellor, and as that is longer or narrower, so is equity. 'Tis all one as if they should make the standard for the measure a Chancellor's foot." ^ Gee v Pritchard (1818) 2 Swans. 402, 414 ^ Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England , Book the First – Chapter the First Archived 5 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gordley & von Mehren 2006 , p. 17.

^ Ferrari, Silvio (2012). "Chapter 4: Canon Law as a Religious Legal System". In Huxley, Andrew (ed.).

Religion, Law and Tradition: Comparative Studies in Religious Law . Routledge. p. 51.

ISBN 978-1-136-13250-6 .

Divine law... is eternal and cannot be changed by any human authority.

^ Glenn 2000 , p. 159.

^ Boudinhon, Auguste (1910).

"Canon Law" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 9 August 2013 .

^ Wiesner-Hanks, Merry (2011).

Gender in History: Global Perspectives . Wiley Blackwell. p. 37.

^ Raymond Wacks, Law: A Very Short Introduction, 2nd Ed.

(Oxford University Press, 2015) pg. 13.

^ Peters, Edward.

"Home Page" . CanonLaw.info.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ Blessed John Paul II, Ap. Const. (1990).

"Apostolic Constitution Sacri Canones John Paul II 1990" .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2019 .

^ Friedman, Lawrence M., American Law: An Introduction (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1984), pg. 70.

^ William Wirt Howe, Studies in the Civil Law, and its Relation to the Law of England and America (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1896), pg. 51.

^ A. Brundag, James (2010).

he Medieval Origins of the Legal Profession: Canonists, Civilians, and Courts . University of Chicago Press. p. 116.

ISBN 978-0226077598 .

^ Anderson 1956 , p. 43.

^ Giannoulatos 1975 , pp. 274–275.

^ Sherif 2005 , pp. 157–158.

^ "Saudi Arabia" .

JURIST . Archived from the original on 30 August 2006 . Retrieved 2 September 2006 .

^ Akhlaghi 2005 , p. 127.

^ Hallaq 2005 , p. 1.

^ a b Markovits 2007 .

^ Quigley, J. (1989). "Socialist Law and the Civil Law Tradition".

The American Journal of Comparative Law .

37 (4): 781– 808.

doi : 10.2307/840224 .

JSTOR 840224 .

^ Smith, G. B. (1988). "Socialist Legality and the Soviet Legal System".

Soviet Politics . Palgrave. pp.

137– 162.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-19172-7_7 .

ISBN 978-0-333-45919-5 .

^ Edward H. Levi, An Introduction to Legal Reasoning (2013), p. 1-2.

^ Jerman v. Carlisle , 130 S.Ct. 1605, 1614, 559 U.S. 573, 587 (2010), Sotomayor , J.

^ Heise, Michael (1999).

"The Importance of Being Empirical" .

Pepperdine Law Review .

26 (4): 807– 834.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 18 December 2019 .

^ Posner, Eric (24 July 2015).

"The rise of statistics in law" .

ERIC POSNER .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2019 .

^ Montesquieu , The Spirit of Laws , Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty, with Regard to the Constitution, Chapters 6–7 Archived 3 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan , XVII ^ Caldwell, Ernest (2016).

"Chinese Constitutionalism: Five-Power Constitution" .

Max Planck Encyclopedia of Comparative Constitutional Law .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2020 .

^ "Does Political Bias in the Judiciary Matter: Implications of Judicial Bias Studies for Legal and Constitutional Reform" .

75 U. Chi. L. Rev. 853 . 2008 . Retrieved 19 July 2025 .

^ a b Riker 1992 , p. 101.

^ a b Haggard & Shugart 2001 , p. 71.

^ Olson, The New Parliaments of Central and Eastern Europe , 7 ^ Weber, Politics as a Vocation ^ Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation , 154 ^ See, e.g.

Tuberville v Savage (1669), 1 Mod. Rep. 3, 86 Eng. Rep. 684, where a knight said in a threatening tone to a layperson, "If it were not assize time, I would not take such language from you." ^ "History of Police Forces" .

History.com Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 29 December 2006 . Retrieved 10 December 2006 .

^ [ "Des Sergents de Ville et Gardiens de la Paix à la Police de Proximité : la Préfecture de Police au Service des Citoyens" (in French). La Préfecture de Police de Paris. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008 . Retrieved 24 January 2007 .

^ "bureaucracy" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2009 . Retrieved 2 September 2007 .

^ Albrow 1970 , p. 16.

^ Mises, Bureaucracy , II, Bureaucratic Management Archived 14 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Kettl 2006 , p. 367.

^ Weber, Economy and Society , I, 393 ^ Kettl 2006 , p. 371.

^ Hazard & Dondi 2004 , p. 1.

^ The Sunday Times v The United Kingdom [1979] ECHR 1 at 49 Archived 16 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine Case no. 6538/74 ^ "British English: Esquire" . Collins Dictionary. n.d.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 .

^ "American English: Esquire" . Collins Dictionary. n.d.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 23 September 2014 .

^ Ahmad 2009 .

^ Hazard & Dondi 2004 , pp. 22–23.

^ a b Fine, The Globalisation of Legal Education , 364 ^ Warren, Civil Society , 3–4 ^ Locke, Second Treatise , Chap. VII, Of Political or Civil_Society. Chapter 7, section 87 ^ Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right , 3, II, 182 Archived 1 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Karkatsoulis 2004 , pp. 277–278.

^ (Pelczynski, The State and Civil Society , 1–13; Warren, Civil Society , 5–9) ^ Zaleski, Pawel (2008). "Tocqueville on Civilian Society. A Romantic Vision of the Dichotomic Structure of Social Reality".

Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte .

50 .

^ Robertson, Crimes Against Humanity , 98–99 ^ Jakobs 2004 , pp. 5–6.

^ Kaldor–Anheier–Glasius, Global Civil Society , passim Archived 17 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Karkatsoulis 2004 , pp. 282–283.

^ Henderson, Conway W. (2010).

Understanding International Law . Wiley. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9764-9 .

^ Erakat, Noura (2019).

Justice for some: law and the question of Palestine . Stanford (Calif.): Stanford University Press. pp.

7– 10.

ISBN 978-0-8047-9825-9 .

^ Locke, The Second Treatise , Chapter 9, section 124 ^ Tamanaha, On the Rule of Law , 47 ^ Auby 2002 , p. 75.

^ Cesare Beccaria 's seminal treatise of 1763–1764 is titled On Crimes and Punishments ( Dei delitti e delle pene ).

^ a b Brody, Acker & Logan 2001 , p. 2.

^ a b Wilson 2003 , p. 2.

^ Dennis J. Baker, Glanville Williams Textbook of Criminal Law (London: 2012), 2 ^ See e.g.

Brody, Acker & Logan 2001 , p. 205 about Robinson v. California , 370 U.S. 660 (1962).

^ See e.g. Feinman, Law 111 , 260–261 about Powell v. Texas , 392 U.S. 514 (1968).

^ Dörmann, Doswald-Beck & Kolb 2003 , p. 491.

^ Kaiser 2005 , p. 333.

^ About R v Dudley and Stephens [1884] 14 QBD 273 DC Archived 28 February 2005 at the Wayback Machine , see Simpson, Cannibalism and the Common Law , 212–217, 229–237 ^ Pelser, Criminal Legislation , 198 ^ "The States Parties to the Rome Statute" .

International Criminal Court . Archived from the original on 23 June 2011 . Retrieved 10 February 2007 .

^ Wehberg, Pacta Sunt Servanda , 775 ^ Austotel v Franklins (1989) 16 NSWLR 582 ^ a b Pargendler 2018 .

^ e.g. in Germany, § 311 Abs. II Archived 11 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine BGB ^ "§ 105 BGB Nichtigkeit der Willenserklärung" .

dejure.org .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2006 . Retrieved 5 December 2006 .

^ Smith, The Structure of Unjust Enrichment Law , 1037 ^ Lee, R. W. (April 1918).

"Torts and Delicts" .

Yale Law Journal .

27 (6): 721– 730.

doi : 10.2307/786478 .

ISSN 0044-0094 .

JSTOR 786478 .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2020 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ Bolton v Stone [1951] AC 850 ^ Donoghue v Stevenson [1932] AC 532, 580 ^ Sturges v Bridgman (1879) 11 Ch D 852 ^ e.g. concerning a British politician and the Iraq War, George Galloway v Telegraph Group Ltd [2004] EWHC 2786 ^ Taff Vale Railway Co v Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants [1901] AC 426 ^ Harris 1994 , pp. 610–627.

^ e.g.

Hunter v Canary Wharf Ltd [1997] 2 All ER 426 Archived 22 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ Armory v Delamirie (1722) 93 ER 664, 1 Strange 505 ^ Matthews 1995 , pp. 251–274.

^ Savigny 1803 , p. 25.

^ Locke 1689 , Section 123.

^ Bristol and West Building Society v Mothew (1998).

^ Nestlé v National Westminster Bank plc [1993] 1 WLR 1260 ^ Coase 1937 , pp. 386–405.

^ Coase 1960 , pp. 1–44.

^ Jakoby 2005 , p. 53.

^ a b Cotterrell 1992 .

^ a b Jary & Jary 1995 , p. 636.

^ Ehrlich, Fundamental Principles , Hertogh, Living Law , Rottleuthner, La Sociologie du Droit en Allemagne , 109, Rottleuthner, Rechtstheoritische Probleme der Sociologie des Rechts , 521 ^ Cotterrell 2006 .

^ Rheinstein 1954 , p. 336.

^ Cotterrell 1999 .

^ Johnson 1995 , p. 156.

^ Gurvitch & Hunt 2001 , p. 142.

^ Papachristou 1999 , pp. 81–82.

Bibliography Ahmad, Ahmad Atif (2009).

"Lawyers: Islamic Law" (PDF) .

Oxford Encyclopedia of Legal History . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009.

Akhlaghi, Behrooz (2005). "Iranian Commercial Law and the New Investment Law FIPPA". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.).

The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3 .

Albrow, Martin (1970).

Bureaucracy (Key Concepts in Political Science) . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-11262-5 .

Anderson, J.N.D. (January 1956). "Law Reform in the Middle East".

International Affairs .

32 (1): 43– 51.

doi : 10.2307/2607811 .

JSTOR 2607811 .

Aristotle .

Athenian Constitution . Translated by Frederic George Kenyon – via Wikisource .

See original text in Perseus Project Archived 8 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

Arnold, Thurman W. (1935). "The Symbols of Government".

American Political Science Review . New Haven: Yale University Press: 379.

Auby, Jean-Bernard (2002). "Administrative Law in France". In Stroink, F.A.M.; Seerden, René (eds.).

Administrative Law of the European Union, its Member States and the United States . Intersentia.

ISBN 978-90-5095-251-4 .

Barzilai, Gad (2003).

Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities . The University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-11315-6 .

Bayles, Michael D. (1992). "A Critique of Austin".

Hart's Legal Philosophy . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-7923-1981-8 .

Beale, Hugh; Tallon, Denis (2002). "English Law: Consideration".

Contract Law . Hart Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84113-237-2 .

Berger, Adolf (1953).

Encyclopedic Dictionary of Roman Law . American Philosophical Society.

ISBN 978-0-87169-432-4 .

Roman ars boni et aequi.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Bergkamp, Lucas (2001). "Introduction".

Liability and Environment . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-411-1645-1 .

Berle, Adolf (1932).

Modern Corporation and Private Property . New York, Chicago, Commerce Clearing House, Loose leaf Service division of the Corporation Trust Co.

Bix, Brian (2022).

"John Austin" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2007 . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

Blackstone, William (1765–69).

Commentaries on the Laws of England .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 May 2010 .

Brody, David C.; Acker, James R.; Logan, Wayne A. (2001). "Introduction to the Study of Criminal Law".

Criminal Law . Jones & Bartlett Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-8342-1083-7 .

Campbell, Tom D. (1993). "The Contribution of Legal Studies". In Robert E. Goodin; Philip Pettit (eds.).

A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy . Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-631-19951-9 .

Churchill, Winston (1986). "Problems of War and Peace".

The Hinge of Fate . Houghton Mifflin Books.

ISBN 978-0-395-41058-5 .

Clarke, Paul A. B.; Linzey, Andrew (1996).

Dictionary of Ethics, Theology and Society . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-06212-1 .

Coase, Ronald H.

(November 1937). "The Nature of the Firm".

Economica .

4 (16): 386– 405.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x .

Coase, Ronald H.

(October 1960).

"The Problem of Social Cost (this online version excludes some parts)" (PDF) .

Journal of Law and Economics .

3 : 1– 44.

doi : 10.1086/466560 .

S2CID 222331226 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 November 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2018 .

Cohen, Morris L.

(1992).

Law : the Art of Justice . Beaux Arts Editions.

ISBN 9780883633120 .

Cotterrell, Roger (1992).

The Sociology of Law: An Introduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-406-51770-8 .

Cotterrell, Roger (1999).

Emile Durkheim: Law in a Moral Domain . Edinburgh University Press/ Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-1339-7 .

Cotterrell, Roger (2006).

Law, Culture and Society: Legal Ideas in the Mirror of Social Theory . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-2511-7 .

Curtin, Deirdre; Wessel, Ramses A. (2005). "A Survey of the Content of Good Governance for some International Organisations".

Good Governance and the European Union: Reflections on Concepts, Institutions and Substance . Intersentia nv.

ISBN 978-90-5095-381-8 .

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli; Levine, Ross (2001).

Financial Structures and Economic Growth . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-54179-4 .

Dicey, Albert Venn (2005). "Parliamentary Sovereignty and Federalism".

Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution . Adamant Media Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-4021-8555-7 .

Dörmann, Knut; Doswald-Beck, Louise; Kolb, Robert (2003). "Appendix".

Elements of War Crimes . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-81852-0 .

Durkheim, Émile (1893).

The Division of Labor in Society . The Free Press reprint.

ISBN 978-0-684-83638-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Dworkin, Ronald (1986).

Law's Empire . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-51836-0 .

Ehrlich, Eugen (2002) [1936].

Fundamental Principles of the Sociology of Law . Transaction Books reprint.

Farah, Paolo (August 2006). "Five Years of China WTO Membership. EU and US Perspectives about China's Compliance with Transparency Commitments and the Transitional Review Mechanism".

Legal Issues of Economic Integration .

33 (3): 263– 304.

doi : 10.54648/LEIE2006016 .

S2CID 153128973 .

SSRN 916768 .

Feinman, Jay M. (2006).

"Criminal Responsibility and Criminal Law" .

Law 101 . Oxford University Press US.

ISBN 978-0-19-517957-6 .

Findlay, Marc (1999).

" 'Independence' and the Judiciary in the PRC" . In Jayasuriya, Kanishka (ed.).

Law, Capitalism and Power in Asia . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-19742-7 .

Fine, Tony F. (2001). "The Globalization of Legal Education in the United States". In Drolshammer, Jens I.; Pfeifer, Michael (eds.).

The Internationalization of the Practice of Law . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-411-1620-8 .

Finn, John E. (1991).

"Constitutional Dissolution in the Weimar Republic" .

Constitutions in Crisis: Political Violence and the Rule of Law . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-505738-6 .

France, Anatole (1894).

The Red Lily (Le lys rouge) .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 February 2007 .

Fukuyama, Francis (2005).

State-Building (First edition in English 2004 ed.). Editions Livanis.

ISBN 978-960-14-1159-0 .

Georgiadis, Apostolos S. (1997). "Sources of Law".

General Principles of Civil Law (in Greek). Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers.

ISBN 978-960-232-715-9 .

Giannoulatos, Anastasios (1975). "Characteristics of Modern Islam".

Islam – A General Survey (in Greek). Athens: Poreuthentes.

Glenn, H. Patrick (2000).

Legal Traditions of the World . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-876575-2 .

Goldhaber, Michael D. (2007). "Europe's Supreme Court".

A People's History of the European Court of Human Rights . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8135-3983-6 .

Gordley, James R.; von Mehren, Arthur Taylor (2006).

An Introduction to the Comparative Study of Private Law . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-68185-8 .

Gurvitch, Georges ; Hunt, Alan (2001) [1942]. "Max Weber and Eugen Ehrlich".

Sociology of Law . Athens: Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7658-0704-5 .

Haggard, Stephan; Shugart, Matthew Soberg (2001). "Institutions and Public Policy in Presidential Systems". In Haggard, Stephan; McCubbins, Mathew Daniel (eds.).

Presidents, Parliaments and Policy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-77485-7 .

Hallaq, Wael Bahjat (2005). "Introduction".

The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-00580-7 .

Hamilton, Michael S., and George W. Spiro (2008).

The Dynamics of Law , 4th ed. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7656-2086-6 .

Harris, Ron (September 1994). "The Bubble Act: Its Passage and Its Effects on Business Organization".

The Journal of Economic History .

54 (3): 610– 627.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700015059 .

JSTOR 2123870?

.

S2CID 154429555 .

Hart, H.L.A. (1961).

The Concept of Law . Oxford University Press.

Hatzis, Aristides N. (November 2002). "The Nature of the Firm".

European Journal of Law and Economics .

14 (3): 253– 263.

doi : 10.1023/A:1020749518104 .

S2CID 142679220 .

Hayek, Friedrich (1978).

The Constitution of Liberty . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-32084-7 .

Hazard, Geoffrey C.; Dondi, Angelo (2004).

Legal Ethics . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4882-7 .

Hegel, Georg (1820).

Elements of the Philosophy of Right (in German).

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 January 2007 .

Heinze, Eric (2013).

The Concept of Injustice . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-52441-4 .

Hertogh, Marc, ed. (2009).

Living Law: Reconsidering Eugen Ehrlich . Hart.

ISBN 978-1-84113-898-5 .

Hobbes, Thomas (1651).

"Chapter XVII: Of the Causes, Generation, and Definition of a Commonwealth" .

Leviathan . Archived from the original on 27 November 2010.

Jakobs, Lesley A. (2004). "Retrieving Equality of Opportunity".

Pursuing Equal Opportunities . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53021-7 .

Jakoby, Stanford M. (2005).

"Economic Ideas and the Labour Market – Chapter: Cycles of Economic Thought" (PDF) .

Comparative Labor Law and Policy Journal .

25 (1): 43– 78. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007 . Retrieved 12 February 2007 .

Jary, David; Jary, Julia (1995).

Collins Dictionary of Sociology . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-00-470804-1 .

Jensen, Eric G.; Heller, Thomas C. (2003).

"Introduction" . In Jensen, Eric G.; Heller, Thomas C. (eds.).

Beyond Common Knowledge . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4803-2 .

Johnson, Alan (1995).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology . Blackwells.

ISBN 978-1-55786-116-0 .

Kaiser, Dagmar (2005). "Leistungsstōrungen". In Staudinger, Julius von; Martinek, Michael; Beckmann, Roland Michael (eds.).

Eckpfeiler Des Zivilrechts . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-8059-1019-4 .

Kaldor, Mary; Anheier, Helmut; Glasius, Marlies (2003). "Global Civil Society in an Era of Regressive Globalisation". In Kaldor, Mary; Anheier, Helmut; Glasius, Marlies (eds.).

Global Civil Society Yearbook 2003 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-926655-5 .

Kant, Immanuel (1998) [1785].

Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (Translated by Mary Gregor) . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-62695-8 .

Karkatsoulis, Panagioti (2004). "Civil Society and New Public Management".

The State in Transitions (PDF) (in Greek). Athens: I. Sideris.

ISBN 978-960-08-0333-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 August 2007 . Retrieved 2 September 2008 .

Kazantzakis, Nikos (1998) [1909]. "Law".

Friedrich Nietzsche and the Philosophy of Law and Polity (in Greek). Athens: Editions Kazantzakis.

Kelly, J.M. (1992).

A Short History of Western Legal Theory . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-876244-7 .

Kettl, Don (November 2006).

"Public Bureaucracies" . In R. A. W. Rhodes; Sarah A. Binder; Bert A. Rockman (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Political Institutions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927569-4 .

Linarelli, John (2004).

"Nietzsche in Law's Cathedral: Beyond Reason and Postmodernism – Chapter: Cycles of Economic Thought" (PDF) .

Catholic University Law Review .

53 : 413– 457.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.421040 .

S2CID 54617575 .

SSRN 421040 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2019.

Locke, John (1689).

"Second Treatise of Government" .

Two Treatises of Government – via Wikisource .

Luban, David (2001). "Law's Blindfold".

Conflict of Interest in the Professions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512863-5 .

Mallory, J.P. (1997). "Law".

Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture .

Malloy, Robin Paul (1994).

"Adam Smith and the Modern Discourse of Law and Economics" . In Paul Malloy, Robin; Evensky, Jerry (eds.).

Adam Smith and the Philosophy of Law and Economics . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-7923-2796-7 .

Markovits, I. (December 2007). "The Death of Socialist Law?".

Annual Review of Law and Social Science .

3 : 233– 253.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.lawsocsci.3.081806.112849 .

Mattei, Ugo (1997). "The Distinction between Common Law and Civil Law".

Comparative Law and Economics . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-06649-0 .

Matthews, Paul (1995). "The Man of Property".

Medical Law Review .

3 (3): 251– 274.

doi : 10.1093/medlaw/3.3.251 .

PMID 11657690 .

S2CID 41659603 .

McGhee, John (2000).

Snell's Equity . London: Sweet and Maxwell.

ISBN 978-0-421-85260-0 .

Mises, Ludwig von (1962) [1944].

Bureaucracy (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 10 November 2006 .

Montesquieu, Baron de (1748).

"Book XI: Of the Laws Which Establish Political Liberty, with Regard to the Constitution, Chapters 6–7" .

The Spirit of Laws (translated in English by Thomas Nugent, revised by J. V. Prichard) .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2009 . Retrieved 14 January 2007 .

Nietzsche, Friedrich (1887). "Zweite Abhandlung: "Schuld", "schlechtes Gewissen" und Verwandtes".

Zur Genealogie der Moral – Eine Streitschrift (in German).

Ober, Josiah (1996). "The Nature of Athenian Democracy".

The Athenian Revolution: Essays on Ancient Greek Democracy and Political Theory . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-00190-6 .

Olivelle, Patrick (2005).

Manu's Code of Law: A Critical Edition and Translation of the Manava-Dharmasastra . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-517146-4 .

Olson, David M.; Norton, Philip (1996).

"Legislatures in Democratic Transition" .

The New Parliaments of Central and Eastern Europe . Frank Cass (UK).

ISBN 978-0-7146-4261-1 .

Papachristou, T.K. (1999). "The Sociological Approach of Law".

Sociology of Law (in Greek). Athens: A.N. Sakkoulas Publishers.

ISBN 978-960-15-0106-2 .

Pargendler, Maria (2018).

"The Role of the State in Contract Law: The Common-Civil Law Divide" (PDF) .

Yale Journal of International Law .

43 (1): 143– 189.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2848886 .

S2CID 3548111 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

Patterson, James T.

(2001).

Brown v. Board of Education: A Civil Rights Milestone and Its Troubled Legacy . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-515632-4 .

Pelczynski, A.Z. (1984).

The State and Civil Society . Cambridge University Press.

Petersmann, Ernst-Ulrich (1997). "Rule of Law and Constitutionalism".

The GATT/WTO Dispute Settlement System . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-411-0933-0 .

Rasekh, Mohammad (2005). "Are Islamism and Republicanism Compatible?". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.).

The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3 .

Raz, Joseph (1979).

The Authority of Law, Essays on Law and Morality . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-825493-5 .

Redfem, Alan (2004). "Regulation of International Arbitration".

Law and Practice of International Commercial Arbitration . Sweet & Maxwell.

ISBN 978-0-421-86240-1 .

Rheinstein, M.

(1954).

Max Weber on Law and Economy in Society . Harvard University Press.

Richardson, W.E.J. (2004). "Introduction".

Hammurabi's Laws . Continuum International Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-567-08158-2 .

Riker, William H.

(January 1992). "The Justification of Bicameralism".

International Political Science Review .

13 (1): 101– 116.

doi : 10.1177/019251219201300107 .

JSTOR 1601440 .

S2CID 154483653 .

Robertson, Geoffrey (2006).

Crimes Against Humanity . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-102463-9 .

Roeber, A. G. (October 2001). "What the Law Requires Is Written on Their Hearts: Noachic and Natural Law among German-Speakers in Early Modern North America".

William and Mary Quarterly . Third Series.

58 (4): 883– 912.

doi : 10.2307/2674504 .

JSTOR 2674504 .

Rottleuthner, Hubert (December 1989).

"La Sociologie du Droit en Allemagne" (PDF) .

Droit et Société (in French).

11 : 101– 120.

doi : 10.3406/dreso.1989.1026 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 November 2006 . Retrieved 10 February 2007 .

Rottleuthner, Hubert (1984). "Rechtstheoritische Probleme der Sociologie des Rechts. Die Kontroverse zwischen Hans Kelsen und Eugen Ehrlich (1915/17)".

Rechtstheorie (in German).

5 : 521– 551.

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1762).

"Book II: Chapter 6 (Law)" .

The Social Contract (translated in English by G. D. H. Cole) (in French). Archived from the original on 22 February 2008 . Retrieved 8 November 2007 .

Salazar, Philippe-Joseph (2019).

Air Law . Juta.

ISBN 9781485133148 .

Savigny, Friedrich Carl von (1803).

"Zu welcher Classe von Rechten gehört der Besitz?" .

Das Recht des Besitzes (in German).

Archived from the original on 6 October 2008 . Retrieved 11 October 2008 .

Schermers, Henry G.; Blokker, Niels M. (1995). "Supervision and Sanctions".

International Institutional Law . The Hague/London/Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publisher.

Sealy, L.S.; Hooley, R.J.A. (2003).

Commercial Law . LexisNexis Butterworths.

Sherif, Adel Omar (2005). "Constitutions of Arab Countries and the Position of Sharia". In Yassari, Nadjma (ed.).

The Sharīʻa in the Constitutions of Afghanistan, Iran, and Egypt . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-148787-3 .

Simpson, A.W.B. (1984).

Cannibalism and the Common Law . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-75942-5 .

Smith, Stephen A. (2003).

"The Structure of Unjust Enrichment Law: Is Restitution a Right or a Remedy" (PDF) .

Loyola of Los Angeles Law Review .

36 (2): 1037– 1062.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 9 February 2007 .

Stein, Peter (1999).

Roman Law in European History . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-64372-6 .

Stone, Julius (1965).

"Early Horizons of Justice in the West" .

Human Law and Human Justice . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0215-7 .

Tamanaha, Brian Z. (2004). "Locke, Montesquieu the Federalist Papers".

On the Rule of Law . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-60465-9 .

Théodoridés, Aristide (1999). "law".

Encyclopedia of the Archaeology of Ancient Egypt . Routledge (UK). 0-415-18589-0.

VerSteeg, Russ (2002).

Law in Ancient Egypt . Durham, N.C.: Carolina Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-89089-978-6 .

Warren, Mark E. (1999).

Civil Society and Good Governance (PDF) . Washington DC: Center for the Study of Voluntary Organisations and Services, Georgetown University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2008.

Washofsky, Mark (2002). "Taking Precedent Seriously".

Re-Examining Progressive Halakhah edited by Walter Jacob, Moshe Zemer . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-57181-404-3 .

Weber, Max (1978). "Bureaucracy and Political Leadership".

Economy and Society, Volume I (Translated and edited by Claus Wittich, Ephraim Fischoff, and Guenther Roth) . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-03500-3 .

Weber, Max (1919).

Politics as a Vocation – via Wikisource .

Weber, Max (1964).

The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (Edited with Introduction by Talcott Parsons – Translated in English by A. M. Henderson) . The Free Press of Glencoe. ASIN B-000-LRHAX-2.

Wehberg, Hans (October 1959). "Pacta Sunt Servanda".

The American Journal of International Law .

53 (4): 775– 786.

doi : 10.2307/2195750 .

JSTOR 2195750 .

S2CID 147466309 .

Wilson, William (2003). "Understanding Criminal Law".

Criminal Law . Pearson Education.

ISBN 978-0-582-47301-0 .

Willis, Hugh Evander (January 1926).

"A Definition of Law" .

Virginia Law Review .

12 (3): 203– 214.

doi : 10.2307/1065717 .

JSTOR 1065717 .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

World Intellectual Property Organization (1997). "The System of Intellectual Property".

Introduction to Intellectual Property . Kluwer Law International.

ISBN 978-90-411-0938-5 .

Paolo, Silvestri (11 June 2014).

"The ideal of good government in Luigi Einaudi's Thought and Life: Between Law and Freedom" .

SSRN 2447898 . Archived from the original on 25 February 2022.

Further reading "House of Lords Judgments" . House of Lords.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 10 November 2006 .

Opinions of the Supreme Court of the United States "law" .

Law.com Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2009 . Retrieved 10 February 2007 .

"law" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2007 .

"legal" . Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2005 . Retrieved 9 February 2007 .

External links Law at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity DRAGNET: Search of free legal databases from New York Law School .

Archived 3 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

World Legal Information Institute Commonwealth Legal Information Institute Asian Legal Information Institute Australasian Legal Information Institute British and Irish Legal Information Institute Canadian Legal Information Institute (archived 4 October 2006) New Zealand Legal Information Institute Pacific Islands Legal Information Institute Southern African Legal Information Institute v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Law by region v t e Law of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Law of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Law of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Law of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Law in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union v t e Law of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Links to related articles v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Latvia Korea Israel Other NARA 2 Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9w2ds
Cached time: 20250818044453
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.343 seconds
Real time usage: 3.791 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 45130/1000000
Revision size: 139319/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 703224/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 118737/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 70/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 720575/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.087/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25662495/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3192.479      1 -total
 20.56%  656.409    108 Template:Cite_book
 19.57%  624.746      2 Template:Reflist
 11.79%  376.517     43 Template:Cite_journal
 11.62%  370.823      2 Template:Navboxes
 10.87%  347.165     90 Template:Sfn
  6.94%  221.512      8 Template:Navbox
  6.76%  215.918    104 Template:Iso2country
  4.60%  146.999     22 Template:Cite_web
  4.58%  146.255      1 Template:Asia_in_topic Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18949668:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818044453 and revision id 1303914341. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law&oldid=1303914341 " Categories : Law Main topic articles Justice Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2025 Use British English from January 2014 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from November 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with excerpts All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: abbreviated year range CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law 188 languages Add topic

