Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Greece 1.1.1 Plato 1.1.2 Aristotle 1.1.3 Stoic natural law 1.2 Ancient Rome 1.3 Christianity 1.3.1 Catholic natural law jurisprudence 1.3.1.1 Early natural Christian law thinkers 1.3.1.2 Thomas Aquinas 1.3.1.3 School of Salamanca 1.3.1.4 Modern catechism 1.4 Islamic natural law 1.5 Brehon law 1.6 English jurisprudence 1.6.1 Hobbes 1.6.2 Cumberland's rebuttal of Hobbes 1.6.3 American jurisprudence 1.7 European liberal natural law 2 Contemporary jurisprudence 3 Methodology 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Natural law 67 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal and philosophical theory that there are values inherent in nature Not to be confused with Natural justice .

For other uses, see Natural law (disambiguation) .

Thomas Aquinas , whose integration of Aristotelian philosophy with Christian theology established the foundational principles of natural law, influencing Western concepts of justice and ethics Natural law [ 1 ] ( Latin : ius naturale , lex naturalis ) is a philosophical and legal theory that posits the existence of a set of inherent laws derived from nature and universal moral principles, which are discoverable through reason . In ethics , natural law theory [ 2 ] asserts that certain rights and moral values are inherent in human nature and can be understood universally, independent of enacted laws or societal norms. In jurisprudence , natural law—sometimes referred to as iusnaturalism [ 3 ] or jusnaturalism [ 4 ] —holds that there are objective legal standards based on morality that underlie and inform the creation, interpretation, and application of human-made laws. This contrasts with positive law (as in legal positivism ), [ 5 ] which emphasizes that laws are rules created by human authorities and are not necessarily connected to moral principles. Natural law can refer to "theories of ethics, theories of politics, theories of civil law, and theories of religious morality ", [ 6 ] depending on the context in which naturally-grounded practical principles are claimed to exist.

In Western tradition, natural law was anticipated by the pre-Socratics , for example, in their search for principles that governed the cosmos and human beings. The concept of natural law was documented in ancient Greek philosophy , including Aristotle , [ 7 ] and was mentioned in ancient Roman philosophy by Cicero . References to it are also found in the Old and New Testaments of the Bible , and were later expounded upon in the Middle Ages by Christian philosophers such as Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas . The School of Salamanca made notable contributions during the Renaissance .

Although the central ideas of natural law had been part of Christian thought since the Roman Empire, its foundation as a consistent system was laid by Aquinas, who synthesized and condensed his predecessors' ideas into his Lex Naturalis ( lit.

' natural law ' ).

[ 8 ] Aquinas argues that because human beings have reason , and because reason is a spark of the divine, all human lives are sacred and of infinite value compared to any other created object, meaning everyone is fundamentally equal and bestowed with an intrinsic basic set of rights that no one can remove.

Modern natural law theory took shape in the Age of Enlightenment , combining inspiration from Roman law , Christian scholastic philosophy, and contemporary concepts such as social contract theory. It was used in challenging the theory of the divine right of kings , and became an alternative justification for the establishment of a social contract, positive law, and government —and thus legal rights—in the form of classical republicanism .

John Locke was a key Enlightenment-era proponent of natural law, stressing its role in the justification of property rights and the right to revolution .

[ 9 ] In the early decades of the 21st century, the concept of natural law is closely related to the concept of natural rights and has libertarian and conservative proponents.

[ 10 ] Indeed, many philosophers , jurists and scholars use natural law synonymously with natural rights ( Latin : ius naturale ) or natural justice ; [ 11 ] others distinguish between natural law and natural right.

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] Ancient Greece [ edit ] Plato [ edit ] Plato did not have an explicit theory of natural law, but his concept of nature, according to John Wild , contains some of the elements of many natural law theories.

[ 13 ] According to Plato, we live in an orderly universe.

[ 14 ] The basis of this orderly universe or nature are the forms , most fundamentally the Form of the Good , which Plato calls "the brightest region of Being".

[ 15 ] The Form of the Good is the cause of all things, and a person who sees it is led to act wisely.

[ 16 ] In the Symposium , the Good is closely identified with the Beautiful, [ 17 ] and Plato describes how Socrates 's experience of the Beautiful enabled him to resist the temptations of wealth and sex.

[ 18 ] In the Republic , the ideal community is "a city which would be established in accordance with nature".

[ 19 ] Aristotle [ edit ] Plato (left) and Aristotle (right), a detail of The School of Athens , a fresco by Raphael Greek philosophy emphasized the distinction between "nature" and "law", "custom", or " convention ".

[ citation needed ] What the law commanded is expected to vary from place to place, but what is "by nature" should be the same everywhere. A "law of nature" therefore has the flavor more of a paradox than something that obviously existed.

[ 12 ] Against the conventionalism that the distinction between nature and custom could engender, Socrates and his philosophic heirs, Plato and Aristotle , posited the existence of natural justice or natural right. Aristotle is often said to be the father of natural law.

[ 11 ] Aristotle's association with natural law may be due to Thomas Aquinas 's interpretation of his work.

[ 20 ] But whether Aquinas correctly read Aristotle is in dispute.

[ citation needed ] According to some, Aquinas conflates natural law and natural right, the latter of which Aristotle posits in Book V of the Nicomachean Ethics (Book IV of the Eudemian Ethics ). According to this interpretation, Aquinas's influence was such as to affect a number of early translations of these passages in an unfortunate manner, though more recent translations render them more literally.

[ 21 ] Aristotle notes that natural justice is a species of political justice, specifically the scheme of distributive and corrective justice that would be established under the best political community; if this took the form of law, it could be called a natural law, though Aristotle does not discuss this and suggests in the Politics that the best regime may not rule by law at all.

[ 22 ] The best evidence of Aristotle's having thought there is a natural law is in the Rhetoric , where Aristotle notes that, aside from the "particular" laws that each people has set up for itself, there is a "common" law that is according to nature.

[ 23 ] [ edition needed ] Specifically, he quotes Sophocles and Empedocles : Universal law is the law of Nature. For there really is, as every one to some extent divines, a natural justice and injustice that is binding on all men, even on those who have no association or covenant with each other. It is this that Sophocles' Antigone clearly means when she says that the burial of Polyneices was a just act in spite of the prohibition: she means that it was just by nature: "Not of to-day or yesterday it is,
But lives eternal: none can date its birth." And so Empedocles, when he bids us kill no living creature, he is saying that to do this is not just for some people, while unjust for others: "Nay, but, an all-embracing law, through the realms of the sky
Unbroken it stretcheth, and over the earth's immensity." [ 24 ] Some critics believe that this remark's context suggests only that Aristotle advised that it can be rhetorically advantageous to appeal to such a law, especially when the "particular" law of one's own city is averse to the case being made, not that there actually is such a law.

[ 11 ] Moreover, they write that Aristotle considered two of the three candidates for a universally valid, natural law provided in this passage to be wrong.

[ 12 ] Aristotle's paternity of natural law tradition is consequently disputed.

Stoic natural law [ edit ] Further information: Stoicism The development of this tradition of natural justice into one of natural law is usually attributed to the Stoics . The rise of natural law as a universal system coincided with the rise of large empires and kingdoms in the Greek world.

[ 25 ] [ full citation needed ] Whereas the "higher" law that Aristotle suggested one could appeal to was emphatically natural , in contradistinction to being the result of divine positive legislation, the Stoic natural law was indifferent to either the natural or divine source of the law: the Stoics asserted the existence of a rational and purposeful order to the universe (a divine or eternal law ), and the means by which a rational being lived in accordance with this order was the natural law, which inspired actions that accorded with virtue.

[ 12 ] As the English historian A. J. Carlyle notes: There is no change in political theory so startling in its completeness as the change from the theory of Aristotle to the later philosophical view represented by Cicero and Seneca ... We think that this cannot be better exemplified than with regard to the theory of the equality of human nature.

[ 26 ] Charles H. McIlwain likewise observes that "the idea of the equality of men is the most profound contribution of the Stoics to political thought" and that "its greatest influence is in the changed conception of law that in part resulted from it.

[ 27 ] Natural law first appeared among the Stoics, who believed that God is everywhere and in everyone (see classical pantheism ). According to this belief, there is a "divine spark" within us that helps us live in accordance with nature. The Stoics believed there is a way in which the universe has been designed, and that natural law helps us to harmonize with this.

[ citation needed ] Ancient Rome [ edit ] In his History of the Roman Republic , Livy puts a formulation of the Natural Law into the mouth of Marcus Furius Camillus during the siege of the Falerii You, villain, have not come with your villainous offer to a nation or a commander like yourself. Between us and the Faliscans there is no fellowship based on a formal compact as between man and man, but the fellowship which is based on natural instincts exists between us, and will continue to do so. There are rights of war as there are rights of peace, and we have learnt to wage our wars with justice no less than with courage. We do not use our weapons against those of an age which is spared even in the capture of cities, but against those who are armed as we are, and who without any injury or provocation from us attacked the Roman camp at Veii. These men you, as far as you could, have vanquished by an unprecedented act of villainy; I shall vanquish them as I vanquished Veii, by Roman arts, by courage and strategy and force of arms.

Marcus Tullius Cicero Cicero wrote in his De Legibus that both justice and law originate from what nature has given to humanity, from what the human mind embraces, from the function of humanity, and from what serves to unite humanity.

[ 28 ] For Cicero, natural law obliges us to contribute to the general good of the larger society.

[ 29 ] The purpose of positive laws is to provide for "the safety of citizens, the preservation of states, and the tranquility and happiness of human life". In this view, "wicked and unjust statutes" are "anything but 'laws ' ", because "in the very definition of the term 'law' there inheres the idea and principle of choosing what is just and true." [ 30 ] Law, for Cicero, "ought to be a reformer of vice and an incentive to virtue." [ 31 ] Cicero expressed the view that "the virtues which we ought to cultivate, always tend to our own happiness, and that the best means of promoting them consists in living with men in that perfect union and charity which are cemented by mutual benefits." [ 29 ] In De Re Publica , he writes: There is indeed a law, right reason, which is in accordance with nature; existing in all, unchangeable, eternal. Commanding us to do what is right, forbidding us to do what is wrong. It has dominion over good men, but possesses no influence over bad ones. No other law can be substituted for it, no part of it can be taken away, nor can it be abrogated altogether. Neither the people or the senate can absolve from it. It is not one thing at Rome, and another thing at Athens: one thing to-day, and another thing to-morrow; but it is eternal and immutable for all nations and for all time.

[ 32 ] Cicero influenced the discussion of natural law for many centuries to come, up through the era of the American Revolution. The jurisprudence of the Roman Empire was rooted in Cicero, who held "an extraordinary grip ... upon the imagination of posterity" as "the medium for the propagation of those ideas which informed the law and institutions of the empire." [ 33 ] Cicero's conception of natural law "found its way to later centuries notably through the writings of Isidore of Seville and the Decretum of Gratian ." [ 34 ] Thomas Aquinas , in his summary of medieval natural law, quoted Cicero's statement that "nature" and "custom" were the sources of a society's laws.

[ 35 ] The Renaissance Italian historian Leonardo Bruni praised Cicero as the person "who carried philosophy from Greece to Italy, and nourished it with the golden river of his eloquence." [ 36 ] The legal culture of Elizabethan England, exemplified by Sir Edward Coke , was "steeped in Ciceronian rhetoric".

[ 37 ] The Scottish moral philosopher Francis Hutcheson , as a student at Glasgow, "was attracted most by Cicero, for whom he always professed the greatest admiration." [ 38 ] More generally in eighteenth-century Great Britain, Cicero's name was a household word among educated people.

[ 38 ] Likewise, "in the admiration of early Americans Cicero took pride of place as orator, political theorist, stylist, and moralist." [ 39 ] The British polemicist Thomas Gordon "incorporated Cicero into the radical ideological tradition that travelled from the mother country to the colonies in the course of the eighteenth century and decisively shaped early American political culture." [ 40 ] Cicero's description of the immutable, eternal, and universal natural law was quoted by Burlamaqui [ 41 ] and later by the American revolutionary legal scholar James Wilson .

[ 42 ] Cicero became John Adams 's "foremost model of public service, republican virtue, and forensic eloquence".

[ 43 ] Adams wrote of Cicero that "as all the ages of the world have not produced a greater statesman and philosopher united in the same character, his authority should have great weight." [ 44 ] Thomas Jefferson "first encountered Cicero as a schoolboy while learning Latin, and continued to read his letters and discourses throughout his life. He admired him as a patriot, valued his opinions as a moral philosopher, and there is little doubt that he looked upon Cicero's life, with his love of study and aristocratic country life, as a model for his own." [ 45 ] Jefferson described Cicero as "the father of eloquence and philosophy." [ 46 ] Christianity [ edit ] Paul's Epistle to the Romans is generally considered the Scriptural authority for the Christian idea of natural law as something that was endowed in all men, contrasted with an idea of law as something revealed (for example, the law revealed to Moses by God ).

[ 47 ] Because of its origins in the Old Testament, early Church Fathers , especially those in the West , saw natural law as part of the natural foundation of Christianity . The most notable among these was Augustine of Hippo , who equated natural law with humanity's prelapsarian state; as such, a life according to unbroken human nature was no longer possible and persons needed instead to seek healing and salvation through the divine law and grace of Jesus Christ . Augustine was also among the earliest to examine the legitimacy of the laws of man, and attempt to define the boundaries of what laws and rights occur naturally based on wisdom and conscience, instead of being arbitrarily imposed by mortals, and if people are obligated to obey laws that are unjust .

[ 48 ] The natural law was inherently teleological as well as deontological . For Christians, natural law is how human beings manifest the divine image in their life. This mimicry of Christ 's own life is impossible to accomplish except by means of the power of grace. Thus, whereas deontological systems merely require certain duties be performed, Christianity explicitly states that no one can, in fact, perform any duties if grace is lacking. For Christians, natural law flows not from divine commands, but from the fact that humanity is made in God's image, humanity is empowered by God's grace. Living the natural law is how humanity displays the gifts of life and grace, the gifts of all that is good.

Consequences are in God's hands, consequences are generally not within human control, thus in natural law, actions are judged by three things: (1) the person's intent, (2) the circumstances of the act and (3) the nature of the act. The apparent good or evil consequence resulting from the moral act is not relevant to the act itself. The specific content of the natural law is therefore determined by how each person's acts mirror God's internal life of love. Insofar as one lives the natural law, temporal satisfaction may or may not be attained, but salvation will be attained. The state , in being bound by the natural law, is conceived as an institution whose purpose is to assist in bringing its subjects to true happiness. True happiness derives from living in harmony with the mind of God as an image of the living God.

[ citation needed ] After the Protestant Reformation , some Protestant denominations maintained parts of the Catholic concept of natural law. The English theologian Richard Hooker from the Church of England adapted Thomistic notions of natural law to Anglicanism five principles: to live, to learn, to reproduce, to worship God, and to live in an ordered society.

[ 49 ] [ irrelevant citation ] Catholic natural law jurisprudence [ edit ] See also: Treatise on Law and Determinatio Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Early natural Christian law thinkers [ edit ] In Catholic countries in the tradition of the early Christian law and in the twelfth century, Gratian equated the natural law with divine law.

Albertus Magnus would address the subject a century later, and his pupil, Thomas Aquinas , in his Summa Theologica I-II qq. 90–106 , restored natural law to its independent state, asserting natural law as the rational creature's participation in the eternal law.

[ 50 ] Yet, since human reason could not fully comprehend the eternal law , it needed to be supplemented by revealed divine law . (See also Biblical law in Christianity .

[ 51 ] ) Thomas Aquinas [ edit ] Aquinas taught that all human or positive laws were to be judged by their conformity to the natural law. An unjust law is not a law, in the full sense of the word. It retains merely the 'appearance' of law insofar as it is duly constituted and enforced in the same way a just law is, but is itself a 'perversion of law.' [ 52 ] At this point, the natural law was not only used to pass judgment on the moral worth of various laws, but also to determine what those laws meant in the first place. This principle laid the seed for possible societal tension with reference to tyrants .

[ 53 ] The Catholic Church holds the view of natural law introduced by Albertus Magnus and elaborated by Thomas Aquinas , [ 54 ] particularly in his Summa Theologica , and often as filtered through the School of Salamanca . This view is also shared by some Protestants , [ 55 ] and was delineated by Anglican writer C. S. Lewis in his works Mere Christianity and The Abolition of Man .

[ 56 ] The Catholic Church understands human beings to consist of body and soul, and that the two are inextricably linked.

[ 57 ] Humans are capable of discerning the difference between good and evil because they have a conscience .

[ 58 ] There are many manifestations of the good that we can pursue. Some, like procreation , are common to other animals, while others, like the pursuit of truth, are inclinations peculiar to the capacities of human beings.

[ 59 ] To know what is right, one must use one's reason and apply it to Thomas Aquinas' precepts. This reason is believed to be embodied, in its most abstract form, in the concept of a primary precept: "Good is to be sought, evil avoided." [ 60 ] Aquinas explains that: there belongs to the natural law, first, certain most general precepts, that are known to all; and secondly, certain secondary and more detailed precepts, which are, as it were, conclusions following closely from first principles. As to those general principles, the natural law, in the abstract, can nowise be blotted out from men's hearts. But it is blotted out in the case of a particular action, insofar as reason is hindered from applying the general principle to a particular point of practice, on account of concupiscence or some other passion, as stated above (77, 2). But as to the other, i.e., the secondary precepts, the natural law can be blotted out from the human heart, either by evil persuasions, just as in speculative matters errors occur in respect of necessary conclusions; or by vicious customs and corrupt habits, as among some men, theft, and even unnatural vices, as the Apostle states (Rm. i), were not esteemed sinful.

[ 61 ] However, while the primary and immediate precepts cannot be "blotted out", the secondary precepts can be. Therefore, for a deontological ethical theory they are open to a surprisingly large amount of interpretation and flexibility. Any rule that helps humanity to live up to the primary or subsidiary precepts can be a secondary precept, for example: Drunkenness is wrong because it injures one's health, and worse, destroys one's ability to reason, which is fundamental to humans as rational animals (i.e., does not support self-preservation).

Theft is wrong because it destroys social relations, and humans are by nature social animals (i.e., does not support the subsidiary precept of living in society).

Natural moral law is concerned with both exterior and interior acts, also known as action and motive. Simply doing the right thing is not enough; to be truly moral one's motive must be right as well. For example, helping an old lady across the road (good exterior act) to impress someone (bad interior act) is wrong. However, good intentions do not always lead to good actions. The motive must coincide with the cardinal or theological virtues.

Cardinal virtues are acquired through reason applied to nature; they are: Prudence Justice Temperance Fortitude The theological virtues are: Faith Hope Charity According to Aquinas, to lack any of these virtues is to lack the ability to make a moral choice. For example, consider a person who possesses the virtues of justice, prudence, and fortitude, yet lacks temperance. Due to their lack of self-control and desire for pleasure, despite their good intentions, they will find themself swaying from the moral path.

School of Salamanca [ edit ] Main article: School of Salamanca Based on the works of Thomas Aquinas, the members of the School of Salamanca were in the 16th and 17th centuries the first people to develop a modern approach of natural law, which greatly influence Grotius .

[ 62 ] For Leonardus Lessius , natural law ensues from the rational nature and the natural state of everything: that way it is immutable on the contrary of positive law, which stems from divine or human will.

[ 63 ] Jurists and theologians claimed thus the right to observe the conformity of the positive law with natural law. For Domingo de Soto , the theologians task is to assess the moral foundations of civil law.

[ 64 ] Due to this review right based on natural law, Soto criticised the new Spanish charities' laws on the pretext that they violated the fondamental rights of the poors, [ 65 ] or that Juan de Mariana considered that the consent of population was needed in matter of taxation or money alteration.

[ 66 ] Criticized by Protestant thinkers like Friedrich Balduin [ de ] and Samuel von Pufendorf , [ 67 ] this view was salvage by the pope Leo XIII in this encyclical Sapientiae Christianae , in which he asked the members of clergy to analyse modern legislation in view of higher norms.

[ 68 ] Natural law played also a great role in the diffusion of a contractual consensualism.

[ 69 ] First recognize by glossators and postglossators before the ecclesiastic courts, [ 70 ] it was only in the 16th century that civil law allowed the principle of the binding nature of contracts on the basis of pure consent.

[ 71 ] As Pedro de Oñate said, "Consequently, natural law, canon law and Hispanic law entirely agree and innumerable difficulties, frauds, litigations and disputes have been removed thanks to such great consensus and clarity in the laws. To the contracting parties, liberty has very wisely been restored".

[ 72 ] Besides, natural law also requires the respect of the commutative justice in contractual relations: [ 73 ] both parties are bound to respect the notion of just prices [ 74 ] on penalty of sin.

[ 75 ] Modern catechism [ edit ] The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes it in the following way: "The natural law expresses the original moral sense which enables man to discern by reason the good and the evil, the truth and the lie: 'The natural law is written and engraved in the soul of each and every man, because it is human reason ordaining him to do good and forbidding him to sin ... But this command of human reason would not have the force of law if it were not the voice and interpreter of a higher reason to which our spirit and our freedom must be submitted.

' " [ 76 ] The natural law consists, for the Catholic Church, of one supreme and universal principle from which are derived all our natural moral obligations or duties. Thomas Aquinas resumes the various ideas of Catholic moral thinkers about what this principle is: since good is what primarily falls under the apprehension of the practical reason, the supreme principle of moral action must have the good as its central idea, and therefore the supreme principle is that good is to be done and evil avoided.

[ 77 ] Islamic natural law [ edit ] Further information: Sharia and Istislah Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī , a medieval scholar , scientist , and polymath , understood "natural law" as the survival of the fittest. He argued that the antagonism between human beings can be overcome only through a divine law , which he believed to have been sent through prophets . This is also said to be the general position of the Ashari school, the largest school of Sunni theology, [ 78 ] as well as Ibn Hazm . Conceptualized thus, all "laws" are viewed as originating from subjective attitudes actuated by cultural conceptions and individual preferences, and so the notion of "divine revelation" is justified as some kind of "divine intervention" that replaces human positive laws , which are criticized as being relative, with a single divine positive law . This, however, also entails that anything may be included in "the divine law" as it would in "human laws", but unlike the latter, "God's law" is seen as binding regardless of the nature of the commands by virtue of "God's might": since God is not subject to human laws and conventions, He may command what He wills just as He may do what He wills.

The Maturidi school, the second-largest school of Sunni theology, as well as the Mu'tazilites , posits the existence of a form of natural, or "objective", law that humans can comprehend.

Abu Mansur al-Maturidi stated that the human mind could know of the existence of God and the major forms of "good" and "evil" without the help of revelation. Al-Maturidi gives the example of stealing, which, he believes, is known to be evil by reason alone due to people's working hard for their property. Similarly, killing, fornication, and drunkenness are all "discernible evils" that the human mind could know of according to al-Maturidi. Likewise, Averroes (Ibn Rushd), in his treatise on Justice and Jihad and his commentary on Plato's Republic , writes that the human mind can know of the unlawfulness of killing and stealing and thus of the five maqasid or higher intents of the Islamic sharia , or the protection of religion, life, property, offspring, and reason. His Aristotelian commentaries also influenced the subsequent Averroist movement and the writings of Thomas Aquinas .

[ 79 ] Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya also posited that human reason could discern between "great sins" and "good deeds".

[ citation needed ] Nonetheless, he, like Ibn Taymiyah , emphasized the authority of "divine revelation" and asserted that it must be followed even if it "seems" to contradict human reason, though he stressed that most, if not all, of "God's commands" are both sensible (that is, rationalizable) and advantageous to humans in both "this life" and "the hereafter".

The concept of Istislah in Islamic law bears some similarities to the natural law tradition in the West, as exemplified by Thomas Aquinas . However, whereas natural law deems good what is self-evidently good, according as it tends towards the fulfillment of the person, istislah typically calls good whatever is related to one of five "basic goods". Many jurists, theologians, and philosophers attempted to abstract these "basic and fundamental goods" from legal precepts.

Al-Ghazali , for instance, defined them as religion, life, reason, lineage, and property, while others add "honor" also.

[ citation needed ] Brehon law [ edit ] Further information: Brehon law Early Irish law, An Senchus Mor (The Great Tradition), mentions in a number of places recht aicned or natural law. This is a concept predating European legal theory, and reflects a type of law that is universal and may be determined by reason and observation of natural action. Neil McLeod identifies concepts that law must accord with: fír (truth) and dliged (right or entitlement). These two terms occur frequently, though Irish law never strictly defines them. Similarly, the term córus (law in accordance with proper order) occurs in some places, and even in the titles of certain texts. These were two very real concepts to the jurists and the value of a given judgment with respect to them was apparently ascertainable. McLeod has also suggested that most of the specific laws mentioned have passed the test of time and thus their truth has been confirmed, while other provisions are justified in other ways because they are younger and have not been tested over time.

[ 80 ] The laws were written in the oldest dialect of the Irish language, called Bérla Féini [Bairla-faina], which even at the time was so difficult that persons about to become brehons had to be specially instructed in it; the length of time from beginning to becoming a learned Brehon was usually 20 years. However, under the law any third person could fulfill the duty if both parties agreed, and both were sane.

[ 81 ] It has been included in an Ethno-Celtic breakaway subculture, as it has religious undertones and freedom of religious expression allows it to once again be used as a valid system in Western Europe.

[ 82 ] English jurisprudence [ edit ] Heinrich A. Rommen remarked upon "the tenacity with which the spirit of the English common law retained the conceptions of natural law and equity which it had assimilated during the Catholic Middle Ages, thanks especially to the influence of Henry de Bracton (d. 1268) and Sir John Fortescue (d. cir. 1476)." [ 83 ] Bracton's translator notes that Bracton "was a trained jurist with the principles and distinctions of Roman jurisprudence firmly in mind"; but Bracton adapted such principles to English purposes rather than copying slavishly.

[ 84 ] In particular, Bracton turned the imperial Roman maxim that "the will of the prince is law" on its head, insisting that the king is under the law.

[ 85 ] The legal historian Charles F. Mullett has noted Bracton's "ethical definition of law, his recognition of justice, and finally his devotion to natural rights".

[ 86 ] Bracton considered justice to be the "fountain-head" from which "all rights arise".

[ 87 ] For his definition of justice, Bracton quoted the twelfth-century Italian jurist Azo : "Justice is the constant and unfailing will to give to each his right." [ 88 ] Bracton's work was the second legal treatise studied by the American historical figure Thomas Jefferson as a young apprentice lawyer.

[ 89 ] Fortescue stressed "the supreme importance of the law of God and of nature" in works that "profoundly influenced the course of legal development in the following centuries." [ 90 ] The legal scholar Ellis Sandoz has noted that "the historically ancient and the ontologically higher law—eternal, divine, natural—are woven together to compose a single harmonious texture in Fortescue's account of English law." [ 91 ] As the legal historian Norman Doe explains: "Fortescue follows the general pattern set by Aquinas. The objective of every legislator is to dispose people to virtue. It is by means of law that this is accomplished. Fortescue's definition of law (also found in Accursius and Bracton), after all, was 'a sacred sanction commanding what is virtuous [ honesta ] and forbidding the contrary'." [ 92 ] Fortescue cited the great Italian Leonardo Bruni for his statement that "virtue alone produces happiness".

[ 93 ] Christopher St. Germain 's The Doctor and Student was a classic of English jurisprudence.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Norman Doe notes that St. Germain's view "is essentially Thomist", quoting Thomas Aquinas's definition of law as "an ordinance of reason made for the common good by him who has charge of the community, and promulgated".

[ 96 ] Sir Edward Coke was the preeminent jurist of his time.

[ 97 ] Coke's preeminence extended across the ocean: "For the American revolutionary leaders, 'law' meant Sir Edward Coke's custom and right reason." [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Coke defined law as "perfect reason, which commands those things that are proper and necessary and which prohibits contrary things".

[ 100 ] For Coke, human nature determined the purpose of law; and law was superior to any one person's reason or will.

[ 101 ] Coke's discussion of natural law appears in his report of Calvin's Case (1608): "The law of nature is that which God at the time of creation of the nature of man infused into his heart, for his preservation and direction." In this case the judges found that "the ligeance or faith of the subject is due unto the King by the law of nature: secondly, that the law of nature is part of the law of England: thirdly, that the law of nature was before any judicial or municipal law: fourthly, that the law of nature is immutable." To support these findings, the assembled judges (as reported by Coke, who was one of them) cited as authorities Aristotle , Cicero , and the Apostle Paul ; as well as Bracton, Fortescue, and St. Germain .

[ 102 ] After Coke, the most famous common law jurist of the seventeenth century is Sir Matthew Hale . Hale wrote a treatise on natural law that circulated among English lawyers in the eighteenth century and survives in three manuscript copies.

[ 103 ] This natural-law treatise has been published as Of the Law of Nature (2015).

[ 104 ] Hale's definition of the natural law reads: "It is the Law of Almighty God given by him to Man with his Nature discovering the morall good and moral evill of Moral Actions, commanding the former, and forbidding the latter by the secret voice or dictate of his implanted nature, his reason, and his concience." [ 105 ] He viewed natural law as antecedent, preparatory, and subsequent to civil government, [ 106 ] and stated that human law "cannot forbid what the Law of Nature injoins, nor Command what the Law of Nature prohibits." [ 107 ] He cited as authorities Plato , Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca , Epictetus , and the Apostle Paul.

[ 108 ] He was critical of Hobbes's reduction of natural law to self-preservation and Hobbes's account of the state of nature, [ 109 ] but drew positively on Hugo Grotius 's De jure belli ac pacis , Francisco Suárez 's Tractatus de legibus ac deo legislatore , and John Selden 's De jure naturali et gentium juxta disciplinam Ebraeorum .

[ 110 ] As early as the thirteenth century, it was held that "the law of nature ... is the ground of all law." [ 111 ] and by the Chancellor and Judges that "it is required by the law of nature that every person, before he can be punish'd, ought to be present; and if absent by contumacy, he ought to be summoned and make default." [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Further, in 1824, we find it held that "proceedings in our Courts are founded upon the law of England, and that law is again founded upon the law of nature and the revealed law of God. If the right sought to be enforced is inconsistent with either of these, the English municipal courts cannot recognize it." [ 114 ] Hobbes [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes By the 17th century, the medieval teleological view came under intense criticism from some quarters.

Thomas Hobbes instead founded a contractarian theory of legal positivism on what all men could agree upon: what they sought (happiness) was subject to contention, but a broad consensus could form around what they feared, such as violent death at the hands of another. The natural law was how a rational human being, seeking to survive and prosper, would act. Natural law, therefore, was discovered by considering humankind's natural rights , whereas previously it could be said that natural rights were discovered by considering the natural law.

In Hobbes' opinion, the only way natural law could prevail was for men to submit to the commands of the sovereign. Because the ultimate source of law now comes from the sovereign, and the sovereign's decisions need not be grounded in morality, legal positivism is born.

Jeremy Bentham 's modifications on legal positivism further developed the theory.

As used by Thomas Hobbes in his treatises Leviathan and De Cive , natural law is "a precept , or general rule, found out by reason , by which a man is forbidden to do, that, which is destructive of his life, or taketh away the means of preserving the same; and to omit, that, by which he thinketh it may best be preserved." [ 115 ] According to Hobbes, there are nineteen Laws. The first two are expounded in chapter XIV of Leviathan ("of the first and second natural laws; and of contracts"); the others in chapter XV ("of other laws of nature").

The first law of nature is "that every man ought to endeavour peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it; and when he cannot obtain it, that he may seek and use all helps, and advantages of war".

The second law of nature is "that a man be willing, when others are so too, as far-forth, as for peace, and defence of himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men, as he would allow other men against himself." The third law is "that men perform their covenants made ... In this law of nature consisteth the fountain and original of 'justice' ... when a covenant is made, then to break it is 'unjust': and the definition of 'injustice', is no other than 'the not performance of covenant'. And whatsoever is not unjust, is 'just'." The fourth law is "that a man which receiveth benefit from another of mere grace, endeavour that he which giveth it, have no reasonable cause to repent him of his good will. ... The breach of this law is called 'ingratitude ' ".

The fifth law is complaisance: "that every man strive to accommodate himself to the rest. ... The observers of this law, may be called 'sociable' ...; the contrary, 'stubborn', 'insociable', 'forward', 'intractable'." The sixth law is "that upon caution of the future time, a man ought to pardon the offences past of them that repenting, desire it." The seventh law is "that in revenges, ... men look not at the greatness of the evil past, but the greatness of the good to follow." The eighth law is "that no man by deed, word, countenance, or gesture, declare hatred or contempt of another.  The breach of which law is commonly called contumely." The ninth law is "that every man acknowledge another for his equal by nature. ... The breach of this precept is 'pride'." The tenth law is "that at the entrance into the conditions of peace, no man require to reserve to himself any right which he is not content should be reserved to every one of the rest. ... The observers of this law are those we call 'modest', and the breakers 'arrogant' men." The eleventh law is that "if a man be trusted to judge between man and man, ... that he deal equally between them." The twelfth law is "that such things as cannot be divided, be enjoyed in common, if it can be; and if the quantity of the thing permit, without stint; otherwise proportionably to the number of them that have right." The thirteenth law is "the entire right, or else ... the first possession" (in the case of alternating use), of a thing that "can neither be divided nor enjoyed in common" should be determined by lottery.

The fourteenth law is that "those things which cannot be enjoyed in common, nor divided, ought to be adjudged to the first possessor; and in some cases to the first born, as acquired by lot." The fifteenth law is that "all men that mediate peace, be allowed safe conduct." The sixteenth law is "that they that are at controversie, submit their Right to the judgement of an Arbitrator." The seventeenth law is "that no man is a fit Arbitrator in his own cause." The eighteenth law is that no man should serve as a judge in a case if "greater profit, or honour, or pleasure apparently ariseth [for him] out of the victory of one party, than of the other." The nineteenth law is that in a disagreement of fact, the judge should not give more weight to the testimony of one party than another, and absent other evidence, should give credit to the testimony of other witnesses.

Hobbes's philosophy includes a frontal assault on the founding principles of the earlier natural legal tradition, [ 116 ] disregarding the traditional association of virtue with happiness, [ 117 ] and likewise re-defining "law" to remove any notion of the promotion of the common good.

[ 118 ] Hobbes has no use for Aristotle 's association of nature with human perfection, inverting Aristotle's use of the word "nature". Hobbes posits a primitive, unconnected state of nature in which men, having a "natural proclivity ... to hurt each other" also have "a Right to every thing, even to one anothers body"; [ 119 ] and "nothing can be Unjust" in this "warre of every man against every man" in which human life is "solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short." [ 120 ] Rejecting Cicero 's view that people join in society primarily through "a certain social spirit which nature has implanted in man", [ 121 ] Hobbes declares that men join in society simply for the purpose of "getting themselves out from that miserable condition of Warre, which is necessarily consequent ... to the naturall Passions of men, when there is no visible Power to keep them in awe." [ 122 ] As part of his campaign against the classical idea of natural human sociability, Hobbes inverts that fundamental natural legal maxim, the Golden Rule . Hobbes's version is "Do not that to another, which thou wouldst not have done to thy selfe." [ 123 ] Cumberland's rebuttal of Hobbes [ edit ] The English cleric Richard Cumberland wrote a lengthy and influential attack on Hobbes's depiction of individual self-interest as the essential feature of human motivation. Historian Knud Haakonssen has noted that in the eighteenth century, Cumberland was commonly placed alongside Alberico Gentili , Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf "in the triumvirate of seventeenth-century founders of the 'modern' school of natural law".

[ 124 ] The eighteenth-century philosophers Shaftesbury and Hutcheson "were obviously inspired in part by Cumberland".

[ 125 ] Historian Jon Parkin likewise describes Cumberland's work as "one of the most important works of ethical and political theory of the seventeenth century".

[ 126 ] Parkin observes that much of Cumberland's material "is derived from Roman Stoicism , particularly from the work of Cicero , as "Cumberland deliberately cast his engagement with Hobbes in the mould of Cicero's debate between the Stoics, who believed that nature could provide an objective morality, and Epicureans , who argued that morality was human, conventional and self-interested." [ 127 ] In doing so, Cumberland de-emphasized the overlay of Christian dogma (in particular, the doctrine of "original sin" and the corresponding presumption that humans are incapable of "perfecting" themselves without divine intervention) that had accreted to natural law in the Middle Ages.

By way of contrast to Hobbes's multiplicity of laws, Cumberland states in the very first sentence of his Treatise of the Laws of Nature that "all the Laws of Nature are reduc'd to that one, of Benevolence toward all Rationals." [ 128 ] He later clarifies: "By the name Rationals I beg leave to understand, as well God as Man ; and I do it upon the Authority of Cicero." Cumberland argues that the mature development ("perfection") of human nature involves the individual human willing and acting for the common good.

[ 129 ] For Cumberland, human interdependence precludes Hobbes's natural right of each individual to wage war against all the rest for personal survival. However, Haakonssen warns against reading Cumberland as a proponent of " enlightened self-interest ". Rather, the "proper moral love of humanity" is "a disinterested love of God through love of humanity in ourselves as well as others".

[ 130 ] Cumberland concludes that actions "principally conducive to our Happiness" are those that promote "the Honour and Glory of God" and also "Charity and Justice towards men".

[ 131 ] Cumberland emphasizes that desiring the well-being of our fellow humans is essential to the "pursuit of our own Happiness".

[ 132 ] He cites "reason" as the authority for his conclusion that happiness consists in "the most extensive Benevolence", but he also mentions as "Essential Ingredients of Happiness" the "Benevolent Affections", meaning "Love and Benevolence towards others", as well as "that Joy, which arises from their Happiness".

[ 133 ] American jurisprudence [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The United States Declaration of Independence , authored primarily by Thomas Jefferson and ratified on 4 July 1776 by the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia , states that it has become necessary for the people of the United States to assume "the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God entitle them". Some early American lawyers and judges perceived natural law as too tenuous, amorphous, and evanescent a legal basis for grounding concrete rights and governmental limitations .

[ 134 ] Natural law did, however, serve as authority for legal claims and rights in some judicial decisions, legislative acts, and legal pronouncements.

[ 135 ] Robert Lowry Clinton argues that the Constitution of the United States rests on a common law foundation and the common law, in turn, rests on a classical natural law foundation.

[ 136 ] European liberal natural law [ edit ] Dr Alberico Gentili , the founder of the science of international law Hugo Grotius , a Dutch jurist and scholar, is an iusnaturalist author, who maintained that rights are innate potestas of the human being and do not arise out of law.

[ 137 ] Liberal natural law grew out of the medieval Christian natural law theories and out of Hobbes' revision of natural law, sometimes in an uneasy balance of the two.

Sir Alberico Gentili and Hugo Grotius based their philosophies of international law on natural law. In particular, Grotius's writings on freedom of the seas and just war theory directly appealed to natural law. About natural law itself, he wrote that "even the will of an omnipotent being cannot change or abrogate" natural law, which "would maintain its objective validity even if we should assume the impossible, that there is no God or that he does not care for human affairs." ( De iure belli ac pacis , Prolegomeni XI). This is the famous argument etiamsi daremus ( non esse Deum ), that made natural law no longer dependent on theology. However, German church-historians Ernst Wolf and M. Elze disagreed and wrote that Grotius' concept of natural law did have a theological basis.

[ 138 ] In Grotius' view, the Old Testament contained moral precepts (e.g. the Decalogue ) which Christ confirmed and therefore were still valid. Moreover, they were useful in explaining the content of natural law. Both biblical revelation and natural law originated in God and could therefore not contradict each other.

[ 139 ] In a similar way, Samuel Pufendorf gave natural law a theological foundation and applied it to his concepts of government and international law .

[ 140 ] John Locke incorporated natural law into many of his theories and philosophy, especially in Two Treatises of Government . There is considerable debate about whether his conception of natural law was more akin to that of Aquinas (filtered through Richard Hooker ) or Hobbes' radical reinterpretation, though the effect of Locke's understanding is usually phrased in terms of a revision of Hobbes upon Hobbesian contractarian grounds. Locke turned Hobbes' prescription around, saying that if the ruler went against natural law and failed to protect "life, liberty, and property," people could justifiably overthrow the existing state and create a new one.

[ 141 ] While Locke spoke in the language of natural law, the content of this law was by and large protective of natural rights , and it was this language that later liberal thinkers preferred. Political philosopher Jeremy Waldron has pointed out that Locke's political thought was based on "a particular set of Protestant Christian assumptions." [ 142 ] To Locke, the content of natural law was identical with biblical ethics as laid down especially in the Decalogue , Christ 's teaching and exemplary life, and Paul's admonitions.

[ 143 ] Locke derived the concept of basic human equality, including the equality of the sexes ("Adam and Eve"), from Genesis 1, 26–28 , the starting-point of the theological doctrine of Imago Dei .

[ 144 ] One of the consequences is that as all humans are created equally free, governments need the consent of the governed.

[ 145 ] Thomas Jefferson , arguably echoing Locke, appealed to unalienable rights in the Declaration of Independence , "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness ." [ 146 ] The Lockean idea that governments need the consent of the governed was also fundamental to the Declaration of Independence, as the American Revolutionaries used it as justification for their separation from the British crown.

[ 147 ] The Belgian philosopher of law Frank van Dun is one among those who are elaborating a secular conception [ 148 ] of natural law in the liberal tradition.

Anarcho-capitalist theorist Murray Rothbard argues that "the very existence of a natural law discoverable by reason is a potentially powerful threat to the status quo and a standing reproach to the reign of blindly traditional custom or the arbitrary will of the State apparatus." [ 149 ] Austrian school economist Ludwig von Mises states that he relaid the general sociological and economic foundations of the liberal doctrine upon utilitarianism, rather than natural law, but R. A. Gonce argues that "the reality of the argument constituting his system overwhelms his denial." [ 150 ] Murray Rothbard, however, says that Gonce makes a lot of errors and distortions in the analysis of Mises's works, including making confusions about the term which Mises uses to refer to scientific laws, "laws of nature", saying it characterizes Mises as a natural law philosopher.

[ 151 ] David Gordon notes, "When most people speak of natural law, what they have in mind is the contention that morality can be derived from human nature. If human beings are rational animals of such-and-such a sort, then the moral virtues are...(filling in the blanks is the difficult part)." [ 152 ] Nobel Prize winning Austrian economist and social theorist F. A. Hayek said that, originally, "the term 'natural' was used to describe an orderliness or regularity that was not the product of deliberate human will. Together with 'organism' it was one of the two terms generally understood to refer to the spontaneously grown in contrast to the invented or designed. Its use in this sense had been inherited from the stoic philosophy, had been revived in the twelfth century, and it was finally under its flag that the late Spanish Schoolmen developed the foundations of the genesis and functioning of spontaneously formed social institutions." [ 153 ] The idea that 'natural' was "the product of designing reason" is a product of a seventeenth century rationalist reinterpretation of the law of nature.

Luis Molina , for example, when referred to the 'natural' price, explained that it is "so called because 'it results from the thing itself without regard to laws and decrees, but is dependent on many circumstances which alter it, such as the sentiments of men, their estimation of different uses, often even in consequence of whims and pleasures." [ 154 ] And even John Locke , when talking about the foundations of natural law and explaining what he thought when citing "reason", said: "By reason, however, I do not think is meant here that faculty of the understanding which forms traint of thought and deduces proofs, but certain definite principles of action from which spring all virtues and whatever is necessary for the proper moulding of morals." [ 155 ] This anti-rationalist approach to human affairs, for Hayek, was the same which guided Scottish enlightenment thinkers, such as Adam Smith , David Hume and Adam Ferguson , to make their case for liberty.

[ 156 ] For them, no one can have the knowledge necessary to plan society, and this "natural" or "spontaneous" order of society shows how it can efficiently "plan" bottom-up.

[ 157 ] Also, the idea that law is just a product of deliberate design, denied by natural law and linked to legal positivism , can easily generate totalitarianism : "If law is wholly the product of deliberate design, whatever the designer decrees to be law is just by definition and unjust law becomes a contradiction in terms. The will of the duly authorized legislator is then wholly unfettered and guided solely by his concrete interests." [ 158 ] This idea is wrong because law cannot be just a product of "reason": "no system of articulated law can be applied except within a framework of generally recognized but often unarticulated rules of justice." [ 159 ] However, a secular critique of the natural law doctrine was stated by Pierre Charron in his De la sagesse (1601): "The sign of a natural law must be the universal respect in which it is held, for if there was anything that nature had truly commanded us to do, we would undoubtedly obey it universally: not only would every nation respect it, but every individual. Instead there is nothing in the world that is not subject to contradiction and dispute, nothing that is not rejected, not just by one nation, but by many; equally, there is nothing that is strange and (in the opinion of many) unnatural that is not approved in many countries, and authorized by their customs." [ citation needed ] Contemporary jurisprudence [ edit ] One modern articulation of the concept of natural laws was given by Belina and Dzudzek: [ 160 ] By constant repetition, those practices develop into structures in the form of discourses which can become so natural that we abstract from their societal origins, that the latter are forgotten and seem to be natural laws.

In jurisprudence , natural law can refer to the several doctrines: That just laws are immanent in nature; that is, they can be "discovered" or "found" but not "created" by such things as a bill of rights ; That they can emerge by the natural process of resolving conflicts, as embodied by the evolutionary process of the common law; or That the meaning of law is such that its content cannot be determined except by reference to moral principles.

These meanings can either oppose or complement each other, although they share the common trait that they rely on inherence as opposed to design in finding just laws.

Whereas legal positivism would say that a law can be unjust without it being any less a law, a natural law jurisprudence would say that there is something legally deficient about an unjust norm.

Besides utilitarianism and Kantianism , natural law jurisprudence has in common with virtue ethics that it is a live option for a first principles ethics theory in analytic philosophy .

The concept of natural law was very important in the development of the English common law . In the struggles between Parliament and the monarch , Parliament often made reference to the Fundamental Laws of England , which were at times said to embody natural law principles since time immemorial and set limits on the power of the monarchy. According to William Blackstone , however, natural law might be useful in determining the content of the common law and in deciding cases of equity , but was not itself identical with the laws of England. Nonetheless, the implication of natural law in the common law tradition has meant that the great opponents of natural law and advocates of legal positivism , like Jeremy Bentham , have also been staunch critics of the common law.

Today, the most cited authors in literature related to natural law are, in their order: Aquinas, John Finnis, John Locke, Lon Fuller, Ronald Dworkin , and James Wilson, who participated in drafting the U.S. Declaration of Independence.

[ 161 ] It shows how Aquinas has still a significant influence on the topic. The second Australian professor at Oxford University, John Finnis , is the most prominent contemporary natural law jurist alive. Other authors, like the Americans Germain Grisez , Robert P. George , and Canadian Joseph Boyle and Brazilian Emídio Brasileiro are also constructing a new version of natural law. They created a school called " New Natural Law ", originated by Grisez. It focuses on "basic human goods", such as human life, knowledge, and aesthetic experience, which are self-evidently and intrinsically worthwhile, and states that these goods reveal themselves as being incommensurable with one another.

The 19th-century anarchist and legal theorist Lysander Spooner was also a figure in the expression of modern natural law.

The tensions between natural law and positive law have played, and continue to play, a key role in the development of international law .

[ 162 ] U.S. Supreme Court justices Clarence Thomas [ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 165 ] and Neil Gorsuch [ 166 ] [ 167 ] are proponents of natural law.

Methodology [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The authors and supporters of natural law use various methods to develop and articulate their ideas. Here are some of the commonly employed methods: Rational inquiry and human reason: Natural law theorists often engage in rational inquiry to explore the nature of human beings, their moral obligations, and the principles that govern human conduct. They rely on logical reasoning and philosophical analysis to derive principles of natural law. Most Modern scholars dedicated to natural law will follow this rationalistic approach.

Observation of nature: Natural law authors sometimes draw on observations of the natural world and human behavior to derive moral principles. According to Aristotle [ 168 ] and Aquinas , [ 169 ] it is possible to examine the humans powers and inclinations, to detect what kind of goods are achievable and deserve to be reached.

Historical and comparative analysis: Some authors of natural law examine historical legal systems and comparative law to identify common moral principles embedded within them. They may explore ancient legal codes, religious texts, and philosophical treatises to uncover ethical norms that have stood the test of time. To some extent, Montesquieu and Max Gluckman did a similar analysis, although the latter under another school of thought.

[ 170 ] Axiology and Theology: Natural law theorists often incorporate resort to several ends and values to detect principles and rules of natural law. For instance, John Finnis develops natural law based on seven basic good (life, knowledge, play, aesthetic experience, sociability, practical reasonableness, religion) that he believes are self-evident.

[ 171 ] Dialogue, Debate, Experience, Interpretation and other schools: Several natural law methods have been developed in different schools. Some authors engage in scholarly dialogue and debate with other philosophers and ethicists. They present their arguments, respond to objections, and refine their theories through critical discussion and exchange of ideas. Michael Moore has presented his realistic interpretational approach to the law.

[ 172 ] Quite different will be the view of Lon Fuller . It is important to note that the methods employed by authors of natural law may vary depending on their specific philosophical perspectives and the historical context in which they work. Different natural law theorists may emphasize different approaches in their efforts to articulate the foundations and implications of natural law.

Nevertheless, Riofrio [ 173 ] has detected in a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the most cited papers of natural law, that authors dedicated to natural law usually take into account some elements to deduce others. For instance, Finnis deduces legal principles and natural rights from the seven basic goods; [ 171 ] Aquinas deduces the human goods from the human powers, [ 169 ] and so on. The elements of the so-called "Natural Law Formula", [ 173 ] are the following ones: being (of people and things) – potencies of human beings and things – aims and inclinations of those potencies; means – human values or goods – ethical and legal principles – rules – natural and positive rights – cases and circumstances.

See also [ edit ] Classical liberalism Ethical naturalism International legal theories Jungle justice Law of the jungle Libertarianism Moral realism Natural order (philosophy) Natural rights and legal rights Naturalistic fallacy Non-aggression principle Objectivism (philosophy of Ayn Rand) Orders of creation Right of conquest Rule according to higher law Rule of law Rule of man State of nature Substantive due process Unenumerated rights Notes [ edit ] ^ "Natural Law" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-23 . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ Murphy, Mark (2019).

"The Natural Law Tradition in Ethics" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 2025-01-30 .

^ Vallejo, Catalina (2012).

Plurality of Peaces in Legal Action: Analyzing Constitutional Objections to Military Services in Colombia . Münster: LIT. p. 62.

ISBN 978-3-643-90282-5 .

^ Wintgens, Luc J. (2013-04-17).

The Law in Philosophical Perspectives: My Philosophy of Law . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 264.

ISBN 978-94-015-9317-5 .

^ Finnis, John (2020).

"Natural Law Theories" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 2021-09-10 . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ Murphy, Mark (2019).

"The Natural Law Tradition in Ethics" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2019 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-13 . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ Rommen, Heinrich A. (1959) [1947].

The Natural Law: A Study in Legal and Social Philosophy . Translated by Hanley, Thomas R. B. Herder Book Co. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-86597-161-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Maritain, Jacques (9 October 2018).

"Human Rights and Natural Law" . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ Locke, John (April 22, 2003) [1690].

Second Treatise of Government .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved 2024-06-11 – via Project Gutenberg.

^ van Duffel, Siegfried (2004).

"Libertarian Natural Rights" (PDF) .

Critical Review .

16 (4).

ISSN 0891-3811 .

^ a b c Shellens, Max Solomon (1959).

"Aristotle on Natural Law" .

Natural Law Forum .

4 (1): 72– 100.

doi : 10.1093/ajj/4.1.72 .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-12 . Retrieved 2020-09-10 .

^ a b c d Strauss, Leo (1968). "Natural Law".

International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences . London: Macmillan Publishers .

^ Wild, John (1953).

Plato's Modern Enemies and the Theory of Natural Law . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p.

136 .

^ Plato, Gorgias 508a.

^ Plato, The Republic , 518b–d.

^ Plato, The Republic , 540a, 517b–d.

^ Plato, Symposium , 205e–206a.

^ Plato, Symposium , 211d–e.

^ Plato, The Republic , 428e9.

^ Jaffa, Harry (1979) [1952].

Thomism and Aristotelianism . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

^ Corbett, Ross J. (April 2012).

The Philosophic Context of the Development of Natural Law . Midwest Political Science Association.

SSRN 2021235 .

^ Corbett, Ross J. (Summer 2009). "The Question of Natural Law in Aristotle".

History of Political Thought .

30 (2): 229– 250.

^ Aristotle, Rhetoric 1373b2–1378.

^ Aristotle, Rhetoric, Book I – Chapter 13, "Book I - Chapter 13: Aristotle's Rhetoric" . Archived from the original on 2015-02-13 . Retrieved 2012-12-22 .

^ Lloyd's Introduction to Jurisprudence , Seventh Edition.

^ Carlyle, A. J. (1903).

A History of Medieval Political Theory in the West . Vol. 1. Edinburgh: William Blackwood and Sons. pp.

8– 9.

^ McIlwain, Charles H. (1932).

The Growth of Political Thought in the West: From the Greeks to the End of the Middle Ages . New York: The Macmillan Company. pp.

114– 115.

^ Cicero, De Legibus , bk. 1, sec. 16–17.

^ a b Barham, Francis (1842). "Introduction".

The Political Works of Marcus Tullius Cicero . London: Edmund Spettigue.

^ Cicero, De Legibus (Keyes translation), book 2, sec. 11.

^ Cicero, De Legibus (Keyes translation), book 1, sec. 58.

^ Cicero.

The Republic . Retrieved 2017-10-05 – via Project Gutenberg.

This passage is lost, but it is reproduced in the introduction to this edition as it is quoted by Lactantius in The Divine Institutes .

^ Cochrane, Charles Norris (1957).

Christianity and Classical Culture: A Study of Thought and Action from Augustus to Augustine . New York: Oxford University Press. p.

39 .

^ Corwin, Edward S. (1955).

The "Higher Law" Background of American Constitutional Law . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp.

17–18 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-9012-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Thomas Aquinas, Treatise on Law (Summa Theologica, Questions 90–97), ed. Stanley Parry (Chicago: Henry Regnery Company, 1969), p. 18 ^ Quoted in Quentin Skinner (1978), The Foundations of Modern Political Thought , Cambridge University Press, vol. 1, p. 89.

^ Boyer, Allen D. (2004). "Sir Edward Coke, Ciceronianus: Classical Rhetoric and the Common Law Tradition". In Allen D. Boyer (ed.).

Law, Liberty, and Parliament: Selected Essays on the Writings of Sir Edward Coke . Indianapolis: Liberty Fund. pp.

224– 225.

^ a b Scott, William Robert (1966) [1900].

Francis Hutcheson: His Life, Teaching, and Position in the History of Philosophy . New York: Augustus M. Kelley.

^ Reinhold, Meyer (1984).

Classica Americana: The Greek and Roman Heritage in the United States . Detroit: Wayne State University Press. p.

150 .

ISBN 978-0-8143-1744-0 .

^ Botein, Stephen (April–May 1978). "Cicero as Role Model for Early American Lawyers: A Case Study in Classical 'Influence' ".

The Classical Journal .

73 (4): 315.

^ Burlamaqui, Jean Jacques (2006) [1763].

The Principles of Natural and Politic Law . Trans. Thomas Nugent. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund. book I, part 2, ch. 5, sec. 11.

^ Wilson, James (1967). "Of the Law of Nature". In McCloskey, Robert Green (ed.).

The Works of James Wilson . Vol. 1. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp.

145– 146.

^ Farrell, James M. (December 1989). "John Adams's Autobiography: The Ciceronian Paradigm and the Quest for Fame".

The New England Quarterly .

62 (4): 506.

doi : 10.2307/366395 .

JSTOR 366395 .

^ Adams, John (1979) [1797].

A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America . Vol. 1 (3 ed.). Darmstadt: Scientia Verlag Aalen. xvii–xviii.

^ Wilson, Douglas L., ed. (1989).

Jefferson's Literary Commonplace Book . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 159.

^ Jefferson to Amos J. Cook, 21 Jan. 1816; quoted in Jefferson's Literary Commonplace Book , p. 161.

^ Melvin, Kranzberg (1980).

Ethnics in an Age of Pervasive Technology . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-89158-686-9 .

In the Epistle to the Romans, Paul explicitly refers to the doctrine of natural law as the endowment of all men ^ "Augustine on Law and Order" .

Law Explorer .

^ Natural Law aspects of theory (PDF) ( PDF ). Rsrevision.com.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-10-26.

^ Summa Theologica, I-II, Q. 91, Art. 2 Archived 2007-07-04 at the Wayback Machine "I answer that" ^ Summa Theologica , Q. 95, A. 2.

^ Summa Theologica, Q. 95, A. 2.

^ Burns, Tony (2000). "Aquinas's Two Doctrines of Natural Law".

Political Studies .

48 (5): 929– 946.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9248.00288 .

S2CID 143492747 .

^ Pope John Paul II, Veritatis Splendor Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine , n. 44; International Theological Commission, The Search for Universal Ethics: A New Look at the Natural Law , n. 37.

^ A Biblical Case for Natural Law , by David VanDrunen. Studies in Christian Social Ethics and Economics, no. 1. Grand Rapids: Acton Institute, 2006.

^ Tripp, Raymond Paul (1975).

Man's "natural powers": essays for and about C. S. Lewis . Society for New Language Study.

ISBN 978-0-905019-01-7 .

^ Pope John Paul II, Veritatis Splendor Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine , n. 48.

^ Pope John Paul II, Veritatis Splendor Archived 2014-10-27 at the Wayback Machine , n. 54 ff.

^ International Theological Commission, The Search for Universal Ethics: A New Look at the Natural Law , n. 46.

^ Summa Theologica I–II, Q. 94, A. 2.

^ Summa Theologica I–II, Q. 94, A. 6.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 62.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 83.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 43.

^ Decock, Wim (2022). "Mendicité et migration. Domingo de Soto, O.P., sur les droits fondamentaux des pauvres".

Revue de droit canonique (in French).

72 ( 1– 2): 243– 265.

^ Decock, Wim (2016). "Spanish Scholastics on Money and Credit". In Fox, D.; Ernst, W. (eds.).

Money in the Western Legal Tradition: Middle Ages to Bretton Woods . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

272– 277.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 48-49.

^ Decock, Wim (2021). "Neo-thomism, Law and Society. A Prolegomenon to Further Study". In Decock, W.; Raymaekers, B.; Heyrman, P. (eds.).

Neo-Thomism in Action. Law and Society Reshaped by Neo-Scholastic Philosophy. 1880–1960 . Louvain: Leuven University Press. p. 18.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 144.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 109.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 153–162.

^ Pedro de Oñate , De Contractibus , t.1, tract.1, disp.2, sect.5, num.166, p.40 ^ Decock 2013 , p. 508.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 523.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 561.

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church - IntraText - I. The Natural Moral Law" .

The Holy See . Archived from the original on Jan 24, 2021 . Retrieved 2020-11-17 .

^ Fox, J. (1910).

"Natural Law" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2020-11-17 – via New Advent.

^ Corbin, Henry (1993) [1964].

History of Islamic Philosophy . Translated by Sherrard, Liadain; Sherrard, Philip . London; Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies. p. 39.

ISBN 0-7103-0416-1 .

(Original in French.) ^ Roeber, A. G. (October 2001). "What the Law Requires Is Written on Their Hearts: Noachic and Natural Law among German-Speakers in Early Modern North America".

William and Mary Quarterly . Third Series.

58 (4): 883–912 [887].

doi : 10.2307/2674504 .

JSTOR 2674504 .

^ Neil McLeod, "The Concept of Law in Ancient Irish Jurisprudence*, in Irish Jurist 17 (1982) ^ Commissioners for Publishing the Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland (1865–1901).

Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland Volume 1 . Dublin: HM Stationery Office and A. Thom.

^ "Heritage: Other: Brehon law" . Archived from the original on 2017-08-24 . Retrieved 2017-08-24 .

^ Rommen, Heinrich A. (1998) [1947].

The Natural Law: A Study in Legal and Social History and Philosophy . Translated by Hanley, Thomas R. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund. pp.

100– 101.

^ de Bracton, Henry (1968). "Translator's Introduction".

On the Laws and Customs of England . Vol. 1. Translated by Thorne, Samuel E.

Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, Belknap Press and The Selden Society. p. xxxiii.

^ McIlwain, Charles Howard (1958) [1947].

Constitutionalism: Ancient and Modern (rev. ed.). Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. pp.

71– 89.

^ Mullett, Charles F. (1966) [1933].

Fundamental Law and the American Revolution 1760–1776 . New York: Octagon Books. p.

33 .

^ de Bracton, Henry (1968).

On the Laws and Customs of England . Vol. 2. Translated by Thorne, Samuel E. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, Belknap Press and The Selden Society. p. 22.

^ de Bracton, Henry (1968).

On the Laws and Customs of England . Vol. 2. Translated by Thorne, Samuel E. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, Belknap Press and The Selden Society. p. 23.

^ Brown, Imogene E. (1981).

American Aristides: A Biography of George Wythe . East Brunswick, New Jersey: Associated University Presses. p. 77.

^ Hazeltine, Harold Dexter (1949). "General Preface: The Age of Littleton and Fortescue". In Fortescue, John (ed.).

De Laudibus Legum Anglie . Translated by Chrimes, S. B. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. l, xxviii.

^ Sandoz, Ellis (1993). "Editor's Introduction".

The Roots of Liberty: Magna Carta, Ancient Constitution, and the Anglo-American Tradition of Rule of Law . Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press. p. 7.

^ Doe, Norman (1990).

Fundamental Authority in Late Medieval English Law . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 49.

^ Fortescue, John (1949). Chrimes, S. B. (ed.).

De Laudibus Legum Anglie . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 11.

^ Vinogradoff, Paul (Oct 1908). "Reason and Conscience in Sixteenth-Century Jurisprudence".

Law Quarterly Review .

96 : 373– 374.

^ Doe, Norman (1990).

Fundamental Authority in Late Medieval English Law . Cambridge University Press. pp.

112– 113.

^ Doe, Norman (1990).

Fundamental Authority in Late Medieval English Law . Cambridge University Press. p. 113, note 23, citing Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica , 1a, 2ae, 90, 4.

^ Sir Edward Coke, The Selected Writings and Speeches of Sir Edward Coke , ed. Steve Sheppard (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2003), vol. 1, p. xxvii.

^ Reid, John Phillip (1977).

In a Defiant Stance: The Conditions of Law in Massachusetts Bay, The Irish Comparison, and the Coming of the American Revolution . University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 71.

^ Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison in 1826 that before the Revolution, the first volume of Coke's Institutes of the Laws of England "was the universal elementary book of law students, and a sounder Whig never wrote, nor of profounder learning in the orthodox doctrines of the British constitution, or in what were called English liberties." See The Writings of Thomas Jefferson , vol. 16, p. 155.

^ John Underwood Lewis, "Sir Edward Coke (1552–1634): His Theory of 'Artificial Reason' as a Context for Modern Basic Legal Theory", in Law, Liberty, and Parliament: Selected Essays on the Writings of Sir Edward Coke , ed. Allen D. Boyer (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2004), pp. 108–109; citing Edward Coke, First Part of the Institutes , 319b.

^ Lewis, "Sir Edward Coke (1552–1634): His Theory of 'Artificial Reason' as a Context for Modern Basic Legal Theory", p. 120.

^ Sir Edward Coke, The Selected Writings and Speeches of Sir Edward Coke , ed. Steve Sheppard (Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2003), vol. 1, pp. 195–197.

^ British Library, London, Add. MS 18235, fols. 41–147 [1693]; Harley MS 7159, fols. 1–266 [1696]; Hargrave MS 485 [late-eighteenth century] ^ Matthew Hale, Of the Law of Nature Archived 2016-05-14 at the Wayback Machine , ed. David S. Sytsma (CLP Academic, 2015).

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 41.

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 85–106.

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 194.

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 41, 52, 64, 150–151.

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 43, 86, 94.

^ Hale, Of the Law of Nature , 7–8, 17, 49, 63, 111–119, 192.

^ 8 Edw 4 fol. 12 ^ 9 Ed. 4 fol. 14 ^ Fort. 206 ^ 2 B. & C. 471 ^ Hobbes, Leviathan , pt. 1, ch. 14 (p. 64) ^ Paul A. Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution (Chapel Hill, 1992), pp. 372–373 ^ A Hobbes Dictionary: "Happiness" .

A Hobbes Dictionary . Archived from the original on 2012-01-11 . Retrieved 2010-05-23 – via Blackwell Reference Online.

^ James R. Stoner, Jr., Common Law and Liberal Theory: Coke, Hobbes, and the Origins of American Constitutionalism (Lawrence, Kansas, 1992), 71; see also John Phillip Reid, "In the Taught Tradition: The Meaning of Law in Massachusetts-Bay Two-Hundred Years Ago", Suffolk University Law Review 14 (1980), 938–940.

^ Thomas Hobbes, De Cive (The Citizen) , ed. Sterling P. Lamprecht (New York, 1949; orig. 1642), ch. 2, sec. 2 (p. 29).

^ Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, or the Matter, Forme, & Power of a Common-Wealth Ecclesiasticall and Civill (Mineola, N.Y., 2006; orig. 1651), pt. 1, ch. 14 (p. 72); p. 1, ch. 13 (pp. 21, 70).

^ Cicero, De re publica (Keyes translation), book 1, ch. 25, sec. 39 ^ Hobbes, Leviathan , pt. 2, ch. 17 (p. 93) ^ Hobbes, Leviathan , pt. 1, ch. 15 (p. 79). See also Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern , p. 387.

^ Knud Haakonssen, "The Character and Obligation of Natural Law according to Richard Cumberland", in English Philosophy in the Age of Locke , ed. M. A. Stewart (Oxford University Press, 2000), 29.

^ Haakonssen, Natural Law and Moral Philosophy: From Grotius to the Scottish Enlightenment (Cambridge University Press, 1996), 51.

^ Jon Parkin, Science, Religion and Politics in Restoration England: Richard Cumberland's De Legibus Naturae (Bury St. Edmunds: Boydell & Brewer, 1999), 8.

^ Parkin, 8.

^ Richard Cumberland, A Treatise of the Laws of Nature , trans. John Maxwell (Indianapolis, 2005; orig. 1727), "Contents" (p. 237). Cumberland's treatise was originally published in Latin in 1672. A Latin edition was published in Germany in 1684.

^ Cumberland, ch. 1, sec. 33 (p. 356) ^ Haakonssen, "The Character and Obligation of Natural Law according to Richard Cumberland", pp. 34, 35.

^ Cumberland, ch. 5, sec. 13 (pp. 523–524).

^ Cumberland, ch. 5, sec. 12 (p. 525) ^ Cumberland, ch. 5, sec. 15 (pp. 527–528).

^ Edlin, Douglas E. (Jul 2006). "Judicial Review without a Constitution".

Polity .

38 (3). Palgrave Macmillan Journals: 345– 368.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.polity.2300065 .

JSTOR 3877071 .

S2CID 154594418 .

^ Reid, John Phillip (1986).

Constitutional History of the American Revolution: The Authority of Rights . University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

90–91 .

^ Clinton, Robert Lowry (1997).

God and Man in the Law: The Foundations of Anglo-American Constitutionalism . University Press of Kansas.

^ Falcon y Tella, María José (2010).

A Three-Dimensional Theory of Law . Leiden: BRILL. p. 326.

ISBN 978-90-04-17932-5 .

^ Ernst Wolf, Naturrecht , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band IV (1960), Tübingen (Germany), col. 1357 ^ M. Elze, Grotius, Hugo , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band II (1958), col. 1885 ^ H. Hohlwein, Pufendorf, Samuel Freiherr von , in Die Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart , 3. Auflage, Band V (1961), col. 721 ^ John Locke, Two Treatises of Government , Second Treatise, Chapter 13, §149 ^ Jeremy Waldron (2002), God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought . Cambridge University Press, p. 13 ^ Jeremy Waldron, God, Locke, and Equality , pp. 12–15, 45–46, 95–97, 195–198, 230 ^ Jeremy Waldron, God, Locke, and Equality , pp. 21–43 ^ Jeremy Waldron, God, Locke, and Equality , p. 136 ^ Pangle, The Spirit of Modern Republicanism (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 209.

^ Cf.

Robert Middlekauff (2005), The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 , Revised and Expanded Edition, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-531588-2 , pp. 49–52, 136 ^ "Natural law, positive law, justice [natuurrecht, droit naturel]" .

Archived from the original on 2007-12-13 . Retrieved 2007-12-28 .

^ Rothbard, Murray (April 1999).

"Natural Law Versus Positive Law" (PDF) .

The Ethics of Liberty . p. 17.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-11-26.

^ R. A. Gonce (Apr 1973). "Natural Law and Ludwig von Mises' Praxeology and Economic Science".

Southern Economic Journal .

39 (4). Southern Economic Association: 490– 507.

doi : 10.2307/1056701 .

JSTOR 1056701 .

^ Rothbard, Murray (Summer 1980). "Ludwig von Mises and Natural Law: A Comment on Professor Gonce".

The Journal of Libertarian Studies .

IV .

^ Gordon, David (October 2008).

"Review of In Defense of Natural Law by Robert George" . Ludwig von Mises Institute. Archived from the original on 2014-09-14.

^ Hayek, Friedrich.

Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PDF) . pp.

97– 98. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-11.

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1982) [1973].

Law, Legislation and Liberty (PDF) . London: Routledge. p. 21.

ISBN 0-415-09868-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-08.

^ Locke, John (1954).

Essays Concerning the Law of Nature . Oxford: W. von Leyden. p. 111.

^ Hayek, Friedrich.

Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PDF) . pp.

98– 99. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-11.

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1991).

The Trend of Economic Thinking (PDF) . Routledge. pp.

22– 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-08-29 . Retrieved 2016-08-21 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (1978).

The Constitution of Liberty (PDF) . The University of Chicago Press. pp.

238– 239. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-09-26.

^ Hayek, Friedrich.

Studies In Philosophy, Politics And Economics (PDF) . p. 102. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-10-11.

^ Schnelzer, Nadine (2016).

Libya in the Arab Spring: The Constitutional Discourse since the Fall of Gaddafi . New York City: Springer . p. 12.

ISBN 978-3-658-11381-0 .

^ Riofrio, Juan Carlos (2022).

"The Natural Law Formula and the Missing Link: Tracing and Updating Aquinas' Methodology" .

Forum Prawnicze .

74 (6): 5– 31.

^ Singh, Prabhakar (March 2008). "From 'narcissistic' positive international law to 'universal' natural international law: the dialectics of 'absentee colonialism' ".

African Journal of International and Comparative Law .

16 (1). Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University Press : 56– 82.

doi : 10.3366/E0954889008000066 .

^ Toobin, Jeffrey (2007).

The Nine: Inside the Secret World of the Supreme Court .

Random House . p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-385-51640-2 .

^ Woodward, Kenneth (September 23, 1991).

"Natural Law, An Elusive Tradition" .

Newsweek . New York City.

Archived from the original on June 5, 2014 . Retrieved April 20, 2009 .

^ Epstein, Aaron (August 30, 1991).

"The Natural Law According To Clarence Thomas" .

The Seattle Times .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2012 . Retrieved April 20, 2009 .

^ Kengor, Paul.

"Neil Gorsuch and Natural Law" .

NCR .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved April 30, 2017 .

^ Kelleher, J. Paul (March 20, 2017).

"Neil Gorsuch's 'natural law' philosophy is a long way from Justice Scalia's originalism" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 9, 2018 .

^ The Nicomachean Ethics . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ a b "Summa Theologica" . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ "The Spirit of laws" . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ a b "Natural law and natural rights" (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ Lemaitre, Fernando Atria; MacCormick, Neil, eds. (2017).

"Michael S. Moore (1985), 'A Natural Law Theory of Interpretation', Southern California Law Review, 58, pp. 277–398" .

Law and Legal Interpretation .

doi : 10.4324/9781315197470 .

ISBN 978-1-315-19747-0 . Retrieved 2023-05-11 .

^ a b Riofrio, Juan Carlos (2022-12-31).

"The Natural Law Formula and the Missing Link: Tracing and Updating Aquinas' Methodology" .

Forum Prawnicze .

6 (74): 5– 31.

doi : 10.32082/fp.6(74).2022.1070 .

ISSN 2081-688X .

References [ edit ] Adams, John . 1797.

A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America . 3rd edition.

Philadelphia ; repr.

Darmstadt , Germany : Scientia Verlag Aalen, 1979.

Aristotle .

Nicomachean Ethics .

Aristotle .

Rhetoric .

Aristotle .

Politics .

Aquinas .

Summa Theologica .

Barham, Francis.Introduction to The Political Works of Marcus Tullius Cicero.

Blackstone, William . 1765–1769.

Commentaries on the Laws of England .

Botein, Stephen. 1978. "Cicero as Role Model for Early American Lawyers: A Case Study in Classical 'Influence'".

The Classical Journal 73, no. 4 (April–May).

Boyer, Allen D. 2004. " Sir Edward Coke , Ciceronianus: Classical Rhetoric and the Common Law Tradition." in Law, Liberty, and Parliament: Selected Essays on the Writings of Sir Edward Coke , ed. Allen D. Boyer.

Indianapolis : Liberty Fund .

Burlamaqui, Jean Jacques. 1763.

The Principles of Natural and Politic Law . Trans. Thomas Nugent. Repr., Indianapolis : The Liberty Fund , 2006.

Burns, Tony. 2000. "Aquinas's Two Doctrines of Natural Law." Political Studies 48. pp. 929–946.

Carlyle, A. J. 1903.

A History of Medieval Political Theory in the West . vol. 1.

Edinburgh .

Cicero .

De Legibus .

Cochrane, Charles Norris . 1940.

Christianity and Classical Culture: A Study of Thought and Action from Augustus to Augustine . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

Corbett, R. J. 2009. "The Question of Natural Law in Aristotle ." History of Political Thought 30, no. 2 (Summer): 229–250 Corwin, Edward S. 1955.

The "Higher Law" Background of American Constitutional Law . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

Edlin, Douglas E. 2006. "Judicial Review Without a Constitution." Polity 38, no. 3 (July): 345–368.

Farrell, James M. 1989. "John Adams's Autobiography: The Ciceronian Paradigm and the Quest for Fame." The New England Quarterly 62, no. 4 (Dec. ).

Gert, Bernard , [1998] 2005.

Morality: Its Nature and Justification .

Description & outline Archived 2020-04-11 at the Wayback Machine . Revised Edition, Oxford University Press.

Haakonssen, Knud. 1996.

Natural Law and Moral Philosophy: From Grotius to the Scottish Enlightenment .

Cambridge , UK: Cambridge University Press .

Haakonssen, Knud. 2000. "The Character and Obligation of Natural Law according to Richard Cumberland ." In English Philosophy in the Age of Locke , ed. M.A. Stewart. Oxford.

Heinze, Eric , 2013.

The Concept of Injustice (Routledge) Jaffa, Harry V . 1952.

Thomism and Aristotelianism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

Jefferson's Literary Commonplace Book . Trans. and ed. Douglas L. Wilson.

Princeton, NJ : Princeton University Press , 1989.

Maritain, Jacques. 2001.

Natural Law: Reflections on theory and practice, tr. and ed. William Sweet, South Bend, IN: St Augustine's Press.

McIlwain, Charles Howard. 1932.

The Growth of Political Thought in the West: From the Greeks to the End of the Middle Ages .

New York : The Macmillan Company .

Miller, Fred (2008).

"Natural Law" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

351– 353.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n215 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-09 . Retrieved 2022-03-30 .

"Natural Law." International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences .

New York , 1968.

Reinhold, Meyer. 1984.

Classica Americana: The Greek and Roman Heritage in the United States .

Detroit : Wayne State University Press .

Rommen, Heinrich A. 1947.

The Natural Law: A Study in Legal and Social History and Philosophy . Trans. and rev. Thomas R. Hanley. B. Herder Book Co.; repr.

Indianapolis : Liberty Fund , 1998.

Scott, William Robert. 1900.

Francis Hutcheson : His Life, Teaching, and Position in the History of Philosophy Cambridge; repr. New York: Augustus M. Kelley , 1966.

Shellens, Max Salomon. 1959. " Aristotle on Natural Law." Natural Law Forum 4, no. 1. pp. 72–100.

Skinner, Quentin . 1978.

The Foundations of Modern Political Thought . Cambridge.

Waldron, Jeremy . 2002.

God, Locke, and Equality: Christian Foundations in Locke's Political Thought . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK).

ISBN 978-0-521-89057-1 .

Wijngaards, John , AMRUTHA. What the Pope's man found out about the Law of Nature , Author House 2011.

Wilson, James. 1967. The Works of James Wilson. Ed. Robert Green McCloskey.

Cambridge, Mass.

: Harvard University Press .

Woo, B. Hoon. 2012. " Pannenberg's Understanding of the Natural Law.

Archived 2020-04-11 at the Wayback Machine " Studies in Christian Ethics 25, no. 3: 288–290.

Zippelius, Reinhold .

Rechtsphilosophie, 6th edition, § 12 . C.H. Beck, Munich, 2011.

ISBN 978-3-406-61191-9 .

Decock, Wim (2013).

Theologians and Contract Law: The Moral Transformation of the Ius commune (ca. 1500-1650) . Leiden/Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 723.

ISBN 978-90-04-23285-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Natural law .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : The Natural Law Tradition in Ethics , by Mark Murphy, 2002.

Aquinas' Moral, Political, and Legal Philosophy , by John Finnis , 2005.

Natural Law Theories , by John Finnis, 2007.

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry 'Natural Law' by Kenneth Einar Himma Aquinas on natural law Natural Law explained, evaluated and applied A clear introduction to Natural Law Jonathan Dolhenty, Ph.D., "An Overview of Natural Law" Catholic Encyclopedia "Natural Law" McElroy, Wendy "The Non-Absurdity of Natural Law ," The Freeman , February 1998, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 108–111 John Wijngaards , "The controversy of Natural Law ." Lex Naturalis, Ius Naturalis: Law as Positive Reasoning and Natural Rationality by Eric Engle, (Elias Clarke, 2010).

Links to related articles v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐sbgsv
Cached time: 20250815221909
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.264 seconds
Real time usage: 2.657 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14546/1000000
Revision size: 112817/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 827583/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 228362/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 526651/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.157/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22432991/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1870.342      1 -total
 39.57%  740.178      1 Template:Reflist
 17.30%  323.594     55 Template:Cite_book
 14.89%  278.483      1 Template:Navboxes
  9.35%  174.945      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.80%  145.978     11 Template:Cite_web
  6.41%  119.847      8 Template:Navbox
  6.15%  115.027      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy
  5.84%  109.255     15 Template:Cite_journal
  5.83%  109.026      2 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22063:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221909 and revision id 1304461812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Natural_law&oldid=1304461812 " Categories : Natural law Thomistic jurisprudence Applied ethics Concepts in political philosophy Moral realism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Wikipedia articles with citations needing edition from February 2025 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2019 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with unsourced statements from April 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles containing Irish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles that may contain original research from February 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 05:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Natural law 67 languages Add topic

