Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 European Union 2 Advantages of fiscal union 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fiscal union 6 languages Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Español Nederlands Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Integration of the fiscal policy of nations or states Part of a series on World trade Policy Import Export Balance of trade Trade law Trade pact Trade bloc Trade creation Trade diversion Export orientation Import substitution Trade finance Trade facilitation Trade route Domestic trade Tax Restrictions Trade barriers Tariffs Non-tariff barriers Import quotas Tariff-rate quotas Import licenses Customs duties Export subsidies Technical barriers Bribery Exchange rate controls Embargo Safeguards Countervailing duties Anti-dumping duties Voluntary export restraints History Mercantilism Protectionism Laissez-faire Free trade Economic nationalism Economic integration Organizations International Monetary Fund International Trade Centre World Trade Organization World Customs Organization International Chamber of Commerce Economic integration Preferential trading area Free-trade area Currency union Customs union Single market Economic union Fiscal union Customs and monetary union Economic and monetary union Issues Intellectual property rights Smuggling Competition policy Government procurement Global labor arbitrage Outsourcing Globalization Fair trade Trade justice Emissions trading Trade sanctions War Currency war Trade costs Trade war Trade and development Lists Imports Exports Balance of trade Tariffs Largest consumer markets Leading trade partners By country Trade mission Trading nation United States Argentina Pakistan Romania Vietnam India Theory Comparative advantage Competitive advantage Heckscher–Ohlin model New trade theory Economic geography Intra-industry trade Gravity model of trade Ricardian trade theories Balassa–Samuelson effect Linder hypothesis Leontief paradox Lerner symmetry theorem Terms of trade v t e Fiscal union is the integration of the fiscal policy of nations or states. In a fiscal union, decisions about the collection and expenditure of taxes are taken by common institutions, shared by the participating governments. A fiscal union does not imply the centralisation of spending and tax decisions at the supranational level .

Centralisation of these decisions would open up not only the possibility of inherent risk sharing through the supranational tax and transfer system but also economic stabilisation through debt management at the supranational level. Proper management would reduce the effects of asymmetric shocks that would be shared both with other countries and with future generations .

[ 1 ] Fiscal union also implies that the debt would be financed not by individual countries but by a common bond.

[ 2 ] In the European Union , fiscal union has been mooted as a next step forward into deeper European integration but, as of July 2022 [update] , remains largely just a proposal. If fiscal union were to happen, national expenditure and tax rates would be set at European Council level. There would be Eurobonds instead of individual national bonds that would finance collective Euro debt.

[ 2 ] Stages of economic integration around the world (each country colored according to the most integrated multilateral agreement that it participates in): Economic and monetary union ( ECCU / XCD , Eurozone / EUR , Switzerland–Liechtenstein / CHF ) Economic union ( CSME , EAEU , EU , GCC , Mercosur , SICA ) Common market ( EEA –Switzerland ) Customs and monetary union ( CEMAC / XAF , UEMOA / XOF ) Customs union ( CAN , EAC , EUCU , SACU ) Multilateral free-trade area ( AANZFTA , ASEAN , CEFTA , CISFTA , COMESA , CPTPP , EFTA , GAFTA , PAFTA , RCEP , SADCFTA , SAFTA , USMCA ) v t e European Union [ edit ] Main article: Sixpack (EU) See also: European Fiscal Compact It is often proposed that the European Union should adopt a form of fiscal union. Most member states of the EU participate in economic and monetary union (EMU), based on the euro currency, but most decisions about taxes and spending remain at the national level. Therefore, although the European Union has a monetary union, it does not have a fiscal union.

Laruffa describes the European economic governance as "an economic constitution made by rules, policies and institutional practices aimed to establish the  a fiscal-monetary policy mix, competition rules, financial markets regulations, the single market and international trade policies. When the euro was created, monetary policy was established as a centralized policy, while fiscal policy remained in the hands of national authorities under some institutional arrangements for sound budgetary policy and an ex-ante control by the European Commission." [ 3 ] Control over fiscal policy is considered central to national sovereignty, and in the world today there is no substantial fiscal union between independent nations. However the EU has certain limited fiscal powers. It has a role in deciding the level of VAT ( consumption taxes ) and tariffs on external trade. It also spends a budget of many billions of euros. There is furthermore a Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) among members of the Eurozone (common currency area) intended to co-ordinate the fiscal policies of member states. Under the SGP, member states report their economic plans to the European Commission and explain how they are to achieve medium-term budgetary objectives. Then the Commission evaluates these plans and the report is sent to the Economic and Financial Committee for comments. Finally, the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers decides by qualified majority whether to accept the Commission's recommendation to the member state or to rewrite the text. However, under the SGP, no countries have ever been fined for not meeting the objectives and the effort to punish France and Germany in 2003 was not fulfilled.

On 2 March 2012, all members of the European Union, except the Czech Republic (who joined later) and the United Kingdom , signed the European Fiscal Compact , which was ratified on 1 April 2014. The treaty is designed to implement stricter caps on government spending and borrowing, including automatic sanctions for countries breaking the rules. The results of the treaty on the Eurozone economy, are yet to be known.

[ 4 ] With the crisis of the euro area deepening, more and more attention has been put by scholars on completing the fiscal side of the monetary union. Marzinotto, Sapir and Guntram Wolff (2011), for example, were among the first to call for proper fiscal resources at the federal level that would allow to stabilize the financial system and if necessary help individual countries ( What kind of fiscal union?

Archived 2013-10-22 at the Wayback Machine ).

Advantages of fiscal union [ edit ] This  section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fiscal union" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the view of some economists, European fiscal union with strong institutions would be able to manage the EU economy as a whole more appropriately. The benefits from this union would be seen both in the short and in the long term. In case of a future crisis, the probability of its appearance would decrease, and in case of occurrence it would be less severe.

[ 5 ] The emergence of fiscal union would ensure more creditability towards developing European countries because risks will be shared among all the state members. Weaker Euro countries would benefit from sharing the same Euro bonds as more creditworthy countries.

[ 6 ] Also, a centralised fiscal policy will introduce more tools for a particular policy implementation rather than national policies. By transferring some fiscal responsibilities to the centre, it would offset the decrease of some stabilisation capacity at the country level resulted from active control of national budgets.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Criticisms of globalization Fiscal policies in the Eurozone Fiscal federalism European integration References [ edit ] ^ Beetsma, Roel M. W. J.; Bovenberg, A. Lans (2001).

"The Optimality of a Monetary Union without a Fiscal Union" .

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking .

33 (2): 179– 204.

doi : 10.2307/2673880 .

ISSN 0022-2879 .

JSTOR 2673880 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b "Fiscal Union Explained - Economics Help" .

Economics Help . 18 November 2017 . Retrieved 2019-04-28 .

^ Laruffa Matteo, The European Economic Governance: Problems and Proposals for Institutional Innovations, Winning Paper for the Annual Meeting Progressive Economy, Brussels, 6 March 2014.

^ "Statement By The Euro Area Heads Of State Or Government" (PDF) . Retrieved 2011-12-13 .

^ a b Allard, Céline; Brooks, Petya Koeva; Bluedorn, Mr John C.; Bornhorst, Fabian; Ohnsorge, Franziska; Puh, Mrs Katharine M. Christopherson (2013-09-25).

Toward A Fiscal Union for the Euro Area . International Monetary Fund.

ISBN 9781484325186 .

^ "Arguments for and against fiscal union" .

Debating Europe . Retrieved 2019-04-28 .

v t e Forms of economic integration Trade bloc Preferential trading area Free-trade area Economic partnership Passport-free zone Single market Economic union Customs union Monetary union Customs and monetary union Economic and monetary union Complete economic integration Shared policies Fiscal union Social union Political union Theory Economic integration effects Friction of distance Harmonisation of law Theory of the second best Regions Europe Latin America Middle East North America v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7f95766c99‐z8rd6
Cached time: 20250813142741
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.431 seconds
Real time usage: 0.628 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1689/1000000
Revision size: 8051/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 102299/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3909/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56172/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.260/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6445448/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  531.457      1 -total
 23.11%  122.833      1 Template:Reflist
 15.64%   83.128      1 Template:Trade_bloc
 15.03%   79.854      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.40%   76.540      1 Template:As_of
 14.17%   75.288      1 Template:Cite_journal
 13.35%   70.960      4 Template:Navbox
 13.33%   70.835      1 Template:Dated_maintenance_category_(articles)
 12.99%   69.031      1 Template:Dated_maintenance_category
 12.44%   66.105      1 Template:FULLROOTPAGENAME Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27371532:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813142741 and revision id 1301932829. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiscal_union&oldid=1301932829 " Categories : Economic integration Fiscal federalism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Webarchive template wayback links Articles that may contain original research from October 2019 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from October 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fiscal union 6 languages Add topic

