Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Mappings from a group to itself 3 Applications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Near-ring 5 languages Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Algebraic structure in mathematics In mathematics , a near-ring (also near ring or nearring ) is an algebraic structure similar to a ring but satisfying fewer axioms . Near-rings arise naturally from functions on groups .

Algebraic structures Group -like Group Semigroup / Monoid Rack and quandle Quasigroup and loop Abelian group Magma Lie group Group theory Ring -like Ring Rng Semiring Near-ring Commutative ring Domain Integral domain Field Division ring Lie ring Ring theory Lattice -like Lattice Semilattice Complemented lattice Total order Heyting algebra Boolean algebra Map of lattices Lattice theory Module -like Module Group with operators Vector space Linear algebra Algebra -like Algebra Associative Non-associative Composition algebra Lie algebra Graded Bialgebra Hopf algebra v t e Definition [ edit ] A set N together with two binary operations + (called addition ) and ⋅ (called multiplication ) is called a (right) near-ring if: N is a group (not necessarily abelian ) under addition; multiplication is associative (so N is a semigroup under multiplication); and multiplication on the right distributes over addition: for any x , y , z in N , it holds that ( x + y )⋅ z = ( x ⋅ z ) + ( y ⋅ z ).

[ 1 ] Similarly, it is possible to define a left near-ring by replacing the right distributive law by the corresponding left distributive law. Both right and left near-rings occur in the literature; for instance, the book of Pilz [ 2 ] uses right near-rings, while the book of Clay [ 3 ] uses left near-rings.

An immediate consequence of this one-sided distributive law is that it is true that 0⋅ x = 0 but it is not necessarily true that x ⋅0 = 0 for any x in N .  Another immediate consequence is that (− x )⋅ y = −( x ⋅ y ) for any x , y in N , but it is not necessary that x ⋅(− y ) = −( x ⋅ y ). A near-ring is a rng if and only if addition is commutative and multiplication is also distributive over addition on the left .  If the near-ring has a multiplicative identity, then distributivity on both sides is sufficient, and commutativity of addition follows automatically.

Mappings from a group to itself [ edit ] Let G be a group, written additively but not necessarily abelian , and let M ( G ) be the set { f | f : G → G } of all functions from G to G .  An addition operation can be defined on M ( G ): given f , g in M ( G ), then the mapping f + g from G to G is given by ( f + g )( x ) = f ( x ) + g ( x ) for all x in G .  Then ( M ( G ), +) is also a group, which is abelian if and only if G is abelian.  Taking the composition of mappings as the product ⋅, M ( G ) becomes a near-ring.

The 0 element of the near-ring M ( G ) is the zero map , i.e., the mapping which takes every element of G to the identity element of G .  The additive inverse − f of f in M ( G ) coincides with the natural pointwise definition, that is, (− f )( x ) = −( f ( x )) for all x in G .

If G has at least two elements, then M ( G ) is not a ring, even if G is abelian.  (Consider a constant mapping g from G to a fixed element g ≠ 0 of G ; then g ⋅0 = g ≠ 0 .) However, there is a subset E ( G ) of M ( G ) consisting of all group endomorphisms of G , that is, all maps f : G → G such that f ( x + y ) = f ( x ) + f ( y ) for all x , y in G .  If ( G , +) is abelian, both near-ring operations on M ( G ) are closed on E ( G ), and ( E ( G ), +, ⋅) is a ring.  If ( G , +) is nonabelian, E ( G ) is generally not closed under the near-ring operations; but the closure of E ( G ) under the near-ring operations is a near-ring.

Many subsets of M ( G ) form interesting and useful near-rings. For example: [ 1 ] The mappings for which f (0) = 0 .

The constant mappings, i.e., those that map every element of the group to one fixed element.

The set of maps generated by addition and negation from the endomorphisms of the group (the "additive closure" of the set of endomorphisms).  If G is abelian then the set of endomorphisms is already additively closed, so that the additive closure is just the set of endomorphisms of G , and it forms not just a near-ring, but a ring.

Further examples occur if the group has further structure, for example: The continuous mappings in a topological group .

The polynomial functions on a ring with identity under addition and polynomial composition.

The affine maps in a vector space .

Every near-ring is isomorphic to a subnear-ring of M ( G ) for some G .

Applications [ edit ] Many applications involve the subclass of near-rings known as near-fields ; for these see the article on near-fields.

There are various applications of proper near-rings, i.e., those that are neither rings nor near-fields.

The best known is to balanced incomplete block designs [ 2 ] using planar near-rings. These are a way to obtain difference families using the orbits of a fixed-point-free automorphism group of a group. James R. Clay and others have extended these ideas to more general geometrical constructions.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Near-field (mathematics) Semiring Near-semiring References [ edit ] ^ a b G. Pilz, (1982), "Near-Rings: What They Are and What They Are Good For" in Contemp. Math.

, 9, pp. 97–119. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1981.

^ a b G. Pilz, " Near-rings, the Theory and its Applications ", North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2nd edition, (1983).

^ a b J. Clay, "Nearrings: Geneses and applications", Oxford, (1992).

Celestina Cotti Ferrero; Giovanni Ferrero (2002).

Nearrings: Some Developments Linked to Semigroups and Groups . Kluwer Academic Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4613-0267-4 .

External links [ edit ] The Near Ring Main Page at the Johannes Kepler Universität Linz Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Near-ring&oldid=1201632358 " Categories : Algebraic structures Ring theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 February 2024, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Near-ring 5 languages Add topic

