Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 2.1 Morphology 2.2 Genetics 3 Systematics and evolution 4 References Toggle the table of contents Imasa 1 language 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Imasidae ) Genus of flagellated protists Imasa Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Phylum: Malawimonada Class: Malawimonadea Order: Malawimonadida Family: Imasidae Heiss, Simpson & Kim 2020 Genus: Imasa Heiss, Simpson & Kim 2020 Species: I. heleensis Binomial name Imasa heleensis Heiss, Simpson & Kim 2020 Type strain AMNH_IZC 00343331 Imasa is a genus of marine flagellates containing the single species Imasa heleensis , discovered in 2020 in the Solomon Islands .

[ 1 ] It is the first marine member of a basal group of eukaryotes known as Malawimonadida .

[ 2 ] It is the only member of the family Imasidae .

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] Hele class=notpageimage| Location of Hele, the type locality of Imasa heleensis in Solomon Islands The genus name Imasa is the name of the research vessel used to obtain the cells of Imasa heleensis that were isolated. It refers to the pause taken by a crocodile between its emergence from the water and its attack. This pause between actions is resembled by the movement of the anterior flagellum of Imasa , which often appears to pause near the point between the extension and recovery strokes. The specific epithet heleensis refers to ‘Hele’, which is the name of the isles containing the collection site of Imasa heleensis at Solomon Islands . As with the genus name, it is common among the indigenous languages of the region.

[ 1 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Morphology [ edit ] Imasa heleensis was isolated from a marine shallow lagoon . Like the other two accepted species of malawimonads Gefionella okellyi and Malawimonas jakobiformis , which were isolated from soil and freshwater respectively, Imasa is ecologically associated with a particulate substrate. However, its ability to generate a protrusion from the posterior end of the cell is unusually long (~3 μm when suspended, ~15-20 μm when adhered to the substrate) compared to its terrestrial counterparts (~1 μm in G. okellyi ). As for the ventral groove, it only runs the anterior half of the cell in Imasa heleensis , while in the rest of malawimonads it runs the whole length of the cell.

[ 1 ] An additional characteristic of Imasa is its shorter flagellar vane compared to other malawimonads. The vanes end abruptly in a steeper angle with the axoneme , which may result in the generation of fluid movement from a shorter length of the posterior flagellum .

[ 1 ] Genetics [ edit ] The mitochondrial genome of Imasa heleensis is similar to other malawimonads, except for the presence of the sdh3 gene, which is absent in any other known malawimonad.

[ 1 ] Systematics and evolution [ edit ] Imasa is the first marine malawimonad taxon to be described. According to phylogenetic analyses based on SSU rRNA genes, it is the sister taxon to the rest of malawimonads, the Gefionella + Malawimonas clade . Because of this, Imasa was placed in a separate family, Imasidae, while the family Malawimonadidae was reserved for the other two genera.

[ 1 ] Malawimonadida Imasidae Imasa heleensis marine habitats Malawimonadidae Gefionella okellyi Malawimonas jakobiformis " Malawimonas californiana " freshwater or soil References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Heiss AA, Warring SD, Lukacs K, Favate J, Yang A, Gyaltshen Y, Filardi C, Simpson AGB, Kim E (December 2020). "Description of Imasa heleensis, gen. nov., sp. nov. (Imasidae, fam. nov.), a Deep-Branching Marine Malawimonad and Possible Key Taxon in Understanding Early Eukaryotic Evolution".

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

68 (2): e12837.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.12837 .

PMID 33274482 .

^ Cavalier-Smith T (December 2021).

"Ciliary transition zone evolution and the root of the eukaryote tree: implications for opisthokont origin and classification of kingdoms Protozoa, Plantae, and Fungi" .

Protoplasma .

259 (3): 487– 593.

doi : 10.1007/s00709-021-01665-7 .

PMC 9010356 .

PMID 34940909 .

Taxon identifiers Imasa Wikidata : Q119015683 NCBI : 2795259 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Imasa&oldid=1294212215 " Categories : Taxa described in 2020 Protist genera Excavata Eukaryote genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items Taxonbars without secondary Wikidata taxon IDs This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 09:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Imasa 1 language Add topic

