Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Given names Toggle Given names subsection 1.1 Males 1.2 Females 1.3 Forms 1.3.1 Short forms 1.3.2 Diminutive forms 1.3.2.1 Affectionate diminutive 1.3.2.2 Colloquial diminutives 1.3.2.3 Slang forms 1.4 Early Soviet Union 2 Patronymics Toggle Patronymics subsection 2.1 Usage 2.2 Derivation 2.3 Historical grounds 2.4 Legal basis 2.5 Matronymic 3 Family names Toggle Family names subsection 3.1 Derivation and meaning 3.2 Grammar 4 Slavicisation of foreign names Toggle Slavicisation of foreign names subsection 4.1 Slavicisation of foreign surnames 4.2 Slavicisation of foreign patronymics 5 Forms of address Toggle Forms of address subsection 5.1 Common rules 5.2 Adjectives 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents East Slavic name 6 languages فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Slovenščina Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from East Slavic naming customs ) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article should specify the language of its non-English content using {{ lang }} or {{ langx }} , {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's multilingual support templates may also be used.

See why .

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Russian citizen's (Yevgeniy Aleksandrovich Imyarek) internal passport . The lower page includes the lines: Фамилия ("Family name"), Имя ("Name") and Отчество ("Patronymic").

East Slavic naming customs are the traditional way of identifying a person's given name , patronymic name, and family name in East Slavic cultures in Russia and some countries formerly part of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union .

They are used commonly in Russia , Ukraine , Belarus , Moldova , Kazakhstan , Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , and to a lesser extent in Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , Azerbaijan , Armenia and Georgia .

Name Belarusian example Russian example Ukrainian example First name ( given name ) Belarusian : Уладзімір , romanized : Uladzimir Russian : Владимир , romanized : Vladimir Ukrainian : Володимир , romanized : Volodymyr Patronymic Belarusian : Антонавіч , romanized : Antonavič Russian : Антонович , romanized : Antonovich Ukrainian : Антонович , romanized : Antonovych Family name (surname) Belarusian : Іваноў , romanized : Ivanoŭ Russian : Иванов , romanized : Ivanov Ukrainian : Іванів , romanized : Ivaniv Given names East Slavic parents select a given name for a newborn child. Most first names in East Slavic languages originate from two sources: Eastern Orthodox Church tradition native pre-Christian Slavic lexicons Almost all first names are single. Doubled first names (as in, for example, French , like Jean-Luc ) are very rare and are from foreign influence. Most doubled first names are written with a hyphen: Mariya-Tereza .

Males Belarusian variant Russian variant Ukrainian variant Latin-alphabet transliteration [ note 1 ] (Belarusian / Russian / Ukrainian) Origin Comments Іван, Ян Иван, Ян Іван, Ян Ivan, Jan / Ivan / Ivan Hebrew equivalent to John Якуб, Якаў Иаков, Яков Яків Yakub, Yakau / Iakov, Yakov / Yakiv Hebrew equivalent to James or Jacob Ілля Илья Ілля Illa / Ilia / Illia Hebrew equivalent to Elijah Мікалай, Мікола Николай Микола Mikałaj, Mikoła / Nikolai / Mykola, Mykolai Greek equivalent to Nicholas , meaning "Victory (of the) People" Мiкiта Никита Микита Mikita / Nikita / Mykyta Greek equivalent to " Nicetas ", meaning "victorious one" (from Nike "victory") Барыс Борис Борис Barys / Boris / Borys Bulgar unclear, possibly "wolf", "short" or "snow leopard" Уладзімір Владимир Володимир Uładzimir / Vladimir / Volodymyr Slavonic meaning "great/famous lord" (-мир comes from мѣръ and is not related to міръ or миръ, see also the name's etymology ) Equivalent to Norse Valdemar Пётр, Пятро, Пятрусь Пётр Петро Piotr, Piatro, Piatruś / Petr, Pyotr / Petro Greek equivalent to Peter Андрэй Андрей Андрій Andrej / Andrei / Andrii Greek equivalent to Andrew Аляксандр Александр Олександр, Олекса Alaksandr / Aleksandr / Oleksandr, Oleksa Greek equivalent to Alexander Піліп Филипп Пилип Pilip / Filipp / Pylyp Greek from Greek Φίλιππος (Phílippos), meaning "fond of horses". Equivalent to Philip .

Дзмітры, Зміцер Дмитрий Дмитро Dzmitry, Zmicier / Dmitrii / Dmytro Greek from Greek Δημήτριος ( Demétrios ),  meaning "of Demeter " Сяргей Сергей Сергій Siarhiej / Sergei / Serhii Latin from the Roman nomen (patrician family name) Sergius , itself from a more ancient Etruscan name Леанід, Лявон Леонид Леонід Leanid, Lavon / Leonid / Leonid Greek from Greek Leonidas , meaning "Son of the Lion" Віктар Виктор Віктор Viktar / Viktor / Viktor Latin meaning "Conqueror" Георгій, Юры Георгий Георгiй Hieorhij, Jury / Georgii / Heorhii Greek the analogues are Егор (Yegor), Юрий (Yury), equivalent to George Павел, Павал, Паўло Павел Павло Pavał, Paŭło / Pavel / Pavlo Latin equivalent to Paul Канстанцін, Кастусь Константин Костянтин Kanstancin, Kastuś / Konstantin / Kostiantyn Latin equivalent to Constantine Кірыл, Кірыла Кирилл Кирило Kirył, Kiryła / Kirill / Kyrylo Greek equivalent to Cyril Васіль, Базыль Василий Василь Vasiĺ, Bazyl / Vasilii / Vasyl Greek equivalent to Basil Раман Роман Роман Raman / Roman / Roman Latin from Romanus Уладзіслаў Владислав Владислав Uladzisłaŭ / Vladislav / Vladyslav Slavonic meaning "Lord of Fame" Вячаслаў Вячеслав В'ячеслав Viačasłaŭ / Viacheslav / Viacheslav Slavonic meaning "Growing Fame" Матвей, Мацвей Матвей Матвій Matviej, Macviej / Matvei / Matvii Hebrew equivalent to Matthew Міхал, Міхась Михаил Михайло Michał, Michaś / Mikhail / Mykhailo Hebrew equivalent to Michael Алег Олег Олег Aleh / Oleg / Oleh Old Norse derivative from Scandinavian " Helgi " Ігар Игорь Ігор Ihar / Igor / Ihor Old Norse derivative from Scandinavian " Ingvar " Максім Максим Максим Maksim / Maksim / Maksym Latin meaning "Greatest" Фёдар Фёдор Федiр Fiodar / Fyodor / Fedir Greek equivalent to Theodore , meaning "God's gift" or "God-given" Захар Захар Захар Zachar / Zakhar / Zakhar Hebrew equivalent to Zachary , meaning "Remembered” Аляксей Алексей Олексій Alaksej / Aleksei / Oleksii Greek equivalent to Alexis , meaning "Defender” Макар Макар Макар Makar / Makar / Makar Greek meaning "Blessed” ^ The same romanization system is used for all three languages for comparative purposes. For the official romanization systems of Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarusian, which will be used throughout the rest of the article, see romanization of Russian , romanization of Ukrainian , and romanization of Belarusian , respectively.

Females Belarusian variant Russian variant Ukrainian variant Latin-alphabet transliteration (Belarusian / Russian / Ukrainian) Origin Comments Настасся, Наста Анастасия Анастасія Nastassia, Nasta / Anastasiya / Anastasiia Greek from Greek Ἀναστασία ( Anastasia ) meaning "she of the Resurrection" Ангеліна Ангелина Ангеліна Anhelina / Angelina / Anhelina Greek From Greek Ἀγγελίνα (Angelina) meaning "messenger" Ганна Анна Ганна Hanna / Anna / Hanna Hebrew equivalent to Anne or Hannah Алена Елена, Алёна Oленa Alena / Yelena, Alyona / Olena Greek equivalent to Helen ; in Russian Alyona can be both a pet version of Yelena and a name in its own right Марыя Мария Марія Maryja / Mariya / Mariia Hebrew equivalent to Mary Наталля Наталья, Наталия Наталя, Наталія Natallia / Natalya / Nataliia Latin equivalent to Natalie Вольга Ольга Ольга Volha / Olga / Olha Old Norse derivative from Scandinavian Helga Аляксандра Александра Олександра Alaksandra / Aleksandra / Oleksandra Greek equivalent to Alexandra Ксенія, Аксана Ксения Оксана Ksienija, Aksana / Kseniya / Oksana Greek in Russian, Oksana is a separate name of the same origin Кацярына Екатерина Катерина Kaciaryna / Yekaterina / Kateryna Greek equivalent to Catherine Лізавета Елизавета Єлизавета Lizaveta / Yelizaveta / Ielyzaveta Hebrew equivalent to Elizabeth Тацяна, Таццяна Татьяна Тетяна Tacciana / Tatyana / Tetiana Latin derivative from the Latinized name of the Sabine king Titus Tatius Людміла Людмила Людмила Ludmila / Lyudmila / Liudmyla Slavonic meaning "Dear to the People" Святлана Светлана Світлана Sviatłana / Svetlana / Svitlana Slavonic meaning "The Shining One" Юлія Юлия Юлія Julija / Yuliya / Yuliia Latin equivalent to Julia or Julie Вера Вера Віра Vera / Vera / Vira Slavonic meaning "Faith"; a calque of the Greek Πίστη Надзея Надежда Надія Nadzeja / Nadezhda / Nadiia Slavonic meaning "Hope"; a calque of the Greek Ἐλπίς Любоў Любовь Любов Luboŭ / Lyubov / Liubоv Slavonic meaning "Love"; a calque of the Greek Ἀγάπη Соф'я София, Софья Софія Sofja / Sofiya, Sofya / Sofiia Greek equivalent to Sophia, meaning "Wisdom" Forms Being highly synthetic languages , the East Slavic ones treat personal names as grammatical nouns and apply the same rules of inflection and derivation to them as for other nouns. So one can create many forms with different degrees of affection and familiarity by adding the corresponding suffixes to the auxiliary stem derived from the original name. The auxiliary stem may be identical to the word stem of the full name (the full name Жанна Zhanna can have the suffixes added directly to the stem Жанн- Zhann- like Жанн очка Zhann ochka ), and most names have the auxiliary stem derived unproductively (the Russian name Михаил Mikhail has the auxiliary stem Миш- Mish- , which produces such name-forms as Миш а Mish a , Миш енька Mish enka , Миш уня Mish unya etc., not * Михаил ушка Mikhail ushka ).

Unlike English, in which the use of diminutive forms is optional even between close friends, in East Slavonic languages, such forms are obligatory in certain contexts because of the strong T–V distinction : the T-form of address usually requires the short form of the counterpart's name. Also, unlike other languages with prominent use of name suffixes, such as Japanese, the use of derived name forms is mostly limited to the T-addressing: there is no way to make the name more formal than the plain unsuffixed full form, and usually no suffixes can be added to the family name.

Most commonly, Russian philologists distinguish the following forms of given names: Name form Example Formation Comments Full Анна (Anna) full name stem + case ending - Short Ан я (An ya ) short name stem + II declension ending most common for informal communication, comparable to Western name-only form of address (Ann, John) , or Japanese surname-only, or surname/name -kun Diminutive Ань к а (An k a) short name stem + -к- -k- + II declension ending expresses familiarity, may be considered rude when used between people who are not close friends. Comparable to English diminutives (Annie, Willy) or Japanese unsuffixed names Affective diminutive Ан ечк а (An yechk a) short name stem + -ечк/очк/оньк/усь/юсь/уль/юль- -echk/ochk/on'k/us/yus/ul/yul- + II declension ending most intimate and affectionate form, comparable to German diminutives (Ännchen) or Japanese -chan suffixes Short forms Marina Tsvetaeva , a Russian poet. The name "Marina" traditionally has no short form.

Руслан (Ruslan), a character in Alexander Pushkin 's poem Ruslan and Ludmila . The short form for Руслан (Ruslan) is Руся (Rusya).

Николай II ( Nicholas II ), the last Russian emperor. In private, his wife addressed him as Nicki, in the German manner, rather than Коля (Kolya), which is the East Slavic short form of his name.

The "short name" (Russian: краткое имя kratkoye imya ), historically also "half-name" (Russian: полуимя poluimya ), is the simplest and most common name derivative. Bearing no suffix, it is produced suppletively and always has the declension noun ending for both males and females, thus making short forms of certain unisex names indistinguishable: for example, Sasha (Russian: Саша) is the short name for both the masculine name Aleksandr (Alexander) and the feminine form Aleksandra (Alexandra).

Some names, such as Zhanna (Jeana) and Mark, have no short forms; others may have two (or more) different forms. In the latter case, one form is usually more informal than the other.

Full name (Cyrillic script) Full name (Latin script) Short forms (Cyrillic) Short forms (Latin) Александр Aleksandr (m) Саша, Саня, Шура, ukr. Сашко, Лесь Sasha, Sanya, Shura, ukr. Sashko, Les Александра Aleksandra (f) Саша, Шура, ukr. Леся Sasha, Shura, ukr. Lesia Алексей Aleksey (m) Алёша, Лёша Alyosha, Lyosha Анастасия Anastasia (f) Настя, Стася Nastya, Stasya (rare) Анатолий Anatoly (m) Толя Tolya Андрей Andrey (m) Андрюша, Дюша, Андря Andryusha, Dyusha, Andrya (rare) Анна Anna (f) Аня, Анюта, Нюта, Нюша Anya, Anyuta, Nyuta, Nyusha Борис Boris (m) Боря Borya Давид David (m) Дава Dava Даниил Daniil (m) Данила, Даня Danila, Danya Дарья Darya (f) Даша Dasha Дмитрий Dmitry (m) Дима, Митя Dima, Mitya Галина Galina (f) Галя Galya Геннадий Gennady (m) Гена Gena Георгий Georgy (m) Гоша, Жора Gosha, Zhora Григорий Grigory (m) Гриша Grisha Иван Ivan (m) Ваня Vanya Иммануил Immanuil (m) Моня Monya Ирина Irina (f) Ира Ira Кирилл Kirill (m) Кира, Киря Kira, Kirya Константин Konstantin (m) Костя Kostya Ксения Ksenya (f) Ксюша Ksyusha Лариса Larisa (f) Лара, Лёля Lara, Lyolya (rare) Леонид Leonid (m) Лёня Lyonya Лев Lev (m) Лёва Lyova Лидия Lidiya (f) Лида Lida Любовь Lyubov' (f) Люба Lyuba Людмила Lyudmila (f) Люда, Люся, Мила Lyuda, Lyusya, Meela (rare) Мария Mariya (f) Маша, Маня, Маруся, Машуля, Машенька, Марийка, Маняша, Марічка Masha, Manya, Marusya, Mashulya, Mashеnka, Mariyka, Manyasha (rare), Marichka (ukr.) Матвей Matvey (m) Мотя Motya Михаил Mihail (m) Миша Misha Надежда Nadezhda (f) Надя Nadya Наталья Natalya (f) Наташа Natasha Николай Nikolay (m) Коля Kolya Ольга Olga (f) Оля Olya Павел Pavel (m) Паша, Павлик Pasha, Pavlik Полина Polina (f) Поля, Лина Polya, Lina (rare) Пётр Pyotr (m) Петя Petya Роман Roman (m) Рома Roma Семён Semyon (m) Сёма Syoma Сергей Sergey (m) Серёжа Seryozha София Sofia, Sofya (f) Соня, Софа Sonya, Sofa Светлана Svetlana (f) Света, Лана Sveta, Lana Станислав Stanislav (m) Стас Stas, Stanko Тамара Tamara (f) Тома Toma Татьяна Tatyana (f) Таня Tanya Вадим Vadim (m) Вадик, Дима Vadik, Dima (rare) Валентин / Валентина Valentin (m) / Valentina (f) Валя Valya Валерий Valery (m) Валера Valera Валерия Valeriya (f) Лера Lera Василий Vasily (m) Вася Vasya Виктор Viktor (m) Витя Vitya Виктория Viktoriya (f) Вика Vika Виталия Vitaliya (f) Вита Vita Владимир Vladimir (m) Вова, Володя Vova, Volodya Владислав, Владислава Vladislav (m), Vladislava (f) Влад, Влада Vlad, Vlada Вячеслав Vyacheslav (m) Слава Slava Ярослав Yaroslav (m) Ярик Yarik Елена Yelena (f) Лена, Алёна Lena, Alyona Елизавета Yelizaveta (f) Лиза Liza Екатерина Yekaterina (f) Катя Katya Евгений / Евгения Yevgeniy (m) / Yevgeniya (f) Женя Zhenya Юлия Yuliya (f) Юля Yulya Юрий Yury (m) Юра Yura Яков Yakov (m) Яша Yasha Diminutive forms Veruschka , a German model, actress and artist. "Veruschka" is the German spelling the hypocoristic Верушка of her given name Vera .

Diminutive forms are produced from the "short name" by means of various suffixes; for example, Михаил Mikhail (full) – Миша Misha (short) – Мишенька Mishenka (affectionate) – Мишка Mishka (colloquial). If no "short name" exists, then diminutive forms are produced from the full form of the respective first name; for example, Марина Marina (full) – Мариночка Marinochka (affectionate) – Маринка Marinka (colloquial). Unlike the full name, a diminutive name carries a particular emotional attitude and may be unacceptable in certain contexts. Depending on the nature of the attitude, diminutive name forms can be subdivided into three broad groups: affectionate, familiar, and slang.

Affectionate diminutive Typically formed by suffixes - еньк - (-yenk-), - оньк - (-onk-), - ечк - (-yechk-), - ушк (-ushk), as illustrated by the examples below. It generally emphasises a tender, affectionate attitude and is roughly analogous to German suffixes - chen , - lein , Japanese - chan and - tan and affectionate name-derived nicknames in other languages. It is often used to address children or intimate friends.

Within a more official context, this form may be combined with the honorific plural to address a younger female colleague.

[ citation needed ] Full form Short form Diminutive form (Cyrillic/Latin) Анна/Anna Аня/Anya Ан'ечк'а/Any'echk'a Виктор/Viktor Витя/Vitya Витенька/Vitenʲka Дмитрий/Dmitry Дима/Dima Димочка/Dimochka Ольга/Olga Оля/Olya Оленька/Olyenka Степан/Stepan Стёпа/Styopa Стёпочка/Styopochka Colloquial diminutives Colloquial diminutives are derived from short names by the - к - ("-k-") suffix. Expressing a highly familiar attitude, the use may be considered rude or even pejorative outside a friendly context.

Full form Short form Colloquial diminutive form (Cyrillic) (Latin) (Cyrillic) (Latin) (Cyrillic) (Latin) Анна Anna Аня Anya Ань'ка' Anʲ'ka' Виктор Viktor Витя Vitya Витька Vitʲka Дмитрий Dmitry Дима Dima Димка Dimka Ольга Olga Оля Olya Олька Olʲka Степан Stepan Стёпа Styopa Стёпка Styopka Slang forms Колян (Kolyan), a character in the sitcom Реальные пацаны ( Realnye Patsany [ ru ] , Real Lads ). Kolyan shows viewers the ridiculous side of the life of gopniks , a subculture similar to British chavs .

Slang forms exist for male names and, since a few decades ago, female names. They are formed with the suffixes - ян (-yan), - он (-on), and - ок/ёк (-ok/yok). The suffixes give the sense of "male brotherhood" that was once expressed by the patronymic-only form of address in the Soviet Union.

Full form Short form Slang form (Cyrillic) (Latin) (Cyrillic) (Latin) (Cyrillic) (Latin) Анатолий Anatoly Толя Tolya Толян Tolyan Николай Nikolay Коля Kolya Колян Kolyan Дмитрий Dmitry Дима Dima Димон Dimon Владимир Vladimir Вова Vova Вован Vovan Александр Alexander Саня Sanya Санёк Sanyok Татьяна Tatiana Таня Tanya Танюха Tanyukha Андрей Andrey Андрюша Andryusha Андрюха Andryukha Early Soviet Union Main article: Names of Soviet origin Vilen "Willi" Tokarev was " octobered " with the name Vilen after V.I. Lenin [ 1 ] During the days of the October Revolution , as part of the campaign to rid Russia of bourgeois culture, there was a drive to invent new, revolutionary names. As a result, many Soviet children were given atypical names, often being acronyms / initialisms .

Name (Cyrillic) Name (Latin) Origin Comments Вил, Вилен, Владлен, Владлена Vil, Vilen , Vladilen Vladlen (m) / Vladlena (f) В ладимир И льич Л енин ( V ladimir I lyich L enin ) Мэл(c) Mel/ Mels М аркс, Э нгельс, Л енин (и С талин) ( M arx , E ngels , L enin (and S talin )) Баррикада Barrikada - " Barricade " - refers to the revolutionary activity Ревмир, Ревмира Revmir (m) / Revmira (f) Рев олюция мир а ( Rev olyutsiya mira ) Means "The World Revolution " Гертруда Gertruda Gertrude reinterpreted as Гер ой труда ( Ger oy truda ) Means "The Hero of Labour " Марлен Marlen Marlene reinterpreted as Мар кс и Лен ин ( Mar x and Len in ) Стэн Sten Stan reinterpreted as Ст алин и Эн гельс ( St alin and En gels ) Ким Kim Kim reinterpreted as К оммунистический и нтернационал м олодёжи ( K ommunistichesky I nternatsional M olodyozhi) Means " Young Communist International " Patronymics The patronymic name is based on the given name of the father and is written in all legal and identity documents. If used with the given name, the patronymic always follows it; but it is not analogous to an English middle name .

Usage The patronymic name is obligatory when addressing a person of higher social stance and/or on special occasions such as business meetings; for example, when a pupil addresses a teacher, they are obliged to use both first and patronymic names – Russian : Марья Ивановна, могу я спросить...

, lit.

'Marya Ivanovna, may I ask...'. Not using patronymic names in such situations is considered offensive.

[ 2 ] Addressing a person by patronymic name only is widespread among older generations and serves as a display of close relationship based on not only sympathy but also mutual responsibility.

[ 3 ] In speech patronymics are commonly truncated and it is not considered to be a colloquialism, e.g., written "Ivan Ivanovich" may be pronounced "as is", as well as "Ivan Ivanych".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In the past of East Slavs , before the introduction of surnames, noble, wealthy, or otherwise respected people were addressed by name plus patronymic, see, e.g., " Yaroslavich "/" Yaroslavna ". From this custom a number of surnames of West Ruthenian origin was produced, such as Antonovich or Prokopovich , which in their turn derived Polish surnames , such as Antonowicz or Prokopowicz (the Ruthenian origin is recognized by the suffix -wicz : the corresponding native (now archaic) Polish suffix was '-wic': Szymonowic , Klonowic ).

[ 6 ] For commoners, when the distinction among people with the same given name was required, a qualifier "son of..." was usually added: " Ивашка, Антонов сын " ("Ivashka, Antonov syn", i.e., 'Ivashka, son of Anton'). From the latter tradition Russian patronymic surnames ending in "-ov/-ev/yov" originated, in this case, Antonov ".

Derivation Name Masculine patronym Feminine patronym Anatoly Anatolyevich Anatolyevna Constantin Constantinovich Constantinovna Dmitry Dmitriyevich Dmitriyevna Ilya Ilyich Ilyinichna Ivan Ivanovich Ivanovna Nikolay Nikolayevich Nikolayevna Vladimir Vladimirovich Vladimirovna Yakov Yakovlevich Yakovlevna The patronymic is formed by a combination of the father's name and suffixes. The suffix is - ович (-ovich) for a son, - овна (-ovna) – for a daughter. For example, if the father's name was Иван (Ivan), the patronymic will be Иванович (Ivanovich) for a son and Ивановна (Ivanovna) for a daughter.

If the suffix is being appended to a name ending in a й ("y") or a soft consonant , the initial o in the suffixes - ович (-ovich) and - овна (-ovna) becomes a е ("ye") and the suffixes change to - евич (-yevich) and - евна (-yevna) . For example, if the father is Дмитрий (Dmitry), the patronymic is Дмитриевич (Dmitrievich) for a son and Дмитриевна (Dmitrievna) for a daughter. It is not Дмитрович (Dmitrovich) or Дмитровна (Dmitrovna) because the name Дмитрий (Dmitry) ends on "й" ("y"); For some names ending in a vowel , the suffix is - ич (-ich) for a son and - ична (-ichna) or - инична (-inichna) for a daughter; for example, Фока Foka (father's first name) – Фокич Fokich (male patronymic) – Фокична Fokichna (female patronymic); Кузьма Kuzma (father's first name) – Кузьмич Kuzmich (male patronymic) – Кузьминична Kuzminichna (female patronymic).

Historical grounds The name Rurik on a Viking Age runestone. All the princes of Kievan Rus had the patronymic Ruerikovichi .

Historical Russian naming conventions did not include surnames. A person's name included that of their father: e.g.

Иван Петров сын (Ivan Petrov syn) which means "Ivan, son of Peter". That is the origin of most Russian -ov surnames.

Modern -ovich- patronyms were originally a feature of the royal dynasty (Рюрико вич и, Rueriko vich i, Rurikids , which makes the East Slavic patronym in its original meaning being similar to German von . From the 17th century, the second name with suffix - ович (- ovich ) was the privilege given by the tsar to commoners. For example, in 1610, Tsar Vasili IV gave to the Stroganovs , who were merchants, the privilege to use patronyms. As a tribute for developing the salt industry in Siberia, Pyotr Stroganov and all his issues were allowed to have a name with - ovich . The tsar wrote in the chart dated on 29 May, "...

to write him with ovich , to try [him] in Moscow only, not to fee [him] by other fees, not to kiss a cross by himself [which means not to swear during any processions]" [ 7 ] In the 18th century, it was the family of merchants to have patronyms. By the 19th century, the -ovich form eventually became the default form of a patronymic.

Legal basis Everyone in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus is supposed to have a tripartite name. Single mothers may give their children any patronym, and this does not have any legal consequences. Foreigners who adopt Russian citizenship are exempted from having a patronym. Now, an adult person is entitled to change patronyms if necessary, [ 8 ] such as to alienate themselves from the biological father (or to show respect for the adopted one) as well as to decide the same for an underage child.

Matronymic In modern Russia, there are cases when women raising a child without a father give the child their own name instead of a patronymic. This practice is not recognized by law, but the civil registry offices may meet such wishes. A common loophole is when mother's name is a feminine form of a masculine given name, even an obscure one.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Family names Family names are generally used like in English.

Derivation and meaning This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Russian, some common suffixes are - ов (-ov), - ев (-yev), meaning "belonging to" or "of the clan of/descendant of", e.g. Petrov = of the clan of/descendant of Petr (Peter), usually used for patronymic surnames —or - ский (-sky), an adjectival form, meaning "associated with" and usually used for toponymic surnames . Historically, toponymic surnames may have been granted as a token of nobility; for example, the princely surname Shuysky is indicative of the princedom based on the ownership of Shuya . Prince Grigory Aleksandrovich Potemkin -Tavricheski had the victory title 'Tavricheski', as part of his surname, granted to him for the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire .

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, -off was a common transliteration of -ov for Russian family names in foreign languages such as French and German (like for the Smirnoff and the Davidoff brands).

Surnames of Ukrainian and Belarusian origin use the suffixes -ко (-ko), -ук (-uk), and -ич (-ych). For example, the family name Писаренко ( Pisarenko ) is derived from the word for a scribe, and Ковальчук ( Kovalchuk ) refers to a smith.

Less often, some versions of family names will have no suffix, e.g. Lebed, meaning swan, and Zhuk, meaning beetle (but see also Lebedev and Zhukov).

Hyphenated surnames like Petrov-Vodkin are possible.

Grammar The Coat of Arms of the Романовы ( Romanovs ), the last Russian royal dynasty. The family name Романов (Romanov) means "pertaining to (the name) Roman".

East Slavic languages are synthetic languages and have grammatical cases and grammatical gender . Unlike analytic languages like English, which use prepositions ("to", "at", "on" etc.) to show the links and relations between words in a sentence, East Slavic suffixes are used much more broadly than prepositions. Words need the help of some suffix to integrate them into the sentence and to build a grammatically correct sentence. That includes names, unlike in German. Family names are declined based on the Slavic case system.

The surnames that originally are short ( -ov , -ev , -in ) or full ( -iy/-oy/-yy ) Slavic adjectives, have different forms depending on gender: male forms -ov , -ev , -in and -iy/-oy/-yy correspond to female forms -ova , -eva , -ina and -aya , respectively. For example, the wife of Борис Ельцин (Boris Yel'tsin) was Наина Ельцин а (Naina Yel'tsin a ); the wife of Leo Tolst oy was Sophia Tolst aya , etc. All other, i.e. non-adjectival, surnames stay the same for both genders (including surnames ending with - енко ( -yenko ), - ич ( -ich ) etc.), unlike in many West Slavic languages , where the non-adjectival surname of men corresponds to derivative feminine adjectival surname (Novák → Nováková). Note the difference between patronymics and surnames ending with -ich : surnames are the same for males and females, but patronymics are gender-dependent (for example, Ivan Petrov ich Mirov ich and Anna Petr ovna Mirov ich ) This dependence of grammatical gender of adjectival surname on the gender of its owner is not considered to be changing the surname (compare the equivalent rule in Polish , for example). The correct transliteration of such feminine surnames in English is debated: the names technically should be in their original form, but they sometimes appear in the masculine form.

The example of Иванов (Ivanov), a family name, will be used: Grammatical case Example of question Masculine form Feminine form Cyrillic Latin Cyrillic Latin Nominative Who?

Иванов Ivanov Иванова Ivanova Genitive Whose?

Ивано ва Ivano va Ивано вой Ivano voy Dative To whom?

Ивано ву Ivano vu Ивано вой Ivano voy Accusative Whom?

Ивано ва Ivano va Ивано ву Ivano vu Instrumental By whom?

Ивано вым Ivano vym Ивано вой Ivano voy Locative (Prepositional) About whom?

Ивано ве Ivano ve Ивано вой Ivano voy The surnames which are not grammatically adjectives ( Zhuk , Gogol , Barchuk , Kupala etc.) declines in cases and numbers as the corresponding common noun. The exclusion is when a woman has a surname which is grammatically a noun of masculine gender; in such case, the surname is not declined. For example, Ivan and Anna Zhuk in dative case ("to whom?") would be: Иван у Жук у ( Ivan u Zhuk u ), but Анн е Жук ( Ann e Zhuk ).

Family names are generally inherited from one's parents. As in English, on marriage, women usually adopt the surname of the husband; the opposite, when the husband adopt the maiden surname of his wife, very rarely occurs. Rarely, both spouses keep their pre-marriage family names. The fourth, very rare but still legal way is the taking a double surname; for example, in marriage of Ivanov (he) and Petrovskaya (she), the spouses may adopt the family name Ivanov-Petrovsky and Ivanova-Petrovskaya, correspondingly.

Slavicisation of foreign names Slavicisation of foreign surnames See also: Azerbaijanization of surnames Some surnames in those languages have been russified since the 19th century: the surname of Kazakh former president Nursultan Nazarbayev has a Russian "-yev" suffix , which literally means "of Nazar-bay" (in which "bay" is a Turkic native noble rank : compare Turkish " bey ", Uzbek "boy" "bek", and Kyrghyz "bek"). The frequency of such russification varies greatly by country.

After incorporation of Azerbaijan into the Soviet Union , it became obligatory to register their surnames and to add a Russian suffix such as -yev or -ov for men and -yeva or -ova for women.

[ 11 ] Since the majority did not have official surnames, the problem was resolved by adopting the name of the father and adding the mentioned suffixes. Examples are Aliyev , Huseynov , and Mammadov .

Since 1930s and 1940s, surnames and patronymics were obligatory in Uzbekistan .

[ 12 ] The surname could be derived from the name of the father by adding the suffixes -ev after  vowels or soft consonants and -ov in all other cases. Examples are Rashidov , Beknazarov and Abdullaev . Most of the people born in this time had the same surname as their patronymic.

Slavicisation of foreign patronymics By law, foreign persons who adopt Russian citizenship are allowed to have no patronymic.

[ 13 ] Some adopt non-Slavonic patronymics as well. For example, the Russian politician Irina Hakamada 's patronym is Муцуовна (Mutsuovna) because her Japanese father's given name was Mutsuo. The ethnicity of origin generally remains recognizable in Russified names. Other examples are Kazakh ұлы ( uly ; transcribed into Latin script as -uly , as in Nursultan Abish uly Nazarbayev ), or Azeri оглы/оғлу ( oglu ) (as in Heydar Alirza oglu Aliyev ); Kazakh қызы (transcribed into Latin script as - qyzy , as in Dariga Nursultan qyzy Nazarbayeva ).

[ citation needed ] Such Turkic patronymics were officially allowed in the Soviet Union.

[ citation needed ] Bruno Pontecorvo , after he emigrated to the Soviet Union, was known as Бруно Максимович Понтекорво (Bruno Maximovich Pontekorvo) in the Russian scientific community, as his father's given name was Massimo (corresponding to Russian Максим (Maksim)). His sons have been known by names Джиль Брунович Понтекорво (Gigl Brunovich Pontecorvo), Антонио Брунович Понтекорво (Antonio Brunovich Pontecorvo) and Тито Брунович Понтекорво (Tito Brunovich Pontekorvo).

Forms of address Common rules For informal communication, only the first name is used: Иван Ivan. Even more informally, diminutives (several can be formed from one name) are often used.

In rural areas, the patronymic name alone ( Петрович Petrovich, Ивановна Ivanovna) is used by old people among themselves, but young people sometimes use the form for irony. Also, younger people can use the form for much older people for both respect and informality. For example, a much younger man with a very good relationship with his elder colleague may use a patronymic and the "ty" form, but using the first name alone is generally inappropriate. Using a diminutive (like in most informal communication) would nearly always be very impolite.

The family name alone ( Петров , Petrov) is used, much more rarely, in formal communications. It is commonly used by school teachers to address their students. Informally, Russians are starting to call people by their surnames alone for irony.

the form "first name + patronymic" (for instance, Иван Иванович , Ivan Ivanovich): is the feature of official communication (for instance, students in schools and universities call their teachers in the form of "first name + patronymic" only); may convey the speaker's respect for the recipient. Historically, patronymics were reserved for the royal dynasty (Рюрико вич и, Rueriko vich i ) The full three-name form (for instance, Иван Иванович Петров Ivan Ivanovich Petrov) is used mostly for official documents. With some exceptions, everyone in Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus is supposed to have a three-part name. This form is also used on formal occasions and for introducing oneself to a person who is likely to write down the full name, like a police officer. The family name is placed first ( Петров Иван Иванович , Petrov Ivan Ivanovich) in various documents, when sorting by personal name is important.

Historically, diminutives of the given names  were used in reference to commoners, to indicate an their low status: Stenka Razin , Grishka Rasputin , etc. A diminutive could be used by persons of a higher class when referring to themselves to indicate humility, e.g., when addressing to the tsar .

The choice of addressing format is closely linked to the choice of second-person pronoun . Russian language distinguishes: formal вы (vy, "you"); respectful Вы ("Vy", "You") may be capitalized in formal correspondence, but plural вы ("vy", "you") is not.

informal ты (ty, "you", "thou" in old English); Вы ("Vy") is the plural of both forms to address a pair or group. Historically, it comes from German, under Peter the Great , which uses du and Sie similarly.

[ citation needed ] Other than the use of patronymics, Russian forms of address in Russian are very similar to English ones.

Also, the meaning of the form of address strongly depends on the choice of a V-T form: Vy or ty Form Male example Female example Use Using "Vy" Full three-name form Anatoliy Pavlovich Ivanov Varvara Mikhailovna Kuznetsova Official documents, very formal occasions (when necessary) First name + patronymic Anatoliy Pavlovich Varvara Mikhailovna General formal or respectful form Surname Ivanov Kuznetsova Formal. Often used by a person of a higher social position (like a teacher talking to a student) Informal first name + informal patronymic Tol' Palych Varvara Mikhalna Respectful but less formal Full first name Anatoliy Varvara Diminutive first name Tolya Varya Friendly but still somewhat formal Affectionate first name Varechka Used almost exclusively towards women, showing fondness but still keeping some formality (like to a younger colleague) Using "Ty" First name + patronymic Anatoliy Pavlovich Varvara Mikhailovna Can be used between friends on semi-formal occasions or ironically Informal patronymic Palych Mikhalna Combining familiarity and respect Surname Ivanov Kuznetsova Similar in use to a "vy" form but less formal Full first name Anatoliy Varvara Friendly but with a tone of formality. If the name has no diminutive form (Yegor), also used informally Diminutive first name Tolia Varya General informal form Colloquial first name Tolik Var'ka Very familiar form Slang first name Tolyan Varyukha Affectionate first name Tolen'ka Varechka Tender, affectionate form Using a "ty" form with a person who dislikes it or on inappropriate occasions can be an insult, especially the surname alone.

Adjectives Other East Slavic languages use the same adjectives of their literal translation if they differ from Russian analogue. All East Slavic languages are synthetic languages, and grammatical genders are used. Thus, the suffix of an adjective changes with the sex of the recipient.

In Russian, adjectives before names are generally restricted to written forms of communication. Adjectives like Любимый / Любимая (lyubimiy / lyubimaya, "beloved") and Милый / Милая (miliy / milaya, "sweetheart") are informal, and Уважаемый / Уважаемая (uvazhayemiy / uvazhayemaya, literally "respected") is highly formal. Some adjectives, like Дорогой / Дорогая (dorogoy / dorogaya, "dear"), can be used in both formal and informal letters.

See also Religious name Romanization of Russian Russian given name Russian surnames of illegitimate children Slavic names Slavic name suffixes Surnames of Russian Orthodox clergy Ukrainian name References ^ Aleksandr Kazakevich (2 September 2009).

"Вилли ТОКАРЕВ: "Когда тебя подгоняют, надо говорить "О'кей", и делать по-своему…" " . Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 30 November 2014 .

^ "Как обращаться к человеку в русскоязычной среде" [How to address a person in Russian-speaking community] (in Russian) . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Система обращений и речевой этикет" [System of addressing and speech etiquette] (in Russian). "СЕКРЕТАРСКОЕ ДЕЛО" № 02/2016 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ Irina Veščikova, "On one Particular Orhtoepic Subsystem: the Descriptive and the Normative Aspects" , Žmogus ir žodis , 2012, vol. 14, issue 3, pp. 43-47 ^ Ruben Avanesov [ ru ] Русское литературное произношение ^ Mikołaj Gliński, A Foreigner’s Guide to Polish Surnames , culture.pl , December 2015 ^ писать его с вичем, судить только в Москве, излишних пошлин с товаров не брать, креста самому не целовать (in Russian). Собр. Гос. Грам. II, № 196.

^ Federal Law of the Russian Federation on Acts of Civil Statements, Clauses: 58, 59 .

^ " "Марьевна — и точка!" Почему женщины меняют отчество на матроним" .

РИА Новости (in Russian). 13 January 2020 . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

^ "Как оформить матчество в России" .

Горящая Изба (in Russian) . Retrieved 5 March 2024 .

^ Hirose, Yoko (2016).

"The Complexity of Nationalism in Azerbaijan" .

International Journal of Social Science Studies .

4 (5): 136.

doi : 10.11114/ijsss.v4i5.1531 .

^ Komiljonovna, Koziyeva Iqbal (26 July 2022).

"Changes in the system of anthroponyms in the Uzbek language at the end of the 20th century - the beginning of the 21st century" .

Zien Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities .

10 : 65– 67.

ISSN 2769-996X .

^ Family Code of the Russian Federation, Article 58.2 " A child's patronym is formed from the father's [first] name unless otherwise [decreed by] national custom " .

External links In Russian "Лицо русской национальности" .

kommersant.ru (in Russian). 26 September 2005 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

Commentaries "Генофонд :: Занимательная журналистика" . 31 December 2010. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

"Генофонд :: Занимательная журналистика" . 31 December 2010. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

"Генофонд :: Занимательная журналистика" . 13 March 2012. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

Балановская Е. В., Соловьева Д. С., Балановский О. П. и др. «Фамильные портреты» пяти русских регионов [ permanent dead link ] / Медицинская генетика. 2005.No. 1. С. 2–10.

"Известия Науки – ФАМИЛИИ В РОЛИ ГЕНЕТИЧЕСКИХ МАРКЕРОВ" . 10 June 2011. Archived from the original on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

"Производные и уменьшительно-ласкательные формы имён" .

proizvodnye.ru . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

Таблицы и рисунки к статье «Фамильные портреты» пяти русских регионов [ permanent dead link ] Albert Bayburin [ ru ] , Последовательность элементов языковой формулы в русской традиции - an opinion on the differences in the use of formats "Name Patronymic Surname" (ИОФ) vs. "Surname, Name Patronymic" (ФИО) in Russian.

In English "Paul Goldschmidt's Dictionary of Russian Names – Grammar" .

heraldry.sca.org . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

v t e Personal names and anthroponymy Personal name Birth name Given name Surname patrilineal matrilineal affixes nobiliary particle By sequence Given name list Middle name Surname list By trait Diminutive Double-barrelled Epithet animal common plant Eponymic Matronymic Metonymic Mononymic Occupational Patronymic surname Sobriquet Teknonymic Toponymic surname Patrial Unisex Virtue By life situation Aptronym Birth name Code name Maiden and married names Necronym Posthumous name Temple name Placeholder name Notname Regnal name Slave name Pseudonyms ( list ) Art name bugō Nicknames list hypocorism list of monarchs nom de guerre Pen name heteronym Ring name shikona Stage name list list of mononyms Username By culture ( surnames ) East Asia Chinese art courtesy generation titles Hong Kong Formosan Japanese Korean Okinawan Vietnamese Northern Asia and Central Asia Kalmyk Manchu Mongolian Sakha Tibetan North Africa and Western Asia Afghan Arabic Azerbaijani Berber Coptic Hebrew Mandaean Pashtun Persian Somali Tatar Turkish Oceania Australian Aboriginal Fijian Hawaiian Māori Vanuatuan Sub-Saharan Africa Ashanti Congolese Eritrean and Ethiopian Ewe Ghanaian Igbo Yoruba Zimbabwean Europe, Americas, and Australasia Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Celtic Cornish Irish Manx Scottish Welsh Germanic Dutch English American African-American Canadian German Gothic Icelandic Scandinavian Swedish Romance Catalan French Italian Occitan Portuguese Roman praenomen nomen cognomen agnomen Romanian Spanish Latin America Slavic Bulgarian Croatian Czech East Slavic Belarusian Russian Ukrainian Kashubian Macedonian Polish Serbian Slovak Suffixes Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Other Albanian Armenian Basque Georgian Greek ancient Cypriot South and Southeast Asia Balinese Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Filipino Indonesian Chinese Javanese Cambodian Malaysian Mizo (Lushai) Indian Lao Pakistani Sindhi Sinhalese Tamilian Thai By religion Christian biblical papal saint Buddhist surname Dharma Jewish Hebrew surname Mandaean Theophoric Manners of address ( list ) Of authority and of honour Styles Honorific diplomatic imperial, royal, and noble judiciary religious ecclesiastical Pre-nominal letters Suffix emeritus Post-nominal letters academic orders , decorations , and medals Titles Academic Imperial, royal and noble chivalric courtesy false hereditary subsidiary substantive Military professional Academic educational honorary Corporate Diplomatic Judicial Religious ecclesiastical papal Related traditions Baptism Name day Calendar of saints Related Acronym Anonymity Anthropomorphism personification national Call sign Deadnaming Endonym and exonym Family Galton–Watson process Legal name name change Namesake Naming taboo Nomenclature nomen nescio Misnomer Onomastics -onym Personal identity identifier Proper noun Signature monogram royal cypher khelrtva signum manus tughra Surnames by country NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wlb6d
Cached time: 20250814215547
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.588 seconds
Real time usage: 0.730 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3720/1000000
Revision size: 54322/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 120142/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12958/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71941/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.334/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19021952/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.734      1 -total
 21.91%  120.870      2 Template:Reflist
 15.84%   87.414     10 Template:Langx
 12.11%   66.788      1 Template:Names_in_world_cultures
 11.13%   61.389      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.03%   60.881      1 Template:Cite_news
  9.22%   50.847      1 Template:Short_description
  7.92%   43.717     11 Template:Cite_web
  7.59%   41.880      3 Template:Ambox
  6.60%   36.416      1 Template:More_footnotes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:646423:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215547 and revision id 1300120831. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=East_Slavic_name&oldid=1300120831 " Categories : Russian-language surnames Slavic-language names Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Wikipedia semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup and no ISO hint Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from January 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents East Slavic name 6 languages Add topic

