Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Ice ages 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Marine regression 26 languages Адыгэбзэ Български Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geologic event in which sea level falls relative to the land Cross-sectional diagrams illustrating the shift of sedimentary facies during transgression ( onlap ) and regression ( offlap ) A marine regression is a geological process occurring when areas of submerged seafloor are exposed during a drop in sea level. The opposite event, marine transgression , occurs when flooding from the sea covers previously-exposed land.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] According to one hypothesis, regressions may be linked to a "slowdown in sea-floor spreading, leading to a generalized drop in sea level (as the mid-ocean ridges would take up less space)...." [ 2 ] That view considers major marine regressions to be one aspect of a normal variation in rates of plate tectonic activity, which leads to major episodes of global volcanism like the Siberian Traps and the Deccan Traps , which in turn cause large extinction events .

Evidence of marine regressions and transgressions occurs throughout the fossil record, and the fluctuations are thought to have caused or contributed to several mass extinctions , such as the Permian–Triassic extinction event (250 million years ago, Ma) and Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event (66 Ma ). During the Permian-Triassic extinction, the largest extinction event in the Earth's history, the global sea level fell 250 m (820 ft).

[ 3 ] A major regression could cause marine organisms in shallow seas to go extinct, but mass extinctions tend to involve both terrestrial and aquatic species, and it is harder to see how a marine regression could cause widespread extinctions of land animals. Regressions are, therefore, seen as correlates or symptoms of major extinctions, rather than primary causes. The Permian regression might have been related to the formation of Pangaea . The accumulation of all major landmasses into one body could have facilitated a regression by providing "a slight enlargement of the ocean basins as the great continents coalesced." [ 4 ] However, that cause could not have applied in all or even many of the other cases.

Ice ages [ edit ] During the ice ages of the Pleistocene , a clear correlation existed between marine regressions and episodes of glaciation . As the balance shifts between the global cryosphere and hydrosphere , more of the planet's water in ice sheets means less in the oceans. At the height of the last ice age , around 18,000 years ago, the global sea level was 120 to 130 m (390-425 ft) lower than today. A cold spell around 6 million years ago was linked to an advance in glaciation, a marine regression, and the start of the Messinian salinity crisis in the Mediterranean basin. Some major regressions of the past, however, seem unrelated to glaciation episodes, with the regression that accompanied the mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous being one example.

See also [ edit ] 8.2-kiloyear event – Rapid global cooling about 8,200 years ago Marine terrace – Emergent coastal landform References [ edit ] ^ Monroe, James Stewart, and Reed Wicander.

Physical Geology: Exploring the Earth.

Fifth edition; Thomson Brooks/Cole, 2005; p. 162.

^ Courtillot, p. 141.

^ Courtillot, Vincent .

Evolutionary Catastrophes: The Science of Mass Extinction.

Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999; p. 89.

^ Ward, Peter D.

Rivers in Time: The Search for Clues to Earth's Mass Extinctions.

New York, Columbia University Press, 2000; p. 77.

External links [ edit ] Marine Transgression and Marine Regression: World of Earth Science v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category v t e Geologic principles and processes Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Petrologic principles Intrusive Extrusive Volcanic Exfoliation Weathering Soil formation Diagenesis Compaction Metamorphism Geomorphologic processes Plate tectonics Salt tectonics Tectonic uplift Subsidence Marine transgression Marine regression Sediment transport Fluvial processes Aeolian processes Glacial processes Mass wasting processes Geology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marine_regression&oldid=1205020607 " Categories : Sedimentology Plate tectonics Extinction events Coastal geography Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 February 2024, at 17:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marine regression 26 languages Add topic

