Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theology and theosophy Toggle Theology and theosophy subsection 2.1 God 2.2 Cosmology 2.3 Three-fold revelation 2.4 Twelve-fold hierarchy 3 Fundamental rules and values 4 Worship rituals 5 Symbols Toggle Symbols subsection 5.1 The Divine Eye 5.2 The religious banner and emblem 6 Scriptures Toggle Scriptures subsection 6.1 The Canonical Codes 6.2 The Religious Constitution 7 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 7.1 The Executive Body (Cửu Trùng Đài) 7.2 Palace Uniting Heaven and Earth (Hiệp Thiên Đài) 8 Community structure 9 The Holy See 10 Branches 11 Notes 12 See also 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Caodaism 49 languages العربية বাংলা Banjar Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Kongo Ladino Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy مصرى Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vietnamese monotheistic syncretic religion Cao Đài's left eye, similar to the Eye of Providence .

Caodaism Holy See in Tây Ninh is the main religious building in Caodaism's Holy Land; other buildings with the same functions are called temples.

Caodaism [ a ] is a Vietnamese monotheistic syncretic religion that retains many elements from Vietnamese folk religion such as ancestor worship , [ citation needed ] as well as "ethical precepts from Confucianism , occult practices from Taoism , theories of karma and rebirth from Buddhism , and a hierarchical organization from Catholicism ".

[ 1 ] It was officially established in the city of Tây Ninh in Southern Vietnam in 1926.

The full name of the religion is Đại Đạo Tam Kỳ Phổ Độ ( chữ Hán : 大道三期普度 'The Great Faith [for the] Third Universal Redemption').

[ 2 ] Adherents engage in practices such as prayer, veneration of ancestors , nonviolence, and vegetarianism with the goal of union with God and freedom from saṃsāra .

[ 3 ] Estimates of the number of Caodaists in Vietnam vary; government figures estimate 4.4 million Caodaists affiliated to the Cao Đài Tây Ninh Holy See , with numbers rising up to 6 million if other branches are added.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The United Nations found about 2.5 million Caodaists in Vietnam as of January 2015.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] An additional number of adherents in the tens of thousands, primarily ethnic Vietnamese, live in North America, Cambodia, Europe and Australia as part of the Cao Dai diaspora .

Caodaist temple in Dallas, Texas, serving a large local Vietnamese community.

History [ edit ] Officially called the "Great Way of the Third Time of Redemption" ( Đại Đạo Tam Kỳ Phổ Độ ), it became popular in the first few decades after its 1925 beginning, gathering over a million members and converting a fifth to a fourth of the population of Cochinchina by 1940.

[ 7 ] Ngô Văn Chiêu, who had never intended Cao Đài to become a mass organization, left the movement and eventually established in 1932 an independent, esoteric branch known as Chiếu Minh, headquartered in Vĩnh Long , which still exists and only admits a limited number of committed adepts.

[ 11 ] In the 1930s, its leader criticized yet maintained good ties with the French colonial regime. This stance was controversial, and contrasted with the liturgy of dozens of "dissident" branches of Caodaism that followed a more Taoist model.

[ 7 ] During the First and Second Indochina Wars , members of Cao Đài (along with several other Vietnamese sects, such as Hòa Hảo ) were active in political and military struggles against both French colonial forces and South Vietnamese Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm , who later became president.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Their criticism of the communist forces until 1975 was a factor in their repression after the fall of Saigon in April 1975, when the incoming communist government banned the practice of Caodaism.

[ 14 ] In 1997, Caodaism was granted legal recognition and unrestricted practice once again.

[ 12 ] Confucianism , Taoism , and Buddhism are One , a painting in the litang style portraying three men laughing by a river stream. 12th century, Song Dynasty .

Three Saints and the Divine Covenant Theology and theosophy [ edit ] God [ edit ] The Eight Trigrams ( Bagua , 八卦 ) in Caodaism, borrowed from Taoism "Cao Đài" refers to God the Father (also known as the Supreme Being, Creator, and "Ultimate Reality of the Universe," as well as the Ngọc Hoàng ).

Cao Đài Tiên Ông Đại Bồ Tát Ma Ha Tát , as God's full title, indicates a combination of three religions—namely, Confucianism , Taoism , and Mahayana Buddhism —that significantly influenced Caodaist theology.

[ 15 ] Cao Đài Pronunciation of "Cao Đài" in Vietnamese literally means "High Tower/Palace" (that is, the place where God reigns over the universe) represents Confucianism.

Pronunciation of "Tiên Ông" in Vietnamese Tiên Ông is the largest rank in Taoism.

Pronunciation of "Đại Bồ Tát Ma Ha Tát" in Vietnamese Đại Bồ Tát Ma Ha Tát literally means Great Bodhisattva the Great Being ( Mahasattva ) in Buddhism.

Together, they represent not only the unification of the three main religions but also the humility of God who presents himself as the lowest rank of Divinity.

[ 16 ] [ need quotation to verify ] According to Caodaism, God permeates all things in the Universe, both living and inanimate, reminiscent of Panentheism . It is believed that part of God's spirit is within all people and creatures.

[ 17 ] God has many different names depending on each person's worldview .

Caodaism posits that all religions are derived from the same source; it is a pluralist theology. The unique name for the Caodaist deity is intended to capture the development of God's revelation throughout evolutionary history: Cao Đài Tiên Ông Đại Bồ Tá Ma Ha Tát , Chaos , Taoism , Ông Trời , Thượng Đế , Đấng Sáng Tạo , Allah , Tathāgata , Atenism , Brahma , Yahweh , Great Spirit , God of the gaps , Waheguru , etc.

Cosmology [ edit ] A sphere inside the Tây Ninh Holy See, representing the Left Eye of God.

Caodaists adopt the traditional Chinese idea of âm (yin) and dương (yang) duality constituting the harmonious balance of the universe. Before the creation of the universe there was the "Đạo", the infinite, nameless, formless, unchanging, eternal source. The negative and positive principles of the universe are the components of the eternal nature.

[ 18 ] There are two main Gods, the Cao Đài ("Highest Lord") and the Diêu Trì Kim Mẫu or Đức Phật Mẫu ("Holy Buddha Mother"). They represent respectively the yang and yin forces.

Cao Đài is viewed as the heart of the universe, the common Father of all beings. He imparts part of him into each living being, including even rocks, in the form of consciousness.

Đức Phật Mẫu is venerated as the Mother of the Universe, responsible for giving visible forms, consciousness and emotions to all life.

[ 18 ] Ultimately, she has to follow the orders of Đức Cao Đài who is revered as the Supreme Being of both Heaven and Earth.

All other Divine Beings are to obey the orders of these two Creators during the course of evolution of the universe. Each of them carries a specific role as designated by their Father and Mother. Any being who falls out against them is considered devils in nature. These devils are led by the most powerful being, named Kim Quang Sứ (Satan).

[ citation needed ] In terms of the cosmos, faithful Caodaists believe there are heaven and hell, which are the main destinations for souls after death. Heaven consists of thirty-six planes and many heavenly realms upon each of them, e.g. the Realm of Saints , the Realm of the Holy Mother , the Realm of the Perfect Beings , the Divine Court Realm , the Paradise of Extreme Joy , etc. Meanwhile, hell has ten key realms to carry out punishments in accordance with sins of souls.

In order to get to heaven, souls are required to cultivate their virtues and / or devote themselves to spiritual causes. Without merit from the latter, they cannot escape the cycle of birth and death, but can improve their virtues and merit gradually to reach better places in the universe, including the 72 planets (Earth being the 68th), the 3,000 worlds, the four great cosmic regions, and the thirty six heavenly planes. True liberation can only be attained when souls ultimately rejoin God the Father in Heaven.

Three-fold revelation [ edit ] The father of the universe, Cao Đài, is believed to have communed with men since the beginning of times, revealing his will. According to Cao Đài doctrine, history is divided into three times ( tam kỳ ) of revelation. In the first two periods, there were teachings of Dipankara Buddha , sages, Phục Hy / Fu Xi , Gautama Buddha , Laozi , Confucius and Jesus , who received the will of the Highest Power, and founded their respective religions to serve and / or educate humanity. However, due to the frailty of the messengers and the common men, the will of the Highest Power was misled into corrupted forms. Caodaists also believe that former revelations were culture-bound, being applicable only for certain ethnicities, and primarily intended for specific ages. The third and final form of revelation is disclosed through the teachings of the Cao Đài faith.

[ 19 ] Twelve-fold hierarchy [ edit ] Caodaists believe that there are various ranks of divine spirits: Thần ("Holy Spirits"), Thánh ("saints"), Tiên ("Immortals"), and Phật ("Buddhas"). Each of these ranks can be further divided in the three grades of Thiên (Heavenly), Nhân (Human) and Địa (Earthly), forming a twelve-fold hierarchy that reflects the twelve-fold earthly hierarchy of the Caodaist church. Below those ranks are the spirits of matters, plants, animals and humans. All spirits may evolve to attain higher rank based on present deeds. Disembodied spirits fulfill a number of roles: they are benefactors of mankind, messengers and instructors of the truth.

[ 20 ] Quan Âm is regarded as the exemplary goddess of the Buddhas, Lý Bạch (Li Bai) of the Immortals, and Quan Vũ (Guan Yu) of the Saints.

The Cao Đài pantheon counts three main prophets, as illustrated on a plaque at the entrance of the Tay Ninh Temple: Victor Hugo (to please the French), since he gave many teachings and also the text of a number of important prayers. He himself practiced spiritism on the island of Jersey from 1852 to 1855, and predicted that he would become the prophet of a new religion to merge European and Asian mysticism.

[ 21 ] Sun Yat-sen (for the Chinese) and Trạng Trình, the Vietnamese Nostradamus (for the Vietnamese).

Fundamental rules and values [ edit ] The doctrines of the Cao Đài faith tends not only to reconcile all religious views, but also to adapt itself to all degrees of spiritual evolution. A basic principle of Caodaism is "All Religions are One". Cao Đài has been described from five different points of view: [ citation needed ] From a moral point of view, Cao Đài Religion reminds people of their duties towards themselves, their family, their society (a broader family), then toward humanity (the universal family).

From a philosophical point of view, Cao Đài Religion preaches renunciation of honors, riches and luxury, in other words, deliverance from servitude to materialism in the attainment of full spiritual quietude of soul.

From the point of view of worship, Cao Đài Religion prescribes the adoration of God, the veneration of Divine Beings and the worship of ancestors.

From a spiritual point of view, Cao Đài Religion confirms, in harmony with other religions, the existence of the spirits and the soul, their survival beyond the physical body, and their evolution by successive reincarnations , according to the Karmic Law.

From the initiates' point of view, Cao Đài Religion communicates to worthy adherents and reveals teachings that enable them, by a process of spiritual evolution, to reach the ecstasies of happiness.

Worship rituals [ edit ] Monthly rituals take place at midnight on the 1st and 15th days of the lunar month. There is also a special anniversary ceremony once a year for God the Father, the Holy Mother, the five founders of the world's major religions, and the founders of the Cao Dai religion.

[ 22 ] The rituals differ between places, depending on who they pray to.

At the Holy See Prayers include incense offering, ceremony opening, prayer to the Ngọc Hoàng (God the Father), prayer to Dipankara Buddha (Buddhism), prayer to Thái Thượng Lão Quân or Taishang Laojun (Taoism), prayer to Confucius (Confucianism), one of the three jewel offering prayers (flower, wine, and tea), and the five pledges.

At the Holy Mother temple Prayers include incense offering, ceremony opening, prayer describing the role of the Holy Mother, prayer to express gratitude to the Holy Mother, one of the three jewel offering prayers (flower, wine, and tea), and the five pledges.

There are also differences between monthly rituals, and anniversary ones.

Symbols [ edit ] The Caodaism Holy See, Caodaism Temples, and religious buildings host a rich array of symbols, all of which are instructed by either God the Father or Divine Beings. No symbol is redundant, and none is meaningless. They each tell a different story that reveals the beliefs, values, cosmic secrets, prophecies, etc. When combined, they lay out the journey of the Tao throughout the history of mankind and the universe, as well as its way forward.

The Divine Eye [ edit ] Main article: Eye of Providence Caodaism symbol In spirit and in pictorial representation, the Eye serves to remind Cao Đài believers that the God witnesses everything, everywhere, constantly. At the Holy See, there are in total 50 Divine Eyes of five different shapes; each carrying a different meaning related to various spiritual aspects. The One on the globe shows the Supreme Being above the North Star in the Ursa Minor constellation. The One on the façade of the Holy See has 35 rays of light which represent the three major religions and five main religious doctrines of the world. At the local Cao Đài Temples, the Divine Eye has 16 rays of light emanating from it. Nine radiate upward representing the nine levels of heaven, and seven radiating downward representing the seven emotions, which believers must control.

[ 23 ] The religious banner and emblem [ edit ] In accordance with the religious mission, the three colors of Cao Đài banner represent the three main non-Hinduistic Asian religions of the world; yellow stands for Buddhism , blue for Taoism , and red for Confucianism . Under the Divine Eye is the religious emblem which also represents the essence of the three religions; the bowl of charity for Buddhist compassion and asceticism, the feather duster for Taoist purification; the Spring and Autumn Annals for Confucianist virtue and love.

[ 22 ] Scriptures [ edit ] There are various Caodaist scriptures. Some of those belonging to the Holy See of Tây Ninh are: Kinh Thiên Đạo Và Thế Đạo ("Prayers of the Heavenly and the Earthly Way"), [ 24 ] [ need quotation to verify ] Pháp Chánh Truyền ("the Religious Constitution of Cao Đài Religion"), [ 25 ] Tân Luật ("The Canonical Codes"), [ 26 ] and Con Đường Thiêng Liêng Hằng Sống ("Divine Path to Eternal Life").

[ 27 ] Other sects have additional scriptures.

[ citation needed ] The Canonical Codes [ edit ] This scripture sets out the rules and boundaries for different aspects of the religion, from a believer to the Pope, from education to marriage, etc. There are ten sections in the scripture with the following content: Hierarchy of religious dignitaries Initiation and ranks of believers Establishment of a parish The five interdictions The four commandments Education Sanctions Promulgation of laws and regulations Secular rules The house of meditation The Religious Constitution [ edit ] The Pháp Chánh Truyền (The Religious Constitution of Caodaism) was delivered to the religion as a series of divine messages. These are the guiding texts of the religion's organization, stipulating the authority, responsibility, limits, as well as religious vestment for each rank in the religion.

Organization [ edit ] Inner hall the Caodaism Holy See, Tây Ninh Province.

Caodaists worshipping in a temple. Priests are dressed in red, blue and yellow, followers in white.

On top is Buddha , on his right Lao Tzu , on his left Confucius . Under Buddha is Li Bai . On Li Bai's right is the female Boddhisattva Guanyin , on his left is the red-faced warrior Quan Vũ (Guan Yu) . Below Li Bai is Jesus , and below Jesus is Jiang Ziya .

The organization of the Caodaist church has similarities with that of a state. There are similarities between the hierarchy of the Caodaist clergy and that of the Catholic Church . Besides the Pope , the Caodaist hierarchy has Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and further ranks.

Caodaism stresses equality among men and women in society. However, in the spiritual domain, ordained women may not attain the two highest positions: the Legislative Cardinal and the Pope. The church claims this is ordered by the Highest Lord, who declared that because Dương (Yang) represents male and Âm (Yin) corresponds to female, Yin cannot dominate Yang spiritually or else chaos ensues.

The Religion is governed by two powers, the spiritual and earthly ones.

The spiritual power (Bát Quái Đài): This is the heavenly council, that is, the Spirit and Soul of the New Religion. The council directs all activities of the universe. The council is the invisible part, made up of the Divine Beings, and directed by Duc Cao Dai (God the Father). The Divine Beings represent different religions of the world, including: Founders of five religions The Buddha (Buddhism), Lao Tze (Taoism), Confucius (Confucianism), Jesus Christ (Christianity), Jiang Ziya (Geniism).

[ further explanation needed ] Founders and teachers of Caodaism who represent the doctrines of Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism: Guanyin (Buddhism), Li Bai (Taoism), Guan Yu (Confucianism).

The earthly power: To avoid dictatorship, God divided the earthly power into two bodies – an Executive Body (Cửu Trùng Đài) headed by the Pope, and a Legislative Body ( Hiệp Thiên Đài ) headed by the Hộ Pháp (Protector of Laws and Justice). The former takes charge of the administration of the Religion and its missionary activities, while the latter oversees legislation, jurisdiction and communication with God or Divine Beings. There is also the Charitable Body placed under the supervision of the Legislative Body, and a Lay Committee of selected professional specialists among worthy followers.

[ 28 ] The Executive Body (Cửu Trùng Đài) [ edit ] The Cửu Trùng Ðài is the Executive Body of Caodaism which takes charge of the administration of the Religion and missionary activities. Head of Cửu Trùng Ðài is the Giáo-Tông (Pope). The first and only officially ordained Giáo Tông of the Tây Ninh Holy See was Lê Văn Trung (1876–1934). After his death, the position of Pope was left permanently vacant, a decision reportedly guided by spiritual communication from Cao Đài instructing that no successor be named.

The Giáo-Tông (Pope) represents God to watch over the preservation of His Religion in this world. Whatever his age, he is eldest brother and acts as a guide for the children of God. The Spiritual Power has decided that this is so. The Giáo-Tông (Pope) has the same powers as God to teach Virtue to all His Disciples. He is concerned with each one of them, he guides each one and takes care to ensure that each one does not transgress the Divine Laws (Thiên Điều). He obliges all disciples of God to conform strictly to the prescriptions of the New Codes (Tân Luật) ... Since the Giáo-Tông (Pope) has full powers to replace God he must try to transform the life of suffering into an existence marked by happiness. This is the Exalted Task of the Giáo-Tông (Pope).

[ 25 ] There are nine ranks in its hierarchy: Number Rank 1 Pope 3 Censor Cardinals 3 Cardinals 36 Archbishops 72 Bishops 3,000 Priests no limit Student Priests no limit Subdignitaries no limit Followers For male dignitaries of the Executive Body, from the rank of Censor Cardinal to that of Student Priest, each echelon is subdivided into three branches corresponding to the three principal religions: Buddhist Branch These dignitaries are dressed in yellow.

Taoist Branch These dignitaries are dressed in azure.

Confucianist Branch These dignitaries are dressed in red.

Dignitaries of the same echelon, either Confucianist, Taoist or Buddhist, have the same attributes.

At the Holy See, there are three governing councils: The Popular Council composed of Student Priests, Sub-dignitaries, and representatives of adherents in the ratio of one delegate per 500 members. The Popular Council makes plans for the future.

The Sacerdotal Council composed of Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, and Principal Archbishops. The Sacerdotal Council examines the plans made by the Popular Council.

The High Council composed of Cardinals, Legislative Body Cardinals, and the Pope.

All plans made by the Popular Council and favored by the Sacerdotal Council are submitted to High Council for approval.

In addition, there is also a Central Administration body chaired by three Cardinals. Each of them is assisted by three Principal Archbishops to oversee three religious ministries: The Principal Archbishops of the Buddhist branch take care of finances, supply, and public works.

The Principal Archbishops of the Taoist branch take care of education, health, and agriculture.

The Principal Archbishops of the Confucianist branch take care of interior, rites, and justice.

The administrative network which functions throughout Vietnam consists of: The Religious Region ( Trấn Đạo ) comprising several provinces, headed by a Bishop who is called the Regional Religious Chief / Khâm Trấn Đạo.

The Religious Province ( Châu Đạo ) comprising several districts / delegations, headed by a Priest who is called Provincial Religious Chief / Khâm Châu Đạo.

The Religious District ( Họ Đạo ) comprising several villages, headed by a Student Priest who is called the Religious Chief of Delegation ( Đầu Tộc Đạo / Đầu Họ Đạo / Đầu Phận Đạo ).

The Religious Village ( Hương Đạo ) headed by a Sub-dignitary who is called Village Religious Chief ( Đầu Hương Đạo ). He is assisted by one (or more) Phó Trị Sự (Deputy Chief for Administration of a religious village) representing the Executive Body and one (or more) Thông Sự representing the Legislative Body. The Religious Village is made up of Religious Hamlets ( Ấp Đạo ).

[ 28 ] Palace Uniting Heaven and Earth (Hiệp Thiên Đài) [ edit ] This Body has the duty of communicating with Divine Beings, to preserve the religious laws and listen to the complaints of the unhappy. It is headed by the Hộ Pháp (Defender of the Dharma,protector of laws and justice), and assisted by the Thượng Phẩm (Director of religious affairs) and Thượng Sanh (Director of secular affairs).

Hộ-Pháp (護法) (The head of Legislative Body Affairs) unveils the Mystery of the Invisible and is the Maintainer of the Rules and Laws of the New Religion. He is the one who pronounces judgments on the dignitaries and adepts, elevates the dignity of the fervent through their merit and brings sanctions against those who have committed faults. Defender of the Dharma holds control over the Legislative Body Power both exoterically and esoterically. He watches over the positive progress of the disciples in the Way of God, and guides all evolved souls to Bát-Quái-Đài for the union with Angels, Saints, Immortals and Buddhas.

Thượng-Phẩm (上品) (The head of Religious Affairs) Representative of the Ho-Phap in the formation of virtuous souls of the Sacerdotal Council. He depends on the Hộ-Pháp in all his missions. In a word, the Thượng-Phẩm helps the Cửu Trùng Đài to live in an atmosphere of happiness; he reveals the Heavenly Voice to virtuous souls, and guides them to the Divine Phase of the Great Spirits, while closing behind them the door of regression. He considers the priestly laws to take up the defense of all clergy and adepts; he prevents all perversion of the Divine Rules, and helps all initiates to attain their aim. He is simultaneously the President of the Hall of Defense and protector of all disciples. The Thượng-Phẩm is "Leader of the Spiritual Power".

Thượng–Sanh (上生) (The head of Secular Affairs) has control of all the laws and rules which relate to the worldly life of all adepts to guide them out of the sea of sufferings. He may present a formal complaint before the religious Tribunal against all those who impede the faithful as they move along the Way of God. He is the President of the Hall of Accusation.

Four "zodiacal dignitaries" under each of these branches carry the four key responsibilities of conservation, renovation, reformation, and legislation. They are further assisted by twelve technical academicians, including Bảo Huyền Linh Quân (Theosophy), Bảo Tinh Quân (Astronomy), Bảo Cô Quân (Orphanage), Bảo Văn pháp quân (Culture), Bảo Học Quân (Education), Bảo Y Quân (Health), Bảo Vật Quân (Science and Industry, Bảo Sĩ Quân (Literature), Bảo Sanh Quân (Social work), Bảo Nông Quân (Agriculture), Bảo Công Quân (Public Works), Bảo Thương Quân (Economics).

[ 28 ] Community structure [ edit ] Any local area having more than 500 believers is authorized to establish a Parish (Họ Đạo/Tộc Đạo) with a Thánh-Thất (Temple, Church, Holy House) which is led by the authority of a dignitary.
Parishes can be established only with the permission and authority of the Giao-Tong/Pope.

Twice a month, the first and the fifteenth day of the lunar calendar, the believers must meet at the Thánh-Thất of the local area to attend the ceremony and listen to the teachings. Exception can be made for those with reasonable excuses.

[ 26 ] The Holy See [ edit ] Near Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) in Tây Ninh province stands the Caodaist Headquarters. At the heart of this city stands the Great Divine Temple . As well as being a major heart of pilgrimage, the Caodaism headquarters is also one of Vietnam's major tourist attractions.

[ 16 ] Branches [ edit ] "The period between 1934 and 1975 witnessed not only the robust development of the Cao Dai religion but also saw the separation of the Cao Dai religion into different independent sects, sometimes as many as 30". As of July 2014, "central and provincial authorities have granted legal recognition" to 11 Cao Dai sects.

[ 29 ] These sects generally divide along geographic lines. The largest is based in Tây Ninh Province, where the religion was founded in 1926 and where the seat of the Caodaist authority is located.

The Caodaist Executive Council of Tây Ninh Province received official government recognition in 1997. Independent Caodaist groups allege that government interference has undermined the independence of the Tây Ninh group, and it no longer faithfully upholds Cao Đài' s principles and traditions. Religious training takes place at individual temples rather than at centralized seminaries. Some Caodaist sects that have broken away from the Tây Ninh Holy See are Cầu Kho, Bến Tre, Minh Chơn Lý, Minh Chơn Đạo, Tiên Thiên, and Hội Thánh Truyền Giáo Trung Việt.

Ngô Văn Chiêu founded Chiếu Minh when he left the original church structure, refusing his appointment as Caodaism's first pope.

Notes [ edit ] ^ / ˌ k aʊ ˈ d aɪ z ə m / ; Vietnamese : Đạo Cao Đài ; chữ Hán : 道高臺 ; IPA: [ʔɗaːw˧˨ʔ kaːw˧˧ ʔɗaːj˨˩] See also [ edit ] Ama-gi Hòa Hảo New religious movement Ngọc Hoàng Nguyễn Thành Phương Queen Mother of the West Slave Ship , a science-fiction novel which involves Cao Đài and its pope.

Taoism Three teachings Trình Minh Thế Xiantiandao Yiguandao References [ edit ] ^ Carrasco et al. 1999 , pp. 182–183.

^ Hoskins 2012a , p. 3.

^ Hoskins 2015 , pp. 1–28.

^ UNHCHR 2014 .

^ Hoskins 2015 , p. 4; 239.

^ Eller 2014 , pp. 184–186, 188.

^ a b c Hoskins 2012a , p. 4.

^ Hoskins 2012b .

^ "A_HRC_28_66_Add.2_E.doc" .

ohchr.org . 30 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

^ "Cao Dai (Vietnamese religion)" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

[B]y the early 1990s, Cao Dai was reported to have some two million adherents in Vietnam, Cambodia, France, and the United States.

^ Jammes 2014 , p. 182.

^ a b Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor & 2014-07-31 .

^ Vietnam Timeline 1955 .

^ Cao Dai Overseas Missionary 2008 .

^ Smith, R. B. (1970). "An Introduction to Caodaism II. Beliefs and Organization".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London .

33 (3): 573– 589.

doi : 10.1017/S0041977X00126576 .

ISSN 0041-977X .

JSTOR 614523 .

S2CID 154983970 .

^ a b Tam 2000 .

^ "Caodai.org - CAODAI, ITS CONCEPTS" .

^ a b Oliver 1976 , p. 8.

^ Oliver 1976 , p. 9.

^ Oliver 1976 , p. 10.

^ Hoskins 2015 , pp. 99–110.

^ a b Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (a) .

^ Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (c) .

^ Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (d) .

^ a b Tâm 1996 .

^ a b Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (e) .

^ Hộ-Pháp Phạm Công Tắc .

^ a b c Sydney Centre of Studies in Caodaism (f) .

^ "The Cao Dai religion" .

religion.vn .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Biederman, Patricia Ward (7 January 2006).

"Cao Dai fuses great faiths of the world" .

The Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 7 December 2014 .

Carrasco, David ; Warmind, Morten; Hawley, John Stratton; Reynolds, Frank ; Giarardot, Norman; Neusner, Jacob ; Pelikan, Jaroslav ; Campo, Juan; Penner, Hans (1999).

Wendy Doniger (ed.).

Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions .

Merriam-Webster . p. 140.

ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0 .

Eller, Jack David (2014).

Introducing Anthropology of Religion: Culture to the Ultimate . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-57914-4 .

Hoskins, Janet Alison (2012a).

What Are Vietnam's Indigenous Religions?

(PDF) (Report). Center for Southeast Asian Studies, Kyoto University. pp.

4– 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 March 2014 .

Hoskins, Janet Alison (2012b).

"God's Chosen People": Race, Religion and Anti-Colonial Struggle in French Indochina (Report). Asia Research Institute of the National University of Singapore.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 December 2017 .

Hoskins, Janet Alison (2015).

The Divine Eye and the Diaspora: Vietnamese syncretism becomes transpacific Caodaism . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press .

ISBN 978-0-824-85140-8 .

Hộ-Pháp Phạm Công Tắc.

Divine Path to Eternal Life .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report).

Archived from the original on 12 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

"Press Statement on the visit to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam by the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (Press release). Hanoi, Viet Nam. 31 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

Oliver, Victor L. (1976).

Caodai Spiritism: A Study of Religion in Vietnamese Society . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-04547-7 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2020 .

Cao Dai Rituals .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report).

Archived from the original on 12 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

"Caodaism in a nutshell" , Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism , archived from the original on 26 December 2018 , retrieved 17 July 2015 KINH THIÊN-ĐẠO & THẾ-ĐẠO .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report) (in Vietnamese).

Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

Structure of CaoDai Religion .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report).

Archived from the original on 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

The New Canonical Codes .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report).

Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

The outline of Caodaism .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report).

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

Tâm, Đào Công (8 November 1996).

The Religious Constitution of Cao Đài Religion .

Sydney Centre for Studies in Caodaism (Report). University of Sydney.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

Tam, Dao (2000).

Understanding Caodaism in 10 minutes (Report). University of Sydney. Archived from the original on 21 September 2009.

"Vietnam Timeline 1955" .

VietnamGear.com .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2015 . Retrieved 18 July 2015 .

Hoskins, Janet Alison.

"Caodaism" .

World Religion and Spirituality . 0037768610375520.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 August 2017 – via wrldrels.org.

Jammes, Jeremy (2014).

Les Oracles du Cao Dai: Étude d'un mouvement religieux vietnamien et de ses réseaux . Paris: Les Indes Savantes.

ISBN 978-2-84654-351-4 .

"Vietnam".

International Religious Freedom Report 2005 .

Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (Report).

U.S. Department of State . 30 June 2005.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 May 2010 .

Cao Dai Overseas Missionary (7 January 2008).

"Cao Dai FAQ" .

caodai.net . Archived from the original on 15 August 2011.

Further reading [ edit ] Blagov, Sergei A. (2012).

Caodaism: Vietnamese Traditionalism and Its Leap Into Modernity . Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-59033-150-7 .

Goossaert, Vincent; Palmer, David A. (2011).

The Religious Question in Modern China . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-00533-1 .

Jammes, Jeremy (2010).

"Divination and Politics in Southern Vietnam: Roots of Caodaism" (PDF) .

Social Compass .

57 (3): 357– 371.

doi : 10.1177/0037768610375520 .

Werner, Jayne (1981).

Peasant Politics and Religious Sectarianism: Peasant and Priest in the Cao Dai in Vietnam . New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asian Studies.

ISBN 978-0-938692-07-2 .

External links [ edit ] Official website of the Tay Ninh Holy See CAODAI Caodai de l'Europe Archived 10 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine Caodaist French Resources Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cao Dai .

Cao Dai Library in Sydney (Multilingual) Cao Dai Library in English Cao Dai Ebooks in PDF, Kindle, Nook formats Caodaist Overseas Missionary Hội Văn Hóa Cao Đài – Caodaist Cultural Association, Australia v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e New religious movements Major groups Brahmoism Adventism CoG7 SDA Aetherius Society Ahmadiyya Lahore Ahmadiyya Ananda Marga AMORC Anthroposophy Antoinism Armstrongism Bábism Baháʼí Faith Bible Students / Jehovah's Witnesses Black Hebrew Israelites Brahma Kumaris Branch Davidians Brotherhood of the Cross and Star Caodaism Charismatic Christianity Chinese salvationist religions Chinmaya Mission Christadelphians Christian Science Church of Divine Science Church of Scientology Church of the Guanche People Creativity Discordianism Eastern Lightning Falun Gong The Family International Friends of Man Fourth Way Goddess Godianism Heaven's Gate Iglesia ni Cristo International Peace Mission movement ISKCON Invitation to Life Kingdom of Jesus Christ Kopimism Latter Day Saints / Mormonism Mahikari movement Sukyo Mahikari World Divine Light Messianic Judaism Modern paganism Druidry Heathenry Rodnovery Moorish Science Temple of America Nation of Islam New Acropolis The New Church New Kadampa Tradition New Thought Religious Science Unity Church Nuwaubian Nation Oomoto Order of the Solar Temple Palmarian Catholic Church Peoples Temple Pilgrims of Arès Prathyaksha Raksha Daiva Sabha The Process Church Raëlism Rajneesh movement Ramakrishna Mission Rastafari Risshō Kōsei Kai Sahaja Yoga Sant Mat Radha Soami Sant Nirankari Mission Santa Muerte Santo Daime Satanism LaVeyan Church of Satan Temple of Set The Satanic Temple Theistic Sathya Sai Baba Shakers Shambhala Buddhism Shri Ram Chandra Mission Soka Gakkai Spiritualism Spiritism Tenrikyo Thelema Theosophy Theosophical Society Transcendental Meditation True Buddha School Twelve Tribes communities Unarius Academy of Science Unification Church Unitarian Universalist Association Universal Church of the Kingdom of God Universal White Brotherhood Vipassana movement The Way International Weixinjiao Wicca Word of Faith World Mission Society Church of God Notable figures Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Noble Drew Ali Marshall Applewhite Michael Angelo Aquino Herbert W. Armstrong Shoko Asahara Sri Aurobindo Báb Sathya Sai Baba Baháʼu'lláh Alice Bailey Chinmayananda Saraswati David Berg Helena Blavatsky Sri Chinmoy Aleister Crowley Mary Baker Eddy Josemaría Escrivá Louis Farrakhan Charles Fillmore Kelsang Gyatso Hak Ja Han L. Ron Hubbard Li Hongzhi David Koresh Anton LaVey Jorge Ángel Livraga Rizzi Lu Sheng-yen Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Meher Baba Nikkyō Niwano Sun Myung Moon Elijah Muhammad Nakayama Miki A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Phineas Parkhurst Quimby Raël Rajneesh Ramakrishna Prem Rawat Helena Roerich Charles Taze Russell Joseph Franklin Rutherford Ahn Sahng-hong Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar Menachem Mendel Schneerson Shiv Dayal Singh Joseph Smith Nirmala Srivastava Rudolf Steiner Sudiksha Emanuel Swedenborg Joseph W. Tkach Chögyam Trungpa Ellen G. White Poykayil Yohannan By region Pacific Northwest Concepts African-initiated church Buddhist modernism Chabad messianism Christian denomination Classifications of religious movements Conspiracy theories Cult Cybersectarianism Doomsday cult Heresy Hindu reform movements In-group favoritism Japanese new religions Neoshamanism New Age Open-source religion Polytheistic reconstructionism Prosperity theology Religious conversion Religious syncretism Schism Sect Self religion Spiritual evolution UFO religion Public education CESNUR INFORM (Information Network Focus on Religious Movements) World Religions and Spirituality Project Scholarship Academic study of new religious movements Anthropology of religion History of religion Journal of Contemporary Religion Nova Religio Philosophy of religion Psychology of religion Religious studies Sociology of religion When Prophecy Fails Opposition Anti-cult movement Christian countercult movement Anti-Mormonism Persecution of Ahmadis Persecution of Baháʼís Persecution of Falun Gong Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Persecution of Rastafari Religious discrimination against modern pagans Lists Academic study In popular culture New religious movements v t e Names of God In Hinduism In Zoroastrianism Abrahamic In Chinese In Christianity In Judaism In Islam In Mandaeism Adonai Ahura Mazda Khuda Parvardigar Allah Amun Aten Atum Bathala Brahman Bhagavan Mahadevi Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Kali Durga Deva Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Rama Krishna Shiva Hiranyagarbha Ishvara Om Tad Ekam Purusha Svayam Bhagavan Caodaism Chukwu Deus Devla Ein Sof El Elohim El Elyon El Shaddai God God the Father God the Son God the Holy Spirit Great Spirit Manitou / Gitche Manitou Wakan Tanka Haneunim Hayyi Rabbi Holy Spirit Huwa Hyang Acintya Sanghyang Adi Buddha Hypsistos I Am that I Am Jahbulon Jehovah 1 Kami Lord Mawu Mulungu Ngai Nyame Nzambi a Mpungu Olodumare Ọlọrun Olofi Osanobua Roog Shen Shangdi Tian Tianzhu Sol Invictus Elagabalus Tenri-Ō-no-Mikoto The One Umvelinqangi Unkulunkulu Waheguru Ik Onkar YHWH Jehovah Jah Yahweh Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9b85n
Cached time: 20250817222956
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.161 seconds
Real time usage: 1.425 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6793/1000000
Revision size: 43793/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 333046/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10539/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129232/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.645/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17519201/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1039.705      1 -total
 14.81%  153.969      1 Template:Efn
 11.67%  121.309      1 Template:Religion_topics
 11.63%  120.870      2 Template:Reflist
 11.37%  118.258      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.92%  113.582     34 Template:Sfn
  9.74%  101.307      6 Template:Cite_web
  9.55%   99.251      1 Template:Langx
  7.12%   74.048      1 Template:Short_description
  6.30%   65.503     11 Template:Cite_report Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:245650:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222956 and revision id 1305139753. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caodaism&oldid=1305139753 " Categories : Caodaism 1926 establishments in Vietnam Cultural depictions of Victor Hugo Cultural depictions of Sun Yat-sen Monotheistic religions Religion in Vietnam Religious organizations established in 1926 Religious syncretism in Vietnam Religions that require vegetarianism New religious movements established in the 1920s Religious syncretism Hidden categories: Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Pages with Vietnamese IPA Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use American English from May 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2015 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 08:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Caodaism 49 languages Add topic

