Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Chronology and history Toggle Chronology and history subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 Early Minoan 2.3 Middle Minoan 2.4 Late Minoan 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Major settlements 3.2 Beyond Crete 4 Art Toggle Art subsection 4.1 Pottery 4.2 Jewelry 4.3 Weapons 4.4 Metal vessels 5 Agriculture and cuisine Toggle Agriculture and cuisine subsection 5.1 Tools 6 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 6.1 Government 6.2 Status of women 6.3 Clothing 7 Language and writing 8 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 8.1 Symbolism 8.2 Burial practices 9 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 9.1 Palaces 9.2 Plumbing 9.3 Columns 9.4 Villas 10 Warfare and the "Minoan peace" Toggle Warfare and the "Minoan peace" subsection 10.1 Warfare 11 Genetic and anthropometric studies 12 See also 13 Notes 14 Footnotes 15 References Toggle the table of contents Minoan civilization 79 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 35°14′53″N 24°53′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 35.248°N 24.887°E ﻿ / 35.248; 24.887 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bronze Age civilization on Crete and other Aegean Islands "Minoan" redirects here. For other uses, see Minoan (disambiguation) .

Minoan civilization Geographical range Crete , additional settlements around Aegean Sea Period Aegean Bronze Age Dates c.

3100 – c.

1100 BC Major sites Knossos , Phaistos , Hagia Triada , Malia , Zakros Preceded by Neolithic Crete Followed by Mycenaean Greece Part of a series on the History of Greece Neolithic Greece Pelasgians Greek Bronze Age Helladic chronology Cycladic ( c.

3100–1000 BC) Minoan ( c.

3100–1100 BC) Mycenean ( c.

1750–1050 BC) Ancient Greece Greek Dark Ages (1100 BC–750 BC) Archaic Greece (800 BC–480 BC) Classical Greece (500 BC–323 BC) Hellenistic Greece (323 BC–31 BC) Roman Greece (146 BC–330 AD) Medieval Greece Byzantine Greece Frankish and Latin states (1204-1579) Early modern Greece Venetian Crete (1205-1667) Venetian Ionian Islands (1363-1797) Ottoman Greece (1371-1822) Modern Greece Septinsular Republic (1800-1807) War of Independence (1821-1829) First Hellenic Republic (1822-1832) Kingdom of Greece (1832-1924, 1935-1973) National Schism (1914/15-1917) Second Hellenic Republic (1924-1935) 4th of August Regime (1936-1941) Axis occupation ( Collaborationist regime , Free Greece ) (1941-1944) Civil War (1946-1949) Military Junta (1967-1974) Third Hellenic Republic (1974-) History by topic Agriculture Alphabet Art Church Constitution Economy Ethnonyms Language Music Military Greece portal v t e The Minoan civilization was a Bronze Age culture which was centered on the island of Crete . Known for its monumental architecture and energetic art , it is often regarded as the first civilization in Europe. The ruins of the Minoan palaces at Knossos and Phaistos are popular tourist attractions.

The Minoan civilization developed from the local Neolithic culture around 3100 BC, with complex urban settlements beginning around 2000 BC. After c.

1450 BC, they came under the cultural and perhaps political domination of the mainland Mycenaean Greeks , forming a hybrid culture which lasted until around 1100 BC.

Minoan art included elaborately decorated pottery , seals , figurines , and colorful frescoes . Typical subjects include nature and ritual. Minoan art is often described as having a fantastical or ecstatic quality, with figures rendered in a manner suggesting motion.

Little is known about the structure of Minoan society. Minoan art contains no unambiguous depiction of a monarch, and textual evidence suggests they may have had some other form of governance. Likewise, it is unclear whether there was ever a unified Minoan state. Religious practices included worship at peak sanctuaries and sacred caves , but nothing is certain regarding their pantheon . The Minoans constructed enormous labyrinthine buildings which their initial excavators labeled Minoan palaces . Subsequent research has shown that they served a variety of religious and economic purposes rather than being royal residences, though their exact role in Minoan society is a matter of continuing debate.

The Minoans traded extensively, exporting agricultural products and luxury crafts in exchange for raw metals which were difficult to obtain on Crete. Through traders and artisans, their cultural influence reached beyond Crete to the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean. Minoan craftsmen were employed by foreign elites, for instance to paint frescoes at Avaris in Egypt.

The Minoans developed two writing systems known as Cretan hieroglyphs and Linear A . Because neither script has been fully deciphered , the identity of the Minoan language is unknown. Based on what is known, the language is regarded as unlikely to belong to a well-attested language family such as Indo-European or Semitic . After 1450 BC, a modified version of Linear A known as Linear B was used to write Mycenaean Greek , which had become the language of administration on Crete. The Eteocretan language attested in a few post-Bronze Age inscriptions may be a descendant of the Minoan language.

Largely forgotten after the Late Bronze Age collapse , the Minoan civilization was rediscovered in the early twentieth century through archaeological excavation . The term "Minoan" was coined by Arthur Evans , who excavated at Knossos and recognized it as culturally distinct from the mainland Mycenaean culture. Soon after, Federico Halbherr and Luigi Pernier excavated the Palace of Phaistos and the nearby settlement of Hagia Triada . A major breakthrough occurred in 1952, when Michael Ventris deciphered Linear B, drawing on earlier work by Alice Kober . This decipherment unlocked a crucial source of information on the economics and social organization in the final year of the palace. Minoan sites continue to be excavated—recent discoveries including the necropolis at Armenoi and the harbour town of Kommos .

Name [ edit ] Bull-Leaping Fresco found at Knossos The modern term "Minoan" is derived from the name of the mythical King Minos , who the Classical Greeks believed to have ruled Knossos in the distant past. It was popularized by Arthur Evans , possibly drawing on an earlier suggestion by Karl Hoeck . It is a modern coinage and not used by the Minoans, whose name for themselves is unknown.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Egyptians referred to the Minoans as the kftjw (vocalized as " Keftiu " in modern Egyptological pronunciation ). It is not known whether this was an exonym or if it was an endonym originating in the Minoan language .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Potentially related terms were used by a variety of Near Eastern cultures, and the Biblical term Caphtor has sometimes been identified with Crete.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 4 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Chronology and history [ edit ] Further information: Minoan chronology , Minoan pottery , and Dating the Thera eruption Minoan chronology Timespan Period 3100–2650 BC [ a ] EM I Prepalatial 2650–2200 BC EM II 2200–2100 BC EM III 2100–1925 BC MM IA 1925–1875 BC MM IB Protopalatial 1875–1750 BC MM II 1750–1700 BC MM III Neopalatial 1700–1625 BC LM IA 1625–1470 BC LM IB 1470–1420 BC LM II Postpalatial 1420–1330 BC LM IIIA 1330–1200 BC LM IIIB 1200–1075 BC LM IIIC Two systems of relative chronology are used for the Minoans. The first, based on pottery styles, divides Minoan history into three major periods: Early Minoan (EM), Middle Minoan (MM) and Late Minoan (LM). These periods can be divided using Roman numerals (e.g. EM I, EM II, EM III), which can be further divided using capital letters (e.g. LM IIIA, LMIIIB, LM IIIC). An alternative system, proposed by Greek archaeologist Nikolaos Platon , divides Minoan history into four periods termed Prepalatial, Protopalatial, Neopalatial, and Postpalatial.

Establishing an absolute chronology has proved difficult. Archaeologists have attempted to determine calendar dates by synchronizing the periods of Minoan history with those of their better understood contemporaries. For example, Minoan artifacts from the LM IB period have been found in 18th Dynasty contexts in Egypt, for which Egyptian chronology provides calendar dates. However, dates determined in this manner do not always match the results of carbon dating and other methods based on natural science . Much of the controversy concerns the dating of the eruption of Thera , which is known to have occurred towards the end of the LM IA period. While carbon dating places this event (and thus LM IA) around 1600 BC, synchronism with Egyptian records would place it roughly a century later.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Origins [ edit ] Main article: Neolithic Crete Although stone-tool evidence suggests that hominins may have reached Crete as early as 130,000 years ago, evidence for the first anatomically modern human presence dates to 10,000–12,000 YBP .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The oldest evidence of modern human habitation on Crete is pre-ceramic Neolithic farming-community remains which date to about 7000 BC.

[ 17 ] A comparative study of DNA haplogroups of modern Cretan men showed that a male founder group, from Anatolia or the Levant , is shared with the Greeks.

[ 18 ] The Neolithic population lived in open villages. Fishermen's huts were found on the shores, and the fertile Messara Plain was used for agriculture.

[ 19 ] Early Minoan [ edit ] An Early Minoan bird-shaped vessel.

Early Minoan society developed largely continuously from local Neolithic predecessors, with some cultural influence and perhaps migration from eastern populations. This period saw a gradual shift from localized clan-based villages towards the more urbanized and stratified society of later periods.

[ 20 ] EM I (c. 3100-2650 BC) is marked by the appearance of the first painted ceramics. Continuing a trend that began during the Neolithic, settlements grew in size and complexity, and spread from fertile plains towards highland sites and islands as the Minoans learned to exploit less hospitable terrain.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] EM II (c. 2650-2200 BC) has been termed an international era. Trade intensified and Minoan ships began sailing beyond the Aegean to Egypt and Syria, possibly enabled by the invention of masted ships. Minoan material culture shows increased international influence, for instance in the adoption of Minoan seals based on the older Near Eastern seal . Minoan settlements grew, some doubling in size, and monumental buildings were constructed at sites that would later become palaces.

[ 20 ] [ 22 ] EM III (c. 2200-2100 BC) saw the continuation of these trends.

Middle Minoan [ edit ] The western façade of the Palace at Knossos. Like other palaces, it was built during the Middle Minoan era but continually renovated throughout its existence.

MM I (c. 2100–1875 BC) saw the emergence of Protopalatial society. During MM IA (c. 2100-1925 BC), populations increased dramatically at sites such as Knossos, Phaistos, and Malia, accompanied by major construction projects. During MM IB (c. 1925-1875 BC), the first palaces were built at these sites, in areas which had been used for communal ceremonies since the Neolithic. Middle Minoan artisans developed new colorful paints and adopted the potter's wheel during MM IB, producing wares such as Kamares ware .

[ 20 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] MM II (c. 1875–1700 BC) saw the development of the Minoan writing systems, Cretan hieroglyphic and Linear A . It ended with mass destructions generally attributed to earthquakes, though violent destruction has been considered as an alternative explanation.

[ 23 ] [ 25 ] MM III (c. 1750–1700 BC) marks the beginning of the Neopalatial period. Most of the palaces were rebuilt with architectural innovations, with the notable exception of Phaistos. Cretan hieroglyphs were abandoned in favor of Linear A, and Minoan cultural influence becomes significant in mainland Greece.

[ 23 ] [ 26 ] Late Minoan [ edit ] The Late Minoan period was an eventful time that saw profound change in Minoan society. Many of the most recognizable Minoan artifacts date from this time, for instance the snake goddess figurines , La Parisienne Fresco , and the marine style of pottery decoration.

[ 27 ] Late Minoan I (c. 1700-1470 BC) was a continuation of the prosperous Neopalatial culture. A notable event from this era was the eruption of the Thera volcano , which occurred around 1600 BC towards the end of the LM IA subperiod.

[ 27 ] One of the largest volcanic explosions in recorded history, it ejected about 60 to 100 cubic kilometres (14 to 24 cu mi) of material and was measured at 7 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] While the eruption destroyed Cycladic settlements such as Akrotiri and led to the abandonment of some sites in northeast Crete, other Minoan sites such as Knossos continued to prosper. The post-eruption LM IB period (c.1625-1470) saw ambitious new building projects, booming international trade, and artistic developments such as the marine style .

[ 27 ] A Marine Style vase from c.

1500 BC found in Palaikastro, and commonly known as the Octopus Vase ; typical of the Late Minoan IB period that followed the eruption of Thera. It is currently in the Heraklion Museum .

Late Minoan IB (c. 1625-1470 BC) ended with severe destructions throughout the island, marking the end of Neopalatial society. These destructions are thought to have been deliberate, since they spared certain sites in a manner inconsistent with natural disasters. For instance, the town at Knossos burned while the palace itself did not. The causes of these destructions have been a perennial topic of debate. While some researchers attributed them to Mycenaean conquerors, others have argued that they were the result of internal upheavals. Similarly, while some researchers have attempted to link them to lingering environmental disruption from the Thera eruption, others have argued that the two events are too distant in time for any causal relation.

[ 27 ] Late Minoan II (c. 1470-1420 BC) is sparsely represented in the archaeological record, but appears to have been a period of decline.

[ 27 ] Late Minoan III (c. 1420-1075 BC) shows profound social and political changes. Among the palaces, only Knossos remained in use, though it too was destroyed by LM IIIB2. The language of administration shifted to Mycenaean Greek and material culture shows increased mainland influence, reflecting the rise of a Greek-speaking elite.

[ 27 ] [ 30 ] In Late Minoan IIIC (c. 1200-1075 BC), coinciding with the wider Late Bronze Age collapse , coastal settlements were abandoned in favor of defensible locations on higher ground. These small villages, some of which grew out of earlier mountain shrines, continued aspects of recognizably Minoan culture until the Early Iron Age .

[ 27 ] [ 31 ] Geography [ edit ] The Minoan Civilization was centered on the island of Crete , with additional settlements around the Aegean Sea . Crete is located in the south of the Aegean, situated along maritime trade routes that connect Europe , Africa , and the Middle East . Because it straddles the Mediterranean and African climate zones, with land at a variety of elevations, it provides a diverse array of natural resources. However, it is notably poor in metals, a fact believed to have spurred the Minoans' interest in international trade. The island is seismically active, with signs of earthquake damage at many Minoan sites. The majority of Minoan sites are found in central and eastern Crete, with few in the western part of the island, especially to the south.

[ 32 ] Major settlements [ edit ] The Palace of Knossos , the largest Minoan palace Knossos – the largest [ 33 ] Bronze Age archaeological site on Crete. Knossos had an estimated population of 1,300 to 2,000 in 2500 BC, 18,000 in 2000 BC, 20,000 to 100,000 in 1600 BC and 30,000 in 1360 BC.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Phaistos – the second-largest [ 33 ] palatial building on the island, excavated by the Italian school shortly after Knossos Hagia Triada – town and administrative center near Phaistos which has yielded the largest number of Linear A tablets.

Kommos – harbour town serving Phaistos and Hagia Triada, with civic buildings mirroring palatial architecture Malia – the subject of French excavations, a palatial center which provides a look into the proto-palatial period Kato Zakros – sea-side palatial site excavated by Greek archaeologists in the far east of the island, also known as "Zakro" in archaeological literature Galatas – confirmed as a palatial site during the early 1990s Kydonia (modern Chania ), the only palatial site in West Crete Gournia – town site excavated in the first quarter of the 20th century Pyrgos – early Minoan site in southern Crete Vasiliki – early eastern Minoan site which gives its name to distinctive ceramic ware Fournou Korfi – southern site Pseira – island town with ritual sites Mount Juktas – the greatest Minoan peak sanctuary, associated with the palace of Knossos [ 36 ] Arkalochori – site of the Arkalochori Axe Karfi – refuge site, one of the last Minoan sites Akrotiri – settlement on the island of Santorini (Thera), near the site of the Thera Eruption Zominthos – mountainous city in the northern foothills of Mount Ida Detail of Minoan painting , from Akrotiri , the Ship Procession Beyond Crete [ edit ] Minoan copper ingot The Minoans were traders, and their cultural contacts reached Egypt , Cyprus , Canaan and the Levantine coast and Anatolia. Minoan-style frescoes have been found at elite residences in Avaris and Tel Kabri . Minoan techniques and ceramic styles had varying degrees of influence on Helladic Greece . Along with Santorini, Minoan settlements are found [ 37 ] at Kastri, Kythera , an island near the Greek mainland influenced by the Minoans from the mid-third millennium BC (EMII) to its Mycenaean occupation in the 13th century.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Minoan strata replaced a mainland-derived early Bronze Age culture, the earliest Minoan settlement outside Crete.

[ 40 ] The Cyclades were in the Minoan cultural orbit and, closer to Crete, the islands of Karpathos , Saria and Kasos also contained middle-Bronze Age (MMI-II) Minoan colonies or settlements of Minoan traders. Most were abandoned in LMI, but Karpathos recovered and continued its Minoan culture until the end of the Bronze Age.

[ 41 ] Other supposed Minoan colonies, such as that hypothesized by Adolf Furtwängler on Aegina , were later dismissed by scholars.

[ 42 ] However, there was a Minoan colony at Ialysos on Rhodes .

[ 43 ] Cretans ( kftjw ) bringing gifts to Egypt, in the Tomb of Rekhmire , under Pharaoh Thutmosis III (c. 1479-1425 BC) Minoan cultural influence indicates an orbit extending through the Cyclades to Egypt and Cyprus. Fifteenth-century BC paintings in Thebes, Egypt depict Minoan-appearing individuals bearing gifts. Inscriptions describing them as coming from keftiu ("islands in the middle of the sea") may refer to gift-bringing merchants or officials from Crete.

[ 4 ] Some locations on Crete indicate that the Minoans were an "outward-looking" society.

[ 44 ] The neo-palatial site of Kato Zakros is located within 100 meters of the modern shoreline in a bay. Its large number of workshops and wealth of site materials indicate a possible entrepôt for trade. Such activities are seen in artistic representations of the sea, including the Ship Procession or "Flotilla" fresco in room five of the West House at Akrotiri .

[ 45 ] In 2024, archaeologists discovered a Minoan bronze dagger with silver rivets in an ancient shipwreck at Kumluca in Antalya Province . According to the researchers, the discovery highlights the cultural and commercial exchanges in the Mediterranean during the bronze age.

[ 46 ] Art [ edit ] Main article: Minoan art Procession fresco from Knossos; reconstructed by Émile Gilliéron Minoan art is marked by imaginative images and exceptional workmanship.

Sinclair Hood described an "essential quality of the finest Minoan art, the ability to create an atmosphere of movement and life although following a set of highly formal conventions".

[ 47 ] It forms part of the wider grouping of Aegean art , and in later periods came for a time to have a dominant influence over Cycladic art . Wood and textiles have decomposed, so most surviving examples of Minoan art are pottery , intricately carved Minoan seals , palace frescos which include landscapes (but are often mostly "reconstructed"), small sculptures in various materials, jewellery, and metalwork.

The relationship of Minoan art to that of other contemporary cultures and later Ancient Greek art has been much discussed. It clearly dominated Mycenaean art and Cycladic art of the same periods, [ 48 ] even after Crete was occupied by the Mycenaeans, but only some aspects of the tradition survived the Greek Dark Ages after the collapse of Mycenaean Greece.

[ 49 ] The Spring Fresco from Akrotiri, Thera, dated to c. 16th century BC. It is currently in the National Archaeological Museum of Greece .

Minoan art has a variety of subject-matter, much of it appearing across different media, although only some styles of pottery include figurative scenes.

Bull-leaping appears in painting and several types of sculpture, and is thought to have had a religious significance; bull's heads are also a popular subject in terracotta and other sculptural materials. There are no figures that appear to be portraits of individuals, or are clearly royal, and the identities of religious figures is often tentative, [ 50 ] with scholars uncertain whether they are deities, clergy or devotees.

[ 51 ] Equally, whether painted rooms were "shrines" or secular is far from clear; one room in Akrotiri has been argued to be a bedroom, with remains of a bed, or a shrine.

[ 52 ] Animals, including an unusual variety of marine fauna, are often depicted; the Marine Style is a type of painted palace pottery from MM III and LM IA that paints sea creatures including octopus spreading all over the vessel, and probably originated from similar frescoed scenes; [ 53 ] sometimes these appear in other media. Scenes of hunting and warfare, and horses and riders, are mostly found in later periods, in works perhaps made by Cretans for a Mycenaean market, or Mycenaean overlords of Crete.

While Minoan figures, whether human or animal, have a great sense of life and movement, they are often not very accurate, and the species is sometimes impossible to identify; by comparison with Ancient Egyptian art they are often more vivid, but less naturalistic.

[ 54 ] In comparison with the art of other ancient cultures there is a high proportion of female figures, though the idea that Minoans had only goddesses and no gods is now discounted.

[ citation needed ] Most human figures are in profile or in a version of the Egyptian convention with the head and legs in profile, and the torso seen frontally; but the Minoan figures exaggerate features such as slim male waists and large female breasts.

[ 55 ] What is called landscape painting is found in both frescos and on painted pots, and sometimes in other media, but most of the time this consists of plants shown fringing a scene, or dotted around within it. There is a particular visual convention where the surroundings of the main subject are laid out as though seen from above, though individual specimens are shown in profile. This accounts for the rocks being shown all round a scene, with flowers apparently growing down from the top.

[ 56 ] The seascapes surrounding some scenes of fish and of boats, and in the Ship Procession miniature fresco from Akrotiri , land with a settlement as well, give a wider landscape than is usual.

[ 57 ] "Ship Procession" fresco, from Akrotiri The largest and best collection of Minoan art is in the Heraklion Archaeological Museum ("AMH") near Knossos , on the northern coast of Crete.

Pottery [ edit ] Main article: Minoan pottery Many different styles of potted wares and techniques of production are observable throughout the history of Crete. Early Minoan ceramics were characterized by patterns of spirals , triangles , curved lines, crosses , fish bones , and beak-spouts. However, while many of the artistic motifs are similar in the Early Minoan period, there are many differences that appear in the reproduction of these techniques throughout the island which represent a variety of shifts in taste as well as in power structures.

[ 58 ] There were also many small terracotta figurines.

During the Middle Minoan period, naturalistic designs (such as fish, squid, birds and lilies) were common. In the Late Minoan period, flowers and animals were still characteristic but more variety existed. However, in contrast to later Ancient Greek vase painting , paintings of human figures are extremely rare, [ 59 ] and those of land mammals not common until late periods. Shapes and ornament were often borrowed from metal tableware that has largely not survived, while painted decoration probably mostly derives from frescos.

[ 60 ] Jewelry [ edit ] Minoan jewellery has mostly been recovered from graves, and until the later periods much of it consists of diadems and ornaments for women's hair, though there are also the universal types of rings, bracelets, armlets and necklaces, and many thin pieces that were sewn onto clothing. In the earlier periods gold was the main material, typically hammered very thin.

[ 61 ] but later it seemed to become scarce.

[ 62 ] The Minoans created elaborate metalwork with imported gold and copper. Bead necklaces, bracelets and hair ornaments appear in the frescoes, [ 63 ] and many labrys pins survive. The Minoans mastered granulation , as indicated by the Malia Pendant , a gold pendant featuring bees on a honeycomb.

[ 64 ] This was overlooked by the 19th-century looters of a royal burial site they called the "Gold Hole".

[ 65 ] Weapons [ edit ] Dagger with gold hilt and bronze blade, MM, AMH Fine decorated bronze weapons have been found in Crete, especially from LM periods, but they are far less prominent than in the remains of warrior-ruled Mycenae, where the famous shaft-grave burials contain many very richly decorated swords and daggers . In contrast spears and "slashing-knives" tend to be "severely functional".

[ 66 ] Many of the decorated weapons were probably made either in Crete, or by Cretans working on the mainland.

[ 67 ] Daggers are often the most lavishly decorated, with gold hilts that may be set with jewels, and the middle of the blade decorated with a variety of techniques.

[ 68 ] Blade of the "Lion Hunt Dagger", National Archaeological Museum, Athens The most famous of these are a few inlaid with elaborate scenes in gold and silver set against a black (or now black) " niello " background, whose actual material and technique have been much discussed. These have long thin scenes running along the centre of the blade, which show the violence typical of the art of Mycenaean Greece, as well as a sophistication in both technique and figurative imagery that is startlingly original in a Greek context.

Metal vessels [ edit ] Golden cup from a LH IIA Mycenaean grave at Vapheio, one of a pair known as the " Vapheio Cups ". This cup is believed to be of Minoan manufacture while its twin is thought to be Mycenaean.

National Archaeological Museum, Athens .

Metal vessels were produced in Crete from at least as early as EM II (c. 2500 BC) in the Prepalatial period through to LM IA (c. 1450 BC) in the Postpalatial period and perhaps as late as LM IIIB/C (c. 1200 BC), [ 69 ] although it is likely that many of the vessels from these later periods were heirlooms from earlier periods.

[ 70 ] The earliest were probably made exclusively from precious metals , but from the Protopalatial period (MM IB – MM IIA) they were also produced in arsenical bronze and, subsequently, tin bronze .

[ 71 ] The archaeological record suggests that mostly cup-type forms were created in precious metals, [ 72 ] but the corpus of bronze vessels was diverse, including cauldrons, pans, hydrias , bowls, pitchers, basins, cups, ladles and lamps.

[ 73 ] The Minoan metal vessel tradition influenced that of the Mycenaean culture on mainland Greece , and they are often regarded as the same tradition.

[ 74 ] Many precious metal vessels found on mainland Greece exhibit Minoan characteristics, and it is thought that these were either imported from Crete or made on the mainland by Minoan metalsmiths working for Mycenaean patrons or by Mycenaean smiths who had trained under Minoan masters.

[ 75 ] Agriculture and cuisine [ edit ] See also: Cretan cuisine The mostly reconstructed "Campstool Fresco " from Knossos Bull rhyton from Kato Zakros The Minoans raised cattle , sheep , pigs and goats , and grew wheat , barley , vetch and chickpeas . They also cultivated grapes , figs and olives , grew poppies for seed and perhaps opium. The Minoans also domesticated bees .

[ 76 ] Vegetables, including lettuce , celery , asparagus and carrots , grew wild on Crete.

Pear , quince , and olive trees were also native.

Date palm trees and cats (for hunting) were imported from Egypt.

[ 77 ] The Minoans adopted pomegranates from the Near East, but not lemons and oranges .

They may have practiced polyculture , [ 78 ] and their varied, healthy diet resulted in a population increase. Polyculture theoretically maintains soil fertility and protects against losses due to crop failure. Linear B tablets indicate the importance of orchards ( figs , olives and grapes) in processing crops for "secondary products".

[ 79 ] Olive oil in Cretan or Mediterranean cuisine is comparable to butter in northern European cuisine.

[ 80 ] The process of fermenting wine from grapes was probably a factor of the "Palace" economies; wine would have been a trade commodity and an item of domestic consumption.

[ 81 ] Farmers used wooden plows , bound with leather to wooden handles and pulled by pairs of donkeys or oxen .

Seafood was also important in Cretan cuisine. The prevalence of edible molluscs in site material [ 82 ] and artistic representations of marine fish and animals (including the distinctive Marine Style pottery, such as the LM IIIC "Octopus" stirrup jar ), indicate appreciation and occasional use of fish by the economy. However, scholars believe that these resources were not as significant as grain, olives and animal produce. "Fishing was one of the major activities...but there is as yet no evidence for the way in which they organized their fishing." [ 83 ] An intensification of agricultural activity is indicated by the construction of terraces and dams at Pseira in the Late Minoan period.

The (incomplete) Harvester Vase , soapstone , LM I.

[ 84 ] Cretan cuisine included wild game: Cretans ate wild deer, wild boar and meat from livestock. Wild game is now extinct on Crete.

[ 85 ] A matter of controversy is whether Minoans made use of the indigenous Cretan megafauna, which are typically thought to have been extinct considerably earlier at 10,000 BC. This is in part due to the possible presence of dwarf elephants in contemporary Egyptian art.

[ 86 ] Not all plants and flora were purely functional, and arts depict scenes of lily-gathering in green spaces. The fresco known as the Sacred Grove at Knossos depicts women facing left, flanked by trees. Some scholars have suggested that it is a harvest festival or ceremony to honor the fertility of the soil. Artistic depictions of farming scenes also appear on the Harvester Vase (an egg-shaped rhyton ), which depicts 27 men led by another carrying bunches of sticks to beat ripe olives from the trees.

[ 87 ] The discovery of storage areas in the palace compounds has prompted debate. At the second "palace" at Phaistos, rooms on the west side of the structure have been identified as a storage area. Jars, jugs and vessels have been recovered in the area, indicating the complex's possible role as a re-distribution center for agricultural produce. At larger sites such as Knossos, there is evidence of craft specialization (workshops). The palace at Kato Zakro indicates that workshops were integrated into palace structure. The Minoan palatial system may have developed through economic intensification, where an agricultural surplus could support a population of administrators, craftsmen and religious practitioners. The number of sleeping rooms in the palaces indicates that they could have supported a sizable population which was removed from manual labor.

[ citation needed ] Tools [ edit ] Tools, originally made of wood or bone, were bound to handles with leather straps. During the Bronze Age , they were made of bronze with wooden handles. Due to its round hole, the tool head would spin on the handle. The Minoans developed oval-shaped holes in their tools to fit oval-shaped handles, which prevented spinning.

[ 76 ] Tools included double adzes , double- and single-bladed axes , axe-adzes, sickles and chisels .

Society and culture [ edit ] The Dolphin fresco from Knossos Apart from the abundant local agriculture, the Minoans were also a mercantile people who engaged significantly in overseas trade, and at their peak may well have had a dominant position in international trade over much of the Mediterranean. After 1700 BC, their culture indicates a high degree of organization. Minoan-manufactured goods suggest a network of trade with mainland Greece (notably Mycenae ), Cyprus , Syria , Anatolia , Egypt , Mesopotamia and westward as far as the Iberian Peninsula .

Minoan religion apparently focused on female deities, with women officiants.

[ 88 ] While historians and archaeologists have long been skeptical of an outright matriarchy , the predominance of female figures in authoritative roles over male ones seems to indicate that Minoan society was matriarchal, and among the most well-supported examples known.

[ 89 ] [ 88 ] The term palace economy first gained popularity among Minoan researchers.

[ 90 ] It is now used as a general term for ancient pre-monetary cultures where much of the economy revolved around the collection of crops and other goods by centralized government or religious institutions (the two tending to go together) for redistribution to the population. This is still accepted as an important part of the Minoan economy; all the palaces have very large amounts of space that seems to have been used for storage of agricultural produce, some remains of which have been excavated after they were buried by disasters.

[ citation needed ] What role, if any, the palaces played in Minoan international trade is unknown, or how this was organized in other ways. The decipherment of Linear A would possibly shed light on this.

[ citation needed ] Government [ edit ] The " saffron -gatherer" fresco, from the Minoan site of Akrotiri on Santorini Very little is known about the forms of Minoan government, particularly since the Minoan language has not yet been deciphered.

[ 91 ] It used to be believed that the Minoans had a monarchy supported by a bureaucracy .

[ 92 ] This might initially have been a number of monarchies, corresponding with the "palaces" around Crete, but later all taken over by Knossos, [ 93 ] which was itself later occupied by Mycenaean overlords. But, in notable contrast to contemporary Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilizations, "Minoan iconography contains no pictures of recognizable kings", [ 88 ] : 175 and in recent decades it has come to be thought that before the presumed Mycenaean invasion around 1450 BC, a group of elite families, presumably living in the "villas" and the palaces, controlled both government and religion.

[ 94 ] Rejecting both a monarchy and an aristocracy, David Graeber and David Wengrow recently concluded: "Pretty much all the available evidence from Minoan Crete suggests a system of female political rule – effectively a theocracy of some sort, governed by a college of priestesses." [ 95 ] Status of women [ edit ] A reconstruction of a Minoan fresco depicting elite Minoan women. Original fresco pieces can be seen offset from reproduction done by Émile Gilliéron .

[ 96 ] As Linear A Minoan writing has not been deciphered yet, most information available about Minoan women is from various art forms and Linear B tablets, [ 97 ] and scholarship about Minoan women remains limited.

[ 98 ] Minoan society was a divided society separating men from women in art illustration, clothing, and societal duties.

[ 98 ] For example, documents written in Linear B have been found documenting Minoan families, wherein spouses and children are not all listed together.

[ 97 ] In one section, fathers were listed with their sons, while mothers were listed with their daughters in a completely different section apart from the men who lived in the same household, signifying the vast gender divide present in Minoan society.

[ 97 ] Artistically, women were portrayed very differently from men. Men were often artistically represented with dark skin while women were represented with lighter skin.

[ 99 ] Minoan dress representation also clearly marks the difference between men and women. Minoan men were often depicted clad in little clothing while women's bodies, specifically later on, were more covered up. While there is evidence that the structure of women's clothing originated as a mirror to the clothing that men wore, fresco art illustrates how women's clothing evolved to be increasingly elaborate throughout the Minoan era.

[ 100 ] Throughout the evolution of women's clothing, breasts were emphasized through varying degrees of exposure. The specific cultural significance of breasts in Minoan culture is not currently understood.

[ 99 ] Both Minoan women and men were portrayed with "wasp" waists, similar to the bodice Western women wore into the 20th century.

[ 97 ] Wall painting from Akrotiri Fresco paintings portray three class levels of women: elite women, women of the masses, and servants.

[ 97 ] A fourth, smaller class of women who participated in religious and sacred tasks are also included among some paintings.

[ 97 ] Elite women were depicted in paintings as having a stature twice the size of women in lower classes, as this was a way of emphasizing the important difference between the elite wealthy women and the rest of the female population within society.

[ 97 ] Childcare was a central job for women within Minoan society.

[ 98 ] Other roles outside the household that have been identified as women's duties are food gathering, food preparation, and household care-taking.

[ 101 ] Additionally, it has been found that women were represented in the artisan world as ceramic and textile craftswomen.

[ 101 ] As women got older it can be assumed that their job of taking care of children ended and they transitioned towards household management and job mentoring, teaching younger women the jobs that they themselves participated in.

[ 97 ] While women were often portrayed in paintings as caretakers of children, pregnant women were rarely shown in frescoes. Pregnant women were instead represented in the form of sculpted pots with the rounded base of the pots representing the pregnant belly.

[ 97 ] Additionally, no Minoan art forms portray women giving birth, breast feeding, or procreating.

[ 97 ] Lack of such actions leads historians to believe that these actions would have been recognized by Minoan society to be either sacred or inappropriate, and kept private within society.

[ 97 ] Childbirth was a dangerous process within Minoan society. Archeological sources have found numerous bones of pregnant women, identified by the fetus bones within their skeleton found in the abdomen area, providing strong evidence that death during pregnancy and childbirth were common features within society.

[ 97 ] Clothing [ edit ] Figures from the Agia Triada Sarcophagus .

Sheep wool was the main fibre used in textiles, and perhaps a significant export commodity.

Linen from flax was probably much less common, and possibly imported from Egypt, or grown locally. There is no evidence of silk , but some use is possible.

[ 102 ] As seen in Minoan art , Minoan men wore loincloths (if poor) or robes or kilts that were often long. Women wore long dresses with short sleeves and layered, flounced skirts.

[ 103 ] With both sexes, there was a great emphasis in art in a small wasp waist, often taken to improbable extremes. Both sexes are often shown with rather thick belts or girdles at the waist. Women could also wear a strapless, fitted bodice , and clothing patterns had symmetrical , geometric designs. Men are shown as clean-shaven, and male hair was short, in styles that would be common today, except for some long thin tresses at the back, perhaps for young elite males. Female hair is typically shown with long tresses falling at the back, as in the fresco fragment known as La Parisienne . This got its name because when it was found in the early 20th century, a French art historian thought it resembled Parisian women of the day.

[ 104 ] Children are shown in art with shaved heads (often blue in art) except for a few very long locks; the rest of the hair is allowed to grow as they approach puberty; [ 105 ] this can be seen in the Akrotiri Boxer Fresco .

Two famous Minoan snake goddess figurines from Knossos (one illustrated below) show bodices that circle their breasts, but do not cover them at all. These striking figures have dominated the popular image of Minoan clothing, and have been copied in some "reconstructions" of largely destroyed frescos, but few images unambiguously show this costume, and the status of the figures—goddesses, priestesses, or devotees—is not at all clear. What is clear, from pieces like the Agia Triada Sarcophagus , is that Minoan women normally covered their breasts; priestesses in religious contexts may have been an exception.

[ 106 ] This shows a funeral sacrifice, and some figures of both sexes are wearing aprons or skirts of animal hide, apparently left with the hair on.

[ 107 ] This was probably the costume worn by both sexes by those engaged in rituals.

[ 108 ] Minoan jewellery included many gold ornaments for women's hair and also thin gold plaques to sew onto clothing.

[ 61 ] Flowers were also often worn in the hair, as by the Poppy Goddess terracotta figurine and other figures. Frescos also show what are presumably woven or embroidered figures, human and animal, spaced out on clothing.

[ 109 ] Language and writing [ edit ] Main article: Minoan language Phaistos Disc , side A (top), side B (bottom) The Minoans used a number of different scripts. During the Palatial period, the primary scripts were Linear A and Cretan hieroglyphs , the latter falling out of use in MM III. The origins of these scripts is unknown. Although Cretan hieroglyphic is often assumed to have been inspired by Egyptian hieroglyphs , Anatolian and Mesopotamian writing systems have also been considered as models.

[ 110 ] Neither script has been deciphered, despite numerous attempts. For instance, when the values of the symbols in Linear B are used in Linear A, they produce mostly unrecognizable words. The language encoded by these scripts is tentatively dubbed "Minoan", though it is not certain that it was a single language. Decipherment attempts have attempted to read the language as Indo-European , Semitic , and Tyrsenian languages , but none have resulted in an accepted decipherment. The post-Bronze Age Eteocretan language has been considered as a potential descendant of Minoan. However, this language is only known from five inscriptions in eastern Crete and is thus itself poorly understood.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Linear B became the primary Cretan script after LM II. This script was adapted from the earlier Linear A in order to write Mycenaean Greek , which had become the language of administration. Linear B was deciphered in 1952, unlocking a major source of textual evidence about the economics and social organization of the final year at the palace of Knossos.

[ 117 ] A handful of Minoan inscriptions use other unknown writing systems. For instance, the Phaistos Disc features a pictorial script whose only close comparison is found on the Arkalochori Axe . Because so few instances of these scripts have been found, they remain undeciphered.

Religion [ edit ] Main article: Minoan religion The smaller of two Minoan snake goddess figurines Arthur Evans thought the Minoans worshipped, more or less exclusively, a mother goddess , which heavily influenced views for decades. Recent scholarly opinion sees a much more diverse religious landscape although the absence of texts, or even readable relevant inscriptions, leaves the picture very cloudy. We have no names of deities until after the Mycenaean era. Much Minoan art is given a religious significance of some sort, but this tends to be vague, not least because Minoan government is now often seen as a theocracy , so politics and religion have a considerable overlap. The Minoan pantheon featured many deities, among which a young, spear-wielding male god is also prominent.

[ 118 ] Some scholars see in the Minoan Goddess a female divine solar figure.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] It is very often difficult to distinguish between images of worshipers, priests and priestesses, rulers and deities; indeed the priestly and royal roles may have often been the same, as leading rituals is often seen as the essence of rulership. Possibly as aspects of the main, probably dominant, nature/mother goddess, archaeologists have identified a mountain goddess, worshipped at peak sanctuaries , a dove goddess, a snake goddess perhaps protectress of the household, the Potnia Theron goddess of animals, and a goddess of childbirth.

[ 121 ] Late Minoan terracotta votive figures like the poppy goddess (perhaps a worshipper) carry attributes, often birds, in their diadems . The mythical creature called the Minoan Genius is somewhat threatening but perhaps a protective figure, possibly of children; it seems to largely derive from Taweret the Egyptian hybrid crocodile and hippopotamus goddess.

Impression of Minoan seal ; designs like this are thought to represent rustic shrines Men with a special role as priests or priest-kings are identifiable by diagonal bands on their long robes, and carrying over their shoulder a ritual "axe-sceptre" with a rounded blade.

[ 122 ] The more conventionally shaped labrys or double-headed axe, is a very common votive offering , probably for a male god, and large examples of the Horns of Consecration symbol, probably representing bull's horns, are shown on seals decorating buildings, with a few large actual survivals.

Bull-leaping , very much centred on Knossos, is agreed to have a religious significance, perhaps to do with selecting the elite. The position of the bull in it is unclear; the funeral ceremonies on the (very late) Hagia Triada sarcophagus include a bull sacrifice.

[ 123 ] The saffron may have had a religious significance.

[ 124 ] [ better source needed ] According to Nanno Marinatos , "The hierarchy and relationship of gods within the pantheon is difficult to decode from the images alone." Marinatos disagrees with earlier descriptions of Minoan religion as primitive, saying that it "was the religion of a sophisticated and urbanized palatial culture with a complex social hierarchy. It was not dominated by fertility any more than any religion of the past or present has been, and it addressed gender identity, rites of passage, and death. It is reasonable to assume that both the organization and the rituals, even the mythology, resembled the religions of Near Eastern palatial civilizations." [ 125 ] It even seems that the later Greek pantheon would synthesize the Minoan female deity and Hittite goddess from the Near East.

[ 126 ] Symbolism [ edit ] Minoan horn-topped altars, which Arthur Evans called Horns of Consecration , are represented in seal impressions and have been found as far afield as Cyprus. Minoan sacred symbols include the bull (and its horns of consecration), the labrys (double-headed axe), the pillar , the serpent, the sun-disc, the tree , and even the Ankh .

The Bull Leaper , from Knossos ( Heraklion Archaeological Museum ) Haralampos V. Harissis and Anastasios V. Harissis posit a different interpretation of these symbols, saying that they were based on apiculture rather than religion.

[ 127 ] A major festival was exemplified in bull-leaping , represented in the frescoes of Knossos [ 128 ] and inscribed in miniature seals .

[ 129 ] Burial practices [ edit ] Similar to other Bronze Age archaeological finds, burial remains constitute much of the material and archaeological evidence for the period. By the end of the Second Palace Period, Minoan burial was dominated by two forms: circular tombs ( tholoi ) in southern Crete and house tombs in the north and the east. However, much Minoan mortuary practice does not conform to this pattern.

Burial was more popular than cremation .

[ 130 ] Individual burial was the rule, except for the Chrysolakkos complex in Malia. Here, a number of buildings form a complex in the center of Mallia's burial area and may have been the focus for burial rituals or a crypt for a notable family.

[ citation needed ] Evidence of possible human sacrifice by the Minoans has been found at three sites: at Anemospilia , in a MMII building near Mt. Juktas considered a temple; an EMII sanctuary complex at Fournou Korifi in south-central Crete, and in an LMIB building known as the North House in Knossos .

Architecture [ edit ] Minoan Palatial Centres UNESCO World Heritage Site The Hall of Columns at Knossos Location Crete , Greece Criteria ii, iii, iv, vi Reference 1733 Inscription 2025 (47th Session ) Coordinates 35°14′53″N 24°53′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 35.248°N 24.887°E ﻿ / 35.248; 24.887 Location of Minoan civilization in Greece Restored model of a Minoan house found in Archanes Fresco from the temple of the Palace of Knossos , [ 131 ] showing Minoan architecture Minoan cities were connected by narrow roads paved with blocks cut with bronze saws. Streets were drained, and water and sewage facilities were available to the upper class through clay pipes.

[ 132 ] Minoan buildings often had flat, tiled roofs; plaster , wood or flagstone floors; and stood two to three stories high. Lower walls were typically constructed of stone and rubble , and the upper walls of mudbrick . Ceiling timbers held up the roofs.

Construction materials for villas and palaces varied, and included sandstone, gypsum and limestone. Building techniques also varied, with some palaces using ashlar masonry and others roughly-hewn, megalithic blocks.

In north-central Crete blue - greenschist was used to pave floors of streets and courtyards between 1650 and 1600 BC. These rocks were likely quarried in Agia Pelagia on the north coast of central Crete.

[ 133 ] Palaces [ edit ] Storage jars (pithoi, πίθοι) at Knossos Reconstruction of the Palace of Knossos Sewers of the Palace of Knossos The Minoans famously built large complexes referred to as palaces. However, despite their name, it is generally agreed that they did not primarily serve as royal residences. The best known of them are at Knossos , Phaistos , Zakros , and Malia .

Minoan palaces consist of wings arranged around an open rectangular court. The wings are often multi-story, with interior and exterior staircases , lightwells , massive columns , and large storage chambers. The various palaces have a fairly uniform style, though each has unique features. They are typically aligned with their surrounding topography, in particular with nearby sacred mountains. For instance, the palace at Phaistos appears to align with Mount Ida and Knossos is aligned with Mount Juktas , [ 134 ] both on a north–south axis.

The first palaces are generally dated to the MM IB period. However, they were not a spontaneous development but rather the culmination of a longer architectural tradition. The palace style has precedents in Early Minoan construction styles and earlier buildings were sometimes incorporated in the later palaces. The palace at Malia is sometimes regarded as having achieved palacehood at the end of the Early Minoan period.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Palaces were continually renovated and altered, with their style changing over time. For instance, early palaces had a square-within-a-square layout, while later renovations introduced more internal divisions and corridors.

[ 137 ] The function of the palaces is a matter of debate, though it is known that they included administrative offices, shrines , workshops and storage spaces.

[ 138 ] Plumbing [ edit ] During the Minoan Era extensive waterways were built in order to protect the growing population. This system had two primary functions, first providing and distributing water, and secondly relocating sewage and stormwater.

[ 139 ] One of the defining aspects of the Minoan Era was the architectural feats of their waste management. The Minoans used technologies such as wells, cisterns, and aqueducts to manage their water supplies. Structural aspects of their buildings even played a part. Flat roofs and plentiful open courtyards were used for collecting water to be stored in cisterns.

[ 140 ] Significantly, the Minoans had water treatment devices. One such device seems to have been a porous clay pipe through which water was allowed to flow until clean.

Columns [ edit ] For sustaining of the roof, some higher houses, especially the palaces, used columns made usually of Cupressus sempervirens , and sometimes of stone. One of the most notable Minoan contributions to architecture is their inverted column, wider at the top than the base (unlike most Greek columns, which are wider at the bottom to give an impression of height). The columns were made of wood (not stone) and were generally painted red. Mounted on a simple stone base, they were topped with a pillow-like, round capital .

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] Villas [ edit ] A number of compounds known as "villas" have been excavated on Crete, mostly near palaces, especially Knossos. These structures share features of neopalatial palaces: a conspicuous western facade, storage facilities and a three-part Minoan Hall.

[ 143 ] These features may indicate a similar role or that the structures were artistic imitations, suggesting that their occupants were familiar with palatial culture. The villas were often richly decorated, as evidenced by the frescos of Hagia Triada Villa A.

A common characteristic of the Minoan villas was having flat roofs. Their rooms did not have windows to the streets, the light arriving from courtyards , a common feature of larger Mediterranean in much later periods. In the 2nd millennium BC , the villas had one or two floors, and the palaces even three.

Warfare and the "Minoan peace" [ edit ] Boar's tusk helmets are worn by the warriors depicted in the fresco fragment from Akrotiri Early excavators such as Arthur Evans proposed that there was little internal armed conflict in Minoan Crete until the Mycenaean period.

[ 144 ] However, subsequent scholarship has questioned this interpretation.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] No evidence has been found of a Minoan army or the Minoan domination of peoples beyond Crete. Evans believed that the Minoans had some kind of overlordship of at least parts of Mycenaean Greece in the Neopalatial Period , but it is now very widely agreed that the opposite was the case, with a Mycenaean elite clearly ruling Knossos from around 1450 BC. Few signs of warfare appear in Minoan art: "Although a few archaeologists see war scenes in a few pieces of Minoan art, others interpret even these scenes as festivals, sacred dance, or sports events" (Studebaker, 2004, p. 27). Although armed warriors are depicted as stabbed in the throat with swords, the violence may be part of a ritual or blood sport.

[ citation needed ] Nanno Marinatos argued that the Neopalatial Minoans had a "powerful navy" that made them a desirable ally to have in Mediterranean power politics, at least by the 14th century as "vassals of the pharaoh", leading Cretan tribute-bearers to be depicted on Egyptian tombs such as those of the top officials Rekmire and Senmut .

[ 147 ] On mainland Greece during the shaft-grave era at Mycenae, there is little evidence for major Mycenaean fortifications; the citadels follow the destruction of nearly all neopalatial Cretan sites. Warfare by other contemporaries of the ancient Minoans, such as the Egyptians and the Hittites , is well-documented.

Warfare [ edit ] Akrotiri Boxer Fresco Despite finding ruined watchtowers and fortification walls, [ 148 ] Evans said that there was little evidence of ancient Minoan fortifications. According to Stylianos Alexiou (in Kretologia 8), a number of sites (especially early and middle Minoan sites such as Aghia Photia) are built on hilltops or otherwise fortified.

[ full citation needed ] Lucia Nixon wrote: We may have been over-influenced by the lack of what we might think of as solid fortifications to assess the archaeological evidence properly. As in so many other instances, we may not have been looking for evidence in the right places, and therefore we may not end with a correct assessment of the Minoans and their ability to avoid war.

[ 149 ] Chester Starr said in "Minoan Flower Lovers" that since Shang China and the Maya had unfortified centers and engaged in frontier struggles, a lack of fortifications alone does not prove that the Minoans were a peaceful civilization unparalleled in history.

[ 150 ] In 1998, when Minoan archaeologists met in a Belgian conference to discuss the possibility that the Pax Minoica was outdated, evidence of Minoan war was still scanty. According to Jan Driessen, the Minoans frequently depicted "weapons" in their art in a ritual context: The construction of fortified sites is often assumed to reflect a threat of warfare, but such fortified centres were multifunctional; they were also often the embodiment or material expression of the central places of the territories at the same time as being monuments glorifying and merging leading power.

[ 151 ] Stella Chryssoulaki 's work on small outposts (or guardhouses) in eastern Crete indicates a possible defensive system; type A (high-quality) Minoan swords were found in the palaces of Mallia and Zarkos (see Sanders, AJA 65, 67, Hoeckmann, JRGZM 27, or Rehak and Younger, AJA 102).

[ full citation needed ] Keith Branigan estimated that 95 percent of Minoan "weapons" had hafting ( hilts or handles) which would have prevented their use as such.

[ 152 ] However, tests of replicas indicated that the weapons could cut flesh down to the bone (and score the bone's surface) without damaging the weapons themselves.

[ 153 ] According to Paul Rehak, Minoan figure-eight shields could not have been used for fighting or hunting, since they were too cumbersome.

[ 154 ] Although Cheryl Floyd concluded that Minoan "weapons" were tools used for mundane tasks such as meat processing, [ 155 ] Middle Minoan " rapiers nearly three feet in length" have been found.

[ 156 ] Charles Gates argues that the absence of warfare in Minoan art does not prove it did not occur because there is no correlation between a society's artistic depiction of warfare and how often said society is involved in conflict.

[ 157 ] Barry Molloy states that artwork is an unreliable guide to a society's behaviour, using the example that frescoes recovered prior to the Late Minoan period seldom depict people interacting with each other yet this should not be taken as evidence that Minoans rarely did so. Molloy further argues that the lack of fortifications could be attributed to Crete's rugged topography, which would have provided a significant natural defensive advantage; Molloy argues that the guardhouses could have been used to secure narrow roads through Crete.

[ 158 ] About Minoan warfare, Branigan concluded: The quantity of weaponry, the impressive fortifications, and the aggressive looking long-boats all suggested an era of intensified hostilities. But on closer inspection there are grounds for thinking that all three key elements are bound up as much with status statements, display, and fashion as with aggression;... Warfare such as there was in the southern Aegean early Bronze Age was either personalized and perhaps ritualized (in Crete) or small-scale, intermittent and essentially an economic activity (in the Cyclades and the Argolid / Attica ).

[ 159 ] Archaeologist Olga Krzyszkowska agreed: "The stark fact is that for the prehistoric Aegean we have no direct evidence for war and warfare per se ." [ 160 ] Genetic and anthropometric studies [ edit ] A cephalometric analysis by Argyropoulos et al. (1989) published in The Angle Orthodontist showed remarkable similarity in craniofacial morphology between Minoans and modern Greeks, suggesting a close affinity, and that the Greek ethnic group remained stable in its cephalic and facial morphology for the last 4,000 years.

[ 161 ] A craniofacial morphological study by Papagrigorakis et al. (2014) published in Anthropologischer Anzeiger also indicated craniological similarities between modern Greeks and Minoans, indicating continuity.

[ 162 ] A 2013 archaeogenetics study by Hughey at al. published in Nature Communications compared skeletal mtDNA from ancient Minoan skeletons that were sealed in a cave in the Lasithi Plateau between 3,700 and 4,400 years ago to 135 samples from Greece, Anatolia , western and northern Europe, North Africa and Egypt.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] The researchers found that the Minoan skeletons were genetically very similar to modern-day Europeans—and especially close to modern-day Cretans, particularly those from the Lasithi Plateau. They were also genetically similar to Neolithic Europeans , but distinct from Egyptian or Libyan populations.

[ 165 ] "We now know that the founders of the first advanced European civilization were European," said study co-author George Stamatoyannopoulos , a human geneticist at the University of Washington . "They were very similar to Neolithic Europeans and very similar to present day-Cretans." [ 164 ] In their archaeogenetic study published in Nature , Lazaridis et al. (2017) found that Minoans and Mycenaean Greeks were genetically highly similar – but not identical – and that modern Greeks descend from these populations. The F ST between the sampled Bronze Age populations and present-day West Eurasians was estimated, finding that Mycenaean Greeks and Minoans were least differentiated from the populations of modern Greece, Cyprus, Albania, and Italy.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] In a subsequent study, Lazaridis et al. (2022) concluded that around ~58.4–65.8% of the DNA of the Mycenaeans and ~70.9–76.7% of the Minoans came from Early European Farmers (EEF) , while the remainder came from ancient populations related to the Caucasus Hunter-Gatherers (CHG) (Mycenaeans ~20.1–22.7%, Minoans ~17–19.4%) and the Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN) culture (Mycenaeans ~7–14%, Minoans ~3.9–9.5%). Unlike the Minoans, the Mycenaeans had also inherited ~3.3–5.5% ancestry on average from a source related to the Eastern European Hunter-Gatherers (EHG) , introduced via a proximal source related to the inhabitants of the Pontic–Caspian steppe ( Western Steppe Herders ) who are hypothesized to be the Proto-Indo-Europeans , and ~0.9–2.3% from the Iron Gates Hunter-Gatherers in the Balkans.

[ 168 ] Admixture proportions (%) of ancestral components for the Mycenaeans and Minoans [ 168 ] EEF CHG PPN EHG Iron Gates HG Mycenaeans 58.4–65.8% 20.1–22.7% 7–14% 3.3–5.5% 0.9–2.3% Minoans 70.9–76.7% 17–19.4% 3.9–9.5% 0–2.3% 0–0.7% In 2023, whole genome-wide data of 102 individuals from Crete, the Greek mainland and Aegean Islands were sequenced, spanning from the Neolithic to Iron Age. It was discovered that the early farmers from Crete shared the same ancestry as other Neolithic Aegeans. It also confirmed previous findings for additional Central/Eastern European ancestry in the Greek mainland by the Middle Bronze Age.

[ 169 ] A report in 2024 also included a bioarcheological investigation conducted on remains that were found in Armenoi , Crete. The research revealed that the DNA of 23 newly sequenced individuals from Late Minoan tombs, had derived most of their ancestry from an Anatolian Neolithic source. Modern Greeks share this genetic profile, but are more shifted towards the Yamnaya on the PCA , and differentiated from the Greek populations that lived during the Early Bronze Age. The admixture analysis identified three main reference components: Anatolian Neolithic, Iranian Neolithic, and Western Hunter-Gatherer, with the Minoans also having some Yamnaya-related ancestry. The majority of individuals in the necropolis formed a homogenous population, with the exception of one individual, who was more similar to the populations of Western Europe. Overall, the studied genomes were found to be most similar to the other published genomes of Myceneans from mainland Greece; however, on the PCA analysis they plot exactly in-between both Minoans and Myceneans. The researchers noted that based on their genomic profile and placement, they may have been a mix of both groups.

[ 170 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Minoan civilization .

Library resources about Minoan civilization Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Caphtor Caucasus Hyksos Minoa Sacred caves of Crete Sea Peoples Notes [ edit ] ^ This chronology is based on Manning (2012), which gives absolute dates based on radiocarbon dating.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Karadimas, Nektarios; Momigliano, Nicoletta (2004).

"On the Term 'Minoan' before Evans's Work in Crete (1894)" (PDF) .

Studi Micenei ed Egeo-anatolici .

46 (2): 243– 258.

^ John Bennet, "Minoan civilization", Oxford Classical Dictionary , 3rd ed., p. 985.

^ Kozloff, Arielle P.

(2012).

Amenhotep III: Egypt's Radiant Pharaoh . Cambridge University Press. p. 211.

ISBN 978-1-139-50499-7 .

^ a b c Dickinson, O (1994) p. 248 ^ Wachsmann, Shelley (1994).

Aegeans in the Theban tombs . Peeters.

ISBN 9068310666 .

^ a b Strange, J.

Caphtor/Keftiu: A New Investigation (Leiden: Brill) 1980 ^ Kozloff, Arielle P. (2012).

Amenhotep III: Egypt's Radiant Pharaoh . Cambridge University Press. p. 211.

ISBN 978-1-139-50499-7 .

^ Wachsmann, Shelley (1994).

Aegeans in the Theban tombs . Peeters.

ISBN 9068310666 .

^ Edward Wells , An historical geography of the Old and New Testament , Clarendon Press, 1809 ^ Manning, Sturt W; Ramsey, CB; Kutschera, W; Higham, T; Kromer, B; Steier, P; Wild, EM (2006). "Chronology for the Aegean Late Bronze Age 1700–1400 BC".

Science .

312 (5773): 565– 569.

Bibcode : 2006Sci...312..565M .

doi : 10.1126/science.1125682 .

PMID 16645092 .

S2CID 21557268 .

^ Friedrich, Walter L; Kromer, B; Friedrich, M; Heinemeier, J; Pfeiffer, T; Talamo, S (2006). "Santorini Eruption Radiocarbon Dated to 1627–1600 B.C".

Science .

312 (5773): 548.

doi : 10.1126/science.1125087 .

PMID 16645088 .

S2CID 35908442 .

^ "Chronology" .

Thera Foundation . Retrieved 2009-01-03 .

^ Balter, M (2006).

"New Carbon Dates Support Revised History of Ancient Mediterranean" .

Science .

312 (5773): 508– 509.

doi : 10.1126/science.312.5773.508 .

PMID 16645054 .

S2CID 26804444 .

^ Warren PM (2006). Czerny E, Hein I, Hunger H, Melman D, Schwab A (eds.).

Timelines: Studies in Honour of Manfred Bietak (Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 149) . Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: Peeters. pp. 2: 305–321.

ISBN 978-90-429-1730-9 .

^ Wilford, J.N., "On Crete, New Evidence of Very Ancient Mariners" , The New York Times, Feb 2010 ^ Bowner, B., "Hominids Went Out of Africa on Rafts" , Wired, Jan 2010 ^ Broodbank, C.; Strasser, T. (1991). "Migrant farmers and the Neolithic colonisation of Crete".

Antiquity .

65 (247): 233– 245.

doi : 10.1017/s0003598x00079680 .

S2CID 163054761 .

^ "R.J. King, S.S. Ozcan et al., "Differential Y-chromosome Anatolian influences on the Greek and Cretan Neolithic" " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 5, 2009.

^ Hermann Bengtson: Griechische Geschichte , C.H. Beck, München, 2002. 9th Edition.

ISBN 340602503X . pp. 8–15 ^ a b c d Tomkins, Peter; Schoep, Ilse (2012). "Crete". In Cline, Eric (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Bronze Age Aegean . Oxford University Press. pp.

66– 82.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199873609.013.0005 .

ISBN 978-0199873609 .

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

35– 38.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

38– 48.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ a b c Schoep, Ilse (2012). "Crete". In Cline, Eric (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Bronze Age Aegean . Oxford University Press. pp.

113– 125.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199873609.013.0008 .

ISBN 978-0199873609 .

^ Hallager, Birgitta (2012). "Minoan Pottery". In Cline, Eric (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Bronze Age Aegean . Oxford University Press. pp.

405– 414.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199873609.013.0030 .

ISBN 978-0199873609 .

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

52– 76.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ Karl-Wilhelm Welwei: Die Griechische Frühzeit , C.H. Beck, München, 2002.

ISBN 3406479855 . pp. 12–18 ^ a b c d e f g Hallager, Erik (2012). "Crete". In Cline, Eric (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Bronze Age Aegean . Oxford University Press. pp.

149– 159.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199873609.013.0011 .

ISBN 978-0199873609 .

^ McCoy, FW; Dunn, SE (2002).

"Modelling the Climatic Effects of the LBA Eruption of Thera: New Calculations of Tephra Volumes May Suggest a Significantly Larger Eruption than Previously Reported" (PDF) .

Chapman Conference on Volcanism and the Earth's Atmosphere . Thera, Greece: American Geographical Union . Retrieved 2007-05-29 .

^ Sigurdsson H, Carey S, Alexandri M, Vougioukalakis G, Croff K, Roman C, Sakellariou D, Anagnostou C, Rousakis G, Ioakim C, Gogou A, Ballas D, Misaridis T, Nomikou P (2006).

"Marine Investigations of Greece's Santorini or Akrotiri Volcanic Field" (PDF) .

Eos .

87 (34): 337– 348.

Bibcode : 2006EOSTr..87..337S .

doi : 10.1029/2006EO340001 .

S2CID 55457903 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 30, 2007.

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

188– 201.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

197– 201.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ Watrous, L. Vance (2021).

Minoan Crete: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press. pp.

4– 13.

ISBN 9781108440493 .

^ a b "Thera and the Aegean World III" . Archived from the original on 2010-04-25 . Retrieved 2009-09-13 .

^ Castleden, Rodney (2012-10-12).

The Knossos Labyrinth . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134967858 .

^ Castleden, Rodney (2002).

Minoan Life in Bronze Age Crete . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134880645 .

^ Donald W. Jones (1999) Peak Sanctuaries and Sacred Caves in Minoan Crete ISBN 91-7081-153-9 ^ Best, Jan G. P.; Vries, Nanny M. W. de (1980).

Interaction and Acculturation in the Mediterranean: Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Mediterranean Pre- and Protohistory, Amsterdam, 19–23 November 1980 . John Benjamins Publishing.

ISBN 978-9060321942 – via Google Books.

^ Hägg and Marinatos 1984; Hardy (ed.) 1984; Broadbank 2004 ^ Branigan, Keith (1981). "Minoan Colonialism".

The Annual of the British School at Athens .

76 : 23– 33.

doi : 10.1017/s0068245400019444 .

JSTOR 30103026 .

S2CID 246244704 .

^ J. N. Coldstream and G. L. Huxley, Kythera: Excavations and Studies Conducted by the University of Pennsylvania Museum and the British School at Athens (London: Faber & Faber) 1972.

^ E. M. Melas, The Islands of Karpathos, Saros and Kasos in the Neolithic and Bronze Age (Studies in Mediterranean archaeology 68 ) (Gothenburg) 1985.

^ James Penrose Harland, Prehistoric Aigina: A History of the Island in the Bronze Age , ch. V. (Paris) 1925.

^ Arne Furumark, "The settlement at Ialysos and Aegean history c. 1500–1400 B.B.", in Opuscula archaeologica 6 (Lund) 1950; T. Marketou, "New Evidence on the Topography and Site History of Prehistoric Ialysos." in Soren Dietz and Ioannis Papachristodoulou (eds.), Archaeology in the Dodecanese (1988:28–31).

^ Hoffman, Gail L. (1997).

Imports and Immigrants: Near Eastern Contacts with Iron Age Crete . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0472107704 – via Google Books.

^ Warren, Peter (1979). "The Miniature Fresco from the West House at Akrotiri, Thera, and Its Aegean Setting".

The Journal of Hellenic Studies .

99 : 115– 129.

doi : 10.2307/630636 .

ISSN 0075-4269 .

JSTOR 630636 .

S2CID 161908616 .

^ "A Dagger from the Minoan Civilization of Crete Found in a Bronze Age Shipwreck" . 4 September 2024. Archived from the original on 2024-09-07 . Retrieved 2024-09-04 .

^ Hood (1978), 56 ^ Hood (1978), 17-18, 23-23 ^ Hood (1978), 240-241 ^ Gates (2004), 33-34, 41 ^ e.g. Hood (1978), 53, 55, 58, 110 ^ Chapin, 49-51 ^ Hood (1978), 37-38 ^ Hood (1978), 56, 233-235 ^ Hood (1978), 235-236 ^ Hood (1978), 49-50, 235-236; Chapin, 47 and throughout ^ Hood (1978), 63-64 ^ Castleden, Rodney (1993).

Minoans: Life in Bronze Age . Routledge. p. 106.

^ Hood (1978), 34, 42, 43 ^ Hood (1978), 27 ^ a b Hood (1978), 188-190 ^ Hood (1978), 205-206 ^ "Greek Jewelry – AJU" . Archived from the original on 2016-04-23 . Retrieved 2016-04-06 .

^ Nelson, E Charles; Mavrofridis, Georgios; Anagnostopoulos, Ioannis Th (2020-09-30).

"Natural History of a Bronze Age Jewel Found in Crete: The Malia Pendant" .

The Antiquaries Journal .

101 : 67– 78.

doi : 10.1017/S0003581520000475 .

ISSN 0003-5815 .

S2CID 224985281 .

^ Hood (1978), 194-195 ^ Hood (1978), 173-175, 175 quoted ^ Hood (1978), 175 ^ Hood (1978), 176-177 ^ Hemingway, Séan (1 January 1996). "Minoan Metalworking in the Postpalatial Period: A Deposit of Metallurgical Debris from Palaikastro".

The Annual of the British School at Athens .

91 : 213– 252.

doi : 10.1017/s0068245400016488 .

JSTOR 30102549 .

S2CID 127346339 .

^ Rehak, Paul (1997). "Aegean Art Before and After the LM IB Cretan Destructions". In Laffineur, Robert; Betancourt, Philip P. (eds.).

TEXNH. Craftsmen, Craftswomen and Craftsmanship in the Aegean Bronze Age / Artisanat et artisans en Égée à l'âge du Bronze: Proceedings of the 6th International Aegean Conference / 6e Rencontre égéenne internationale, Philadelphia, Temple University, 18–21 April 1996 . Liège: Université de Liège, Histoire de l'art et archéologie de la Grèce antique. p. 145.

ISBN 9781935488118 .

^ Clarke, Christina F. (2013).

The Manufacture of Minoan Metal Vessels: Theory and Practice . Uppsala: Åströms Förlag. p. 1.

ISBN 978-91-7081-249-1 .

^ Davis 1977 ^ Matthäus, Hartmut (1980).

Die Bronzegefässe der kretisch-mykenischen Kultur . München: C.H. Beck.

ISBN 9783406040023 .

^ Catling, Hector W.

(1964).

Cypriot Bronzework in the Mycenaean World . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 187.

^ Davis 1977 , pp. 328–352 ^ a b Hood, Sinclair (1971) "The Minoans; the story of Bronze Age Crete" ^ Hood (1971), 87 ^ However, Hamilakis raised doubts in 2007 that systematic polyculture was practiced on Crete. (Hamilakis, Y. (2007) Wiley.com ^ Sherratt, A. (1981) Plough and Pastoralism: Aspects of the Secondary Products Revolution ^ Hood (1971), 86 ^ Hamilakis , Y (1999) Food Technologies/Technologies of the Body: The Social Context of Wine and Oil Production and Consumption in Bronze Age Crete [1] ^ Dickinson, O (1994) The Aegean Bronze Age p. 28) ^ Castleden, Rodney (2002).

Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134880645 .

^ Hood (1978), 145–146; German, Senta, "The Harvester Vase" , Khan Academy ^ Hood (1971), 83 ^ Marco Masseti, Atlas of terrestrial mammals of the Ionian and Aegean islands, Walter de Gruyter, 30/10/2012 ^ Hood (1978), 145-146; Honour and Fleming, 55-56; "The Harvester Vase" , German, Senta, Khan Academy ^ a b c Budin, Stephanie Lynn (2004).

The Ancient Greeks: New Perspectives . Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO. pp.

175– 189.

ISBN 1-57607-815-9 .

OCLC 57247347 .

^ "Art, religious artifacts support idea of Minoan matriarchy on ancient Crete, researcher says" .

The University of Kansas . 2017-06-09 . Retrieved 2020-12-31 .

^ Nakassis, Dimitri (2010), "Reevaluating Staple and Wealth Finance at Mycenaean Pylos", in Pullen, D. J. (ed.), Political Economies of the Aegean Bronze Age , Oxford: Oxbow Books, pp.

127– 148, doi : 10.17613/M62R3NW7C ^ Trounson, Andrew (2019-11-05).

"How do you crack the code to a lost ancient script?" .

University of Melbourne . Retrieved 2020-12-31 .

^ "Greece: Secrets of the Past - The Minoans" .

Canadian Museum of History . Retrieved 2020-12-31 .

^ Honour and Fleming, 52 ^ Chapin, 60-61 ^ Graeber, David; Wengrow, David (2021).

The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p. 247.

ISBN 9780374721107 .

^ Reproduction of the "Ladies in Blue" fresco , retrieved 2025-07-13 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Budin, Stephanie Lynn (2016-08-12). Budin, Stephanie Lynn; Turfa, Jean Macintosh (eds.).

Women in Antiquity .

doi : 10.4324/9781315621425 .

ISBN 9781315621425 .

^ a b c Olsen, Barbara A. (February 1998). "Women, children and the family in the Late Aegean Bronze Age: Differences in Minoan and Mycenaean constructions of gender".

World Archaeology .

29 (3): 380– 392.

doi : 10.1080/00438243.1998.9980386 .

ISSN 0043-8243 .

^ a b Lee, Mireille M. (2000), "9. Deciphering Gender in Minoan Dress", in Rautman, Alison E (ed.), Reading the Body , University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.

111– 123, doi : 10.9783/9781512806830-011 , ISBN 9781512806830 ^ Myres, John L. (January 1950). "1. Minoan Dress".

Man .

50 : 1– 6.

doi : 10.2307/2792547 .

JSTOR 2792547 .

^ a b Nikolaïdou, Marianna (2012), "Looking for Minoan and Mycenaean Women", A Companion to Women in the Ancient World , Blackwell Publishing Ltd, pp.

38– 53, doi : 10.1002/9781444355024.ch3 , ISBN 9781444355024 ^ Castleden, 11 ^ "Minoan Dress - Fashion, Costume, and Culture: Clothing, Headwear, Body Decorations, and Footwear through the Ages" .

www.fashionencyclopedia.com .

^ "Minoan woman or goddess from the palace of Knossos ("La Parisienne")" by Senta German, Khan Academy ^ Marinatos (1993), p. 202 ^ Castleden, 7 ^ "Snake Goddess" by Senta German, Khan Academy ^ Marinatos (2010), 43-44 ^ Hood (1978), 62 ^ Hood (1971), 111 ^ Stephanie Lynn Budin; John M. Weeks (2004).

The Ancient Greeks: New Perspectives . ABC-CLIO. p. 26.

ISBN 9781576078143 .

OCLC 249196051 .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 25, 2019 .

^ Facchetti & Negri 2003 .

^ Yatsemirsky 2011 .

^ Beekes 2014 , p. 1.

^ Brown 1985 , p. 289.

^ Bennett, Emmett L.

(1996).

Daniels, Peter T.

; Bright, William O.

(eds.).

The World's Writing Systems .

Oxford University Press . p. 132.

ISBN 978-0-19-507993-7 .

^ John Chadwick (2014).

The Decipherment of Linear B . Cambridge University Press. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1-107-69176-6 .

^ Sarah Iles Johnston (2004).

Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide . Harvard University Press. p. 206.

ISBN 978-0-674-01517-3 .

^ Ridderstad, Marianna (2009). "Evidence of Minoan Astronomy and Calendrical Practises".

arXiv : 0910.4801 [ physics.hist-ph ].

^ Marinatos, Nanno .

Minoan Kingship and the Solar Goddess: A Near Eastern Koine (2013).

^ Kristiansen, Kristiansen & Larsson, 84-86 ^ Kristiansen, Kristiansen & Larsson, 85 ^ "Hagia Triada sarcophagus" , German, Senta, Khan Academy ^ Nilsson, Martin Persson (1950).

The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek Religion . Biblo & Tannen Publishers.

ISBN 9780819602732 – via Google Books.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Nanno Marinatos (2004).

"Minoan and Mycenaean Civilizations" . In Sarah Isles Johnston (ed.).

Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide . Harvard University Press. pp.

206– 207.

ISBN 978-0674015173 .

^ [2] Sailors, Cara. "The Function of Mythology and Religion in Ancient Greek Society." East Tennessee State University, Digital Commons, 2008, dc.etsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3471&context=etd.

^ Harissis, Haralampos V.; Harissis, Anastasios V. (2009).

Apiculture in the Prehistoric Aegean: Minoan and Mycenaean Symbols Revisited . British Archaeological Reports (S1958).

ISBN 978-1-4073-0454-0 .

^ In the small courtyard of the east wing of the palace of Knossos.

^ An ivory figure reproduced by Spyridon Marinatos and Max Hirmer, Crete and Mycenae (New York) 1960, fig. 97, also shows the bull dance.

^ Hood (1971), 140 ^ B.P. Mihailov; S.B. Bezsonov; B.D. Blavatski; S.A. Kaufman; I.L. Matsa; A.M. Pribâtkova; M.I. Rzianin; I.I. Savitski; A.G. Tsires; E.G. Cernov; I.S. Iaralov (1961).

Istoria Generală a Arhitecturii (in Romanian). Editura Tehnică. p. 88.

^ Ian Douglas, Cities: An Environmental History, p. 16, I.B. Tauris: London and New York (2013) ^ Tziligkaki, Eleni K. (2010).

"Types of schist used in buildings of Minoan Crete" (PDF) .

Hellenic Journal of Geosciences .

45 : 317– 322 . Retrieved December 1, 2018 .

^ Preziosi, D. & Hitchcock, L.A. (1999) p. 86 ^ D. Preziosi and L.A. Hitchcock Aegean Art and Architecture pp. 48–49, Oxford University Press (1999) ^ Dudley J. Moore (2015).

In Search of the Classical World: An Introduction to the Ancient Aegean . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 12.

ISBN 978-1-4438-8145-6 .

^ Preziosi, D. & Hitchcock, L.A. (1999) p. 121 ^ Marvin Perry (2012).

Western Civilization: A Brief History, Volume I: To 1789 . Cengage Learning. p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-133-71418-7 .

^ J.B, Rose; A.N, Angelakis (2014).

Evolution of Sanitation and Wastewater Technologies through the Centuries . London: IWA Publishing. p. 2.

^ J.B, Rose; A.N, Angelakis (2014).

Evolution of Sanitation and Wastewater Technologies Through the Centuries . London: IWA Publishing. p. 5.

^ Benton and DiYanni 1998, p. 67.

^ Bourbon 1998, p 34 ^ Letesson, Quentin (January 2013).

"Minoan Halls: A Syntactical Genealogy" .

American Journal of Archaeology .

117 (3): 303– 351.

doi : 10.3764/aja.117.3.0303 .

S2CID 191259609 . Retrieved 7 April 2017 .

^ Niemeier, W.-B. "Mycenaean Knossos and the Age of Linear B".

Studi Micenei ed Egeoanatolici .

1982 : 275.

^ "Pax Minoica in Aegean" . News – ekathimerini.com.

^ Alexiou wrote of fortifications and acropolises in Minoan Crete, in Kretologia 8 (1979), pp. 41–56, and especially in C.G. Starr, "Minoan flower-lovers" in The Minoan Thalassocracy: Myth and Reality R. Hägg and N. Marinatos, eds. (Stockholm) 1994, pp. 9–12.

^ Marinatos (2010), 4-5 ^ Gere, Knossos and the Prophets of Modernism ^ Nixon 1983 .

^ Starr, Chester (1984). Robin Hägg, Nanno Marinatos (ed.).

The Minoan Thalassocracy . Skrifter utgivna av Svenska institutet i Athen, 4o. Vol. 32. Stockholm: Svenska institutet i Athen. pp.

9– 12.

ISBN 978-91-85086-78-8 .

^ Driessen 1999 .

^ Branigan 1999 , pp. 87–94.

^ D'Amato, Raffaele; Salimbeti, Andrea (2013).

Early Aegean Warrior 5000–1450 BC . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78096-860-5 .

^ Rehak 1999 .

^ Floyd 1999 .

^ Hood (1971) ^ Gates, Charles.

Why are there no scenes of warfare in Minoan art?

, Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Égée à L'âge du Bronze, Aegaeum: annals of Aegean archaeology of the University of Liège, 1999, pp.277-283 ^ Molloy, Barry PC. "Martial Minoans? War as social process, practice and event in Bronze Age Crete." Annual of the British School at Athens 107 (2012): 87-142, pp.96-97, 107 ^ Branigan 1999 , p. 92.

^ Krzyszkowska 1999 .

^ Argyropoulos, E.; Sassouni, V.; Xeniotou, A. (1989). "A comparative cephalometric investigation of the Greek craniofacial pattern through 4,000 years".

The Angle Orthodontist .

59 (3): 195– 204.

ISSN 0003-3219 .

PMID 2672905 .

^ Papagrigorakis, Manolis J.; Kousoulis, Antonis A.; Synodinos, Philippos N. (2014-06-01).

"Craniofacial morphology in ancient and modern Greeks through 4,000 years" .

Anthropologischer Anzeiger .

71 (3): 237– 257.

doi : 10.1127/0003-5548/2014/0277 .

ISSN 0003-5548 .

PMID 25065118 .

^ Hughey, Jeffrey (2013).

"A European population in Minoan Bronze Age Crete" .

Nature Communications .

4 1861.

Bibcode : 2013NatCo...4.1861H .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms2871 .

PMC 3674256 .

PMID 23673646 .

^ a b Ghose, Tia (14 May 2013).

"Mysterious Minoans Were European, DNA Finds" .

LiveScience .

^ Hughey, Jeffery R.; Paschou, Peristera; Drineas, Petros; Mastropaolo, Donald; Lotakis, Dimitra M.; Navas, Patrick A.; Michalodimitrakis, Manolis; Stamatoyannopoulos, John A.; Stamatoyannopoulos, George (2013-05-14).

"A European population in Minoan Bronze Age Crete" .

Nature Communications .

4 (1): 1861.

Bibcode : 2013NatCo...4.1861H .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms2871 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 3674256 .

PMID 23673646 .

^ Lazaridis et al. 2017 ^ "Ancient DNA analysis reveals Minoan and Mycenaean origins" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2021-07-28 .

^ a b Lazaridis et al. 2022 , pp. 1–13, Supplementary Materials: pp. 233–241 ^ Skourtanioti, Eirini; Ringbauer, Harald; Gnecchi Ruscone, Guido Alberto; Bianco, Raffaela Angelina; Burri, Marta; Freund, Cäcilia; Furtwängler, Anja; Gomes Martins, Nuno Filipe; Knolle, Florian; Neumann, Gunnar U.; Tiliakou, Anthi; Agelarakis, Anagnostis; Andreadaki-Vlazaki, Maria; Betancourt, Philip; Hallager, Birgitta P. (2023).

"Ancient DNA reveals admixture history and endogamy in the prehistoric Aegean" .

Nature Ecology & Evolution .

7 (2): 290– 303.

Bibcode : 2023NatEE...7..290S .

doi : 10.1038/s41559-022-01952-3 .

ISSN 2397-334X .

PMC 9911347 .

PMID 36646948 .

^ Foody, M. George B.; Ditchfield, Peter W.; Edwards, Ceiridwen J. (2024). "Bioarchaeological analyses of human and faunal skeletal remains and radiocarbon dating". In Tzedakis, Yannis; Martlew, Holley; Tite, Michael (eds.).

The Late Minoan III Necropolis of Armenoi: Volume II – Biomolecular and Epigraphical Investigations .

Oxbow Books . pp.

43– 45.

ISBN 979-8-88857-046-3 .

References [ edit ] Baboula, Evanthia (2000). " 'Buried' Metals in Late Minoan Inheritance Customs". In Pare, C. F. E. (ed.).

Metals Make the World Go Round: The Supply and Circulation of Metals in Bronze Age Europe: Proceedings of a Conference Held at the University of Birmingham in June 1997 . Oxford: Oxbow. pp.

70– 81.

ISBN 9781842170199 .

Beekes, Robert S. P.

(2014).

Pre-Greek: Phonology, Morphology, Lexicon . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-27944-5 .

Benton, Janetta Rebold and DiYanni, Robert.

Arts and Culture: An Introduction to the Humanities.

Volume 1. Prentice Hall. New Jersey, 1998.

Bourbon, F.

Lost Civilizations . Barnes and Noble, Inc. New York, 1998.

Branigan, Keith, 1970.

The Foundations of Palatial Crete .

Branigan, Keith (1999). "The Nature of Warfare in the Southern Aegean During the Third Millennium BC". In Laffineur, Robert (ed.).

Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998 . Université de Liège. pp.

87– 94.

Brown, Raymond A. (1985).

Evidence for pre-Greek speech on Crete from Greek alphabetic sources . Amsterdam: Adolf M. Hakkert.

ISBN 978-9-02-560876-7 .

Burkert, Walter, 1985.

Greek Religion . J. Raffan, trans. Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-674-36281-0 Cadogan, Gerald, 1992, " Ancient and Modern Crete", in Myers et al., 1992, Aerial Atlas of Ancient Crete .

Callender, Gae (1999) The Minoans and the Mycenaeans: Aegean Society in the Bronze Age Oxford university press, Victoria 3205, Australia Castleden, Rodney (1993).

Minoans: Life in Bronze Age Crete . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415088336 .

ISBN 978-0415040709 Catling, Hector W.

(1964).

Cypriot Bronzework in the Mycenaean World . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Chadwick, John (1967).

The Decipherment of Linear B . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-39830-5 .

Chapin, Anne P., "Power, Privilege and Landscape in Minoan Art", in Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr , Hesperia (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, ISBN 0876615337 , 9780876615331, google books Clarke, Christina F. (2013).

The Manufacture of Minoan Metal Vessels: Theory and Practice . Uppsala: Åströms Förlag.

ISBN 978-91-7081-249-1 .

Clarke, Christina (2014).

"Minoan Metal Vessel Manufacture: Reconstructing Techniques and Technology with Experimental Archaeology" (PDF) . In Scott, Rebecca B.; Braekmans, Dennis; Carremans, Mike; Degryse, Patrick (eds.).

39th International Symposium on Archaeometry: 28 May – 1 June 2012 Leuven, Belgium . Leuven: Centre for Archaeological Sciences, KU Leuven. pp.

81– 85.

Crowley, Janice L. (1989).

The Aegean and the East: An Investigation into the Transference of Artistic Motifs between the Aegean, Egypt, and the Near East in the Bronze Age . Göteborg: Åström.

ISBN 9789186098551 .

Davis, Ellen N. (1977).

The Vapheio Cups and Aegean Gold and Silver Ware . New York: Garland Pub.

ISBN 9780824026813 .

Dickinson, Oliver (1994; 2005 re-print) The Aegean Bronze Age , Cambridge World Archaeology, Cambridge University Press.

Driessen, Jan (1999). "The Archaeology of Aegean Warfare". In Laffineur, Robert (ed.).

Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998 . Université de Liège. pp.

11– 20.

Driessen, J.; Langohr, C. (2014). "Recent developments in the archaeology of Minoan Crete".

Pharos .

20 (1): 75– 115.

doi : 10.2143/PHA.20.1.3064537 .

—— (1921).

The Palace of Minos: a comparative account of the successive stages of the early Cretan civilization as illustrated by the discoveries at Knossos . Vol. I: The Neolithic and Early and Middle Minoan Ages.

doi : 10.11588/DIGLIT.807 .

Sir Arthur Evans , 1921–35.

The Palace of Minos: A Comparative Account of the Successive Stages of the Early Cretan Civilization as Illustrated by the Discoveries at Knossos , 4 vols. in 6 (reissued 1964).

Facchetti, Giulio M.; Negri, Mario (2003).

Creta Minoica: Sulle tracce delle più antiche scritture d'Europa (in Italian). Firenze: L.S. Olschki.

ISBN 978-88-222-5291-3 .

Floyd, Cheryl (1999). "Observations on a Minoan Dagger from Chrysokamino". In Laffineur, Robert (ed.).

Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998 . Université de Liège. pp.

433– 442.

Furumark, Arne (1972).

Mycenaean Pottery I: Analysis and Classification (Reprint 1941 ed.). Stockholm: Åström.

ISBN 978-9185086047 .

Gates, Charles, 1999. "Why Are There No Scenes of Warfare in Minoan Art?" pp 277–284 In Laffineur, Robert, ed., Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998.

Université de Liège.

Gates, Charles (2004), "Pictorial Imagery in Minoan Wall Painting", in Charis: Essays in Honor of Sara A. Immerwahr , Hesperia (Princeton, N.J.) 33, 2004, ASCSA, ISBN 0876615337 , 9780876615331, google books Gere, Cathy.

Knossos and the Prophets of Modernism , University of Chicago Press 2009.

Gesell, G.C. (1983). "The Place of the Goddess in Minoan Society". In O. Krzyszkowska; L. Nixon (eds.).

Minoan Society . Bristol.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Hemingway, Séan (1 January 1996). "Minoan Metalworking in the Postpalatial Period: A Deposit of Metallurgical Debris from Palaikastro".

The Annual of the British School at Athens .

91 : 213– 252.

doi : 10.1017/s0068245400016488 .

JSTOR 30102549 .

S2CID 127346339 .

Hutchinson, Prehistoric Crete , many editions hardcover and softcover Goodison, Lucy , and Morris, Christine , 1998, "Beyond the Great Mother: The Sacred World of the Minoans", in Goodison, Lucy, and Christine Morris, eds., Ancient Goddesses: The Myths and the Evidence , London: British Museum Press, pp. 113–132.

Haarmann, Harald (2008).

"The Danube Script and Other Ancient Writing Systems: A Typology of Distinctive Features" .

The Journal of Archaeomythology .

4 (1): 12– 46.

Hägg, R. and N. Marinatos, eds.

The Minoan Thalassocracy: Myth and Reality (Stockholm) 1994. A summary of revived points-of-view of a Minoan thalassocracy, especially in LMI.

Haralampos V. Harissis, Anastasios V. Harissis.

Apiculture in the Prehistoric Aegean. Minoan and Mycenaean Symbols Revisited British Archaeological Reports S1958, 2009 ISBN 978-1-4073-0454-0 .

Higgins, Reynold, 1981.

Minoan and Mycenaean Art , (revised edition).

Hogan, C. Michael, 2007.

Knossos fieldnotes , Modern Antiquarian Hugh Honour and John Fleming, A World History of Art , 1st edn. 1982 (many later editions), Macmillan, London, page refs to 1984 Macmillan 1st edn. paperback.

ISBN 0333371852 Hood, Sinclair , 1971, The Minoans: Crete in the Bronze Age . London.

Hood, Sinclair (1978), The Arts in Prehistoric Greece , 1978, Penguin (Penguin/Yale History of Art), ISBN 0140561420 Hughes, Dennis, 1991.

Human Sacrifice in Ancient Greece.

Routledge: London.

Hutchinson, Richard W., 1962.

Prehistoric Crete (reprinted 1968) Kristiansen, Kristiansen & Larsson, Thomas B. (2005) The Rise of Bronze Age Society: Travels, Transmissions and Transformations Cambridge University Press Krzyszkowska, Olga (1999). "So Where's the Loot? The Spoils of War and the Archaeological Record". In Laffineur, Robert (ed.).

Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998 . Université de Liège, Histoire de l'art d'archeologie de la Grece antique. pp.

489– 498.

Lapatin, Kenneth, 2002.

Mysteries of the Snake Goddess: Art, Desire, and the Forging of History . Boston: Houghton Mifflin .

ISBN 0-306-81328-9 Lazaridis, Iosif; Mittnik, Alissa; Patterson, Nick; Mallick, Swapan; Rohland, Nadin; Pfrengle, Saskia; Furtwängler, Anja; Peltzer, Alexander; Posth, Cosimo; Vasilakis, Andonis; McGeorge, P. J. P.; Konsolaki-Yannopoulou, Eleni; Korres, George; Martlew, Holley; Michalodimitrakis, Manolis; Özsait, Mehmet; Özsait, Nesrin; Papathanasiou, Anastasia; Richards, Michael; Roodenberg, Songül Alpaslan; Tzedakis, Yannis; Arnott, Robert; Fernandes, Daniel M.; Hughey, Jeffery R.; Lotakis, Dimitra M.; Navas, Patrick A.; Maniatis, Yannis; Stamatoyannopoulos, John A.

; Stewardson, Kristin; Stockhammer, Philipp; Pinhasi, Ron; Reich, David; Krause, Johannes; Stamatoyannopoulos, George (2017).

"Genetic origins of the Minoans and Mycenaeans" .

Nature .

548 (7666): 214– 218.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.548..214L .

doi : 10.1038/nature23310 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMC 5565772 .

PMID 28783727 .

Lazaridis, Iosif; Alpaslan-Roodenberg, Songül; Acar, Ayşe; Açıkkol, Ayşen; et al. (2022-08-26).

"The genetic history of the Southern Arc: A bridge between West Asia and Europe" .

Science .

377 (6609): eabm4247.

doi : 10.1126/science.abm4247 .

hdl : 20.500.12684/12345 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMC 10064553 .

PMID 36007055 .

S2CID 251843620 .

MacKenzie, Donald A. (1917).

Myths of Crete & Pre-Hellenic Europe .

Manning, S.W., 1995. "An approximate Minoan Bronze Age chronology" in A.B. Knapp, ed., The absolute chronology of the Aegean Early Bronze Age: Archaeology, radiocarbon and history (Appendix 8), in series Monographs in Mediterranean Archaeology , Vol. 1 (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic Press) A standard current Minoan chronology.

Marinatos, Nanno, 1993.

Minoan Religion: Ritual, Image, and Symbol . Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.

Marinatos, Nanno (2010), Minoan Kingship and the Solar Goddess: A Near Eastern Koine , University of Illinois Press Marinatos, Spyridon , 1960.

Crete and Mycenae (originally published in Greek, 1959), photographs by Max Hirmer.

Marinatos, Spyridon , 1972. "Life and Art in Prehistoric Thera", in Proceedings of the British Academy , vol 57.

Matthäus, Hartmut (1980).

Die Bronzegefässe der kretisch-mykenischen Kultur . München: C.H. Beck.

ISBN 9783406040023 .

Mellersh, H.E.L.

, 1967.

Minoan Crete.

New York, G.P. Putnam's Sons.

Nixon, L. (1983). "Changing Views of Minoan Society". In L. Nixon (ed.).

Minoan society: Proceedings of the Cambridge Colloquium, 1981 .

Papadopoulos, John K., "Inventing the Minoans: Archaeology, Modernity and the Quest for European Identity", Journal of Mediterranean Archaeology 18 :1:87–149 (June 2005) Pedley, John Griffiths (2012).

Greek Art and Archaeology . Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-205-00133-0 .

Pendlebury, J. D. S.; Evans, Arthur (2003).

Handbook to the Palace of Minos at Knossos with Its Dependencies (2nd ed.).

Kessinger Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7661-3916-9 .

Preziosi, Donald & Hitchcock, Louise A. (1999) Aegean Art and Architecture , Oxford History of Art series, Oxford University Press.

Preston, Laura (2008). "Late Minoan II to IIIB Crete". In Shelmerdine, Cynthia W.

(ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to the Aegean Bronze Age . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

310– 326.

doi : 10.1017/CCOL9780521814447.014 .

ISBN 9781139001892 .

Quigley, Carroll, 1961.

The Evolution of Civilizations: An Introduction to Historical Analysis, Indianapolis: Liberty Press.

Rehak, Paul (1997). "Aegean Art Before and After the LM IB Cretan Destructions". In Laffineur, Robert; Betancourt, Philip P. (eds.).

TEXNH. Craftsmen, Craftswomen and Craftsmanship in the Aegean Bronze Age / Artisanat et artisans en Égée à l'âge du Bronze: Proceedings of the 6th International Aegean Conference / 6e Rencontre égéenne internationale, Philadelphia, Temple University, 18–21 April 1996 . Liège: Université de Liège, Histoire de l'art et archéologie de la Grèce antique. p. 145.

ISBN 9781935488118 .

Rehak, Paul (1999). "The Mycenaean 'Warrior Goddess' Revisited". In Laffineur, Robert (ed.).

Polemos: Le Contexte Guerrier en Egee a L'Age du Bronze. Actes de la 7e Rencontre egeenne internationale Universite de Liège, 1998 . Université de Liège. pp.

227– 240.

Sakellarakis, Y. & E. Sapouna-Sakellarakis (1981). "Drama of Death in a Minoan Temple".

National Geographic .

159 (2): 205– 222.

Schoep, Ilse, 2004. "Assessing the role of architecture in conspicuous consumption in the Middle Minoan I–II Periods." Oxford Journal of Archaeology vol 23/3, pp. 243–269.

Sherratt, Andrew; Taylor, Timothy (1989).

"Metal Vessels in Bronze Age Europe and the Context of Vulchetrun" . In Best, Jan Gijsbert Pieter; De Vries, Manny M. W. (eds.).

Thracians and Mycenaeans: Proceedings of the Fourth International Congress of Thracology, Rotterdam, 24–26 September 1984 . Leiden: Brill Archive. pp.

106– 134.

ISBN 9789004088641 .

Soles, Jeffrey S., 1992, The Prepalatial Cemeteries at Mochlos and Gournia and the House Tombs of Bronze Age Crete: And the House Tombs of Bronze Age Crete , Published by ASCSA, 1992.

Soles, Jeffrey S. (2008).

Mochlos IIA: Period IV: The Mycenaean Settlement and Cemetery: The Sites . Vol. 23. INSTAP Academic Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt3fgw67 .

ISBN 9781931534239 .

JSTOR j.ctt3fgw67 .

S2CID 253870838 .

Warren P., Hankey V., 1989.

Aegean Bronze Age Chronology (Bristol).

Watrous, L. Vance (1991), "The origin and iconography of the Late Minoan painted larnax", Hesperia , 60(3): 285–307; JSTOR 148065 .

Willetts, R. F., 1976 (1995 edition).

The Civilization of Ancient Crete . New York: Barnes & Noble Books .

ISBN 1-84212-746-2 Wright, James C. (2004). "A Survey of Evidence for Feasting in Mycenaean Society".

Hesperia .

73 (2): 133– 178.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.675.9036 .

doi : 10.2972/hesp.2004.73.2.133 .

JSTOR 4134891 .

S2CID 54957703 .

Yatsemirsky, Sergei A. (2011).

Opyt sravnitel'nogo opisaniya minoyskogo, etrusskogo i rodstvennyh im yazykov [ Tentative Comparative Description of Minoan, Etruscan and Related Languages ] (in Russian). Moscow: Yazyki slavyanskoy kul'tury.

ISBN 978-5-9551-0479-9 .

Yule, Paul.

Early Cretan Seals: A Study of Chronology . Marburger Studien zur Vor- und Frühgeschichte 4, Mainz 1980 ISBN 3-8053-0490-0 Vasilakis, Andonis, Minoan Crete: From Myth to History , 2000, Adam Editions, Athens, ISBN 9789605003432 v t e Minoan civilization Topics Minoan art Minoan chronology Minoan pottery Minoan seals Minoan palaces Minoan religion Minoan eruption Peak sanctuaries Sites Palaces Knossos Phaistos Malia Zakros Galatas Settlements Hagia Triada Kommos Palaikastro Kydonia Gournia Troullos Trypiti Lakkos Amnisos Petras Monastiraki Vasiliki Vathypetro Zominthos Tombs Armenoi Apesokari Chryssolakkos Kamilari Koumasa Nea Roumata Odigitria Phourni Phylaki Stylos Yerokambos Sanctuaries Arkalochori Kamares Psychro Cave Atsipades Karfi Modi Mount Juktas Petsofas Traostalos Vrysinas Art and Architecture Aegina Treasure Akrotiri Boxer Fresco Hagia Triada Sarcophagus Horns of Consecration Snake goddess figurines La Parisienne (fresco) Lustral basin Prince of the Lilies Stirrup jar Harvester Vase Kamares ware Kouloura Knossos board game Minoan Genius Minoan frescoes from Tell el-Dab'a Malia altar stone Malia Pendant Minoan Moulds of Palaikastro Minoan Bull-leaper Papoura Hill Circular Structure Vasiliki ware Wall Paintings of Thera Writing Linear A Linear B Cretan hieroglyphs Phaistos disc Arkalochori script Minoan seals See also Arthur Evans Heraklion Archaeological Museum Archaeological Museum of Chania Archaeological Museum of Sitia v t e History of Crete Minoan period Mycenean period Classical and Hellenistic period Roman period Cretan League Crete and Cyrenaica First Byzantine period Arab period Second Byzantine period Venetian period Revolt of Saint Titus Cretan War Siege of Candia Ottoman period 1841 revolt Great Cretan Revolution 1878 revolt 1897–1898 revolt Cretan State Theriso revolt World War II Battle of Crete Resistance v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Ancient seafaring Vessels Types Balangay Bangka Beden Coracle Dhow Dragon boat Dugout canoe Fire ship Galley Penteconter Kunlun ship Liburna Longship Multihull Navis lusoria Obelisk ship Outriggers Sakman Single-outrigger Catamaran Trimaran Polyremes Bireme Oared warships Trireme Quadrireme Quinquereme Hexareme Tessarakonteres Raft Reed boat Sailing ship Solar ship Tomol Tākitimu Uru by region Austronesia Egypt Persia Rome Propulsion Paddling Sailing Towing Poling Components Anchor Bow Cabin Deck Figurehead Hull Planking Keel Mast Oar Paddle Rope Rudder Steering oar Sail Sail components Stem Sternpost Strake Tiller Construction Boat building Careening Carvel built Clinker built Dugout Framing Frame-first Shell-first Joinery Lashed-lug Mortise and tenon Phoenician joint Scarf joint Sewn-plank Shipbuilding By region: Egypt Rigging Crab claw Fore-and-aft Lateen Settee Tanja Triangular sail Junk Mast-aft Spritsail Square Armaments Ballista Catapult Corvus Dolphin Fire ship Harpax Ram Sambuca Wrecks and relics Earliest Pesse canoe Dufuna canoe Abydos Moor Sand Dokos Khufu ship Ferriby Boats Dover Bronze Age Boat Uluburun Canaanite Cape Gelidonya Zambratija Rochelongue Austronesia Pontian boat Butuan boats Black Sea‎ Sinop D Greek Kyrenia Leontophoros Syracusia Ashkelon Antikythera Canaanite and Phoenician Bajo de la Campana Canaanite shipwreck Gozo Ma'agan Michael Mazarrón Punic Marsala Punic shipwreck Roman Alkedo Arles Rhône 3 Blackfriars I Caligula's Giant Ship De Meern ships Isis Madrague de Giens Nemi ships Marausa Yassi Ada Nordic Hjortspring boat Nydam boat Lists Oldest surviving Museum ships Surviving ancient ships Navigation, and ports and harbors Navigation Celestial Charts Coastal Lighthouses History Ocean swell Stick chart Periplus Piloting Pilot boat Maritime pilot By region: Inuit Micronesian Polynesia Ports and harbors Actium Aden Adulis Alexandria Apollonia Aradus Arikamedu Arsinoe Avalites Barbarikon Barygaza Basra Berenice Troglodytica Bosphorus Byblos Caesarea Maritima Canopus Carthage Centumcellae Charmutha Chittagong Delos Essina Giao Chỉ Godavaya Guangzhou Jambukola Jeddah Kaveri Poompattinam Kedah Korkai Leptis Magna Lothal Manthai Madurai Malao Mersa Gawasis Myos Hormos Martaban Mueang Phra Rot Muscat Muziris Narbonne Nesis Óc Eo ( Cattigara ) Opone Ostia Antica Palembang Piraeus Portus Augusti Portus Pisanus Prosphorion Ptolemais Theron Puteoli Qal'at al-Bahrain Qandala Quilon Rhacotis Sarapion Satingpra Sidon Socotra Sounagoura Thapsus Trincomalee Tulum Tyndis Tyre Wadi al-Jarf Zanzibar History Prehistory Timeline Britain Oceania Remote Near Ubaid period Indus Valley Civilizations Ancient Egypt Old Kingdom Austronesia Sa Huỳnh Lapita Micronesia Langkasuka Kedah Champa Kutai Tarumanagara Kalingga Srivijaya Sunda Polynesia Minoan Indus Valley Tamilakam Chola Chera Pandya Somalia Dilmun Maya Nuragic Mycenaean Phoenicia Olmecs Carthage Greece Archaic Classical Rome Achaemenid Nabatea Aksum Migration and exploration Peopling of Australia Peopling of Micronesia Austronesian Expansion Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Ocean exploration Phoenician maritime expansion Sardinia Circumnavigation of Africa Pytheas' voyage to Britain Roman circumnavigation of Britain Timeline Mariners and explorers Henenu Euthymenes Hanno the Navigator Himilco Sataspes Androsthenes of Thasos Archias of Pella Alexander the Great Nearchus Pytheas Megasthenes Xu Fu Hippalus Julius Caesar Eudoxus of Cyzicus Maes Titianus Military Navies Egyptian Achaemenid Greek Roman Battles Mediterranean: Alashiya Nile Delta Salamis Artemisium Eurymedon Naupactus Olpae Syracuse Cynossema Arginusae Mytilene Hellespont Echinades Salamis II Mylae Cape Hermaeum Ecnomus Drepana Aegates Lake Trasimene Chios Myonessus Nile Naulochus Mycale Actium Tactics Boarding Grappling Incendiaries Oared vessels Sailing ships Greek navy Ramming By region China India Odisha Japan Rome South America Rafts Economy and trade Whaling Fishing Egypt Land of Punt Indo–Mesopotamia relations Meluhha Tin Spice trade Austronesian network Sa Huynh-Kalanay Incense trade Maritime Silk Road Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Maya Greece Greco–Indian shipping Rome Indo–Roman Piracy History Mediterranean piracy Ameinias the Phocian Cilician pirates Jewish pirates Kidnapping of Julius Caesar Pompey's campaign against the pirates Research and education Scholars Historians David Blackman Lionel Casson Fik Meijer John Sinclair Morrison William L. Rodgers Chester G. Starr Archaeologists George Bass Jean-Yves Empereur Boris Rankov J. Richard Steffy Peter Throckmorton Shelley Wachsmann Topics and theories Coastal defence and fortification Grave goods Lighthouses Alexandria Marine art Marine navigation Maritime archaeology Naval warfare Maritime temples Temple of Isthmia Temple of Poseidon, Sounion Samothrace temple complex Nusantao network Phoenician discovery of America Pre-Columbian theories Sea Peoples Shipbuilding Shell middens Ship burial Tacking Thalassocracy Underwater archaeology Underwater exploration Sites H3 Qal'at al-Bahrain Experimental archaeology Ship replica Heyerdahl expeditions Kon-Tiki Ra and Ra II Austronesian replicas Hōkūleʻa Sarimanok Te Au o Tonga Hawaiʻiloa canoe Samudra Raksa Alingano Maisu Saina Balangay Voyage Faʻafaite Gaualofa Marumaru Atua Mediterranean Olympias Regina Phoenician Ship Expedition Viking replicas Viking Others Vital Alsar Ivlia Abora Viracocha Tangaroa Oakleaf Morgawr Institutes and conferences Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology Archaeological Institute of America European Association of Archaeologists Institute of Nautical Archaeology International Congress of Maritime Museums Nautical Archaeology Society RPM Nautical Foundation Sea Research Society Society for American Archaeology Museums and memorials Boat Museum, Kolkata Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology Giza Solar boat museum Grand Egyptian Museum Ancient Shipwreck Museum at Kyrenia Castle Museum of Ancient Seafaring Museum of Ancient Ships, Pisa National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology Viking ship museums: Oslo Roskilde Legend and literature Legend Ark of bulrushes Flood myths Genesis Gilgamesh Greek Literature Odyssey Histories (Herodotus) On the Ocean Argonautica Histories (Polybius) Metamorphoses Geography Aeneid v t e Bronze Age ↑ Chalcolithic Bronze Age Abashevo culture Aegean civilization Andronovo culture Apennine culture Armorican Tumulus culture Atlantic Bronze Age BMAC Bronze Age Britain Bronze Age Europe Canegrate culture Catacomb culture Chinese Bronze Age Cycladic culture Deer stones culture Deverel–Rimbury culture Elp culture Ewart Park Phase Ezero culture Glazkov culture Argaric culture Hallstatt culture Helladic period Indus Valley Civilisation Late Jomon Karasuk culture Liaoning bronze dagger culture Lusatian culture Minoan civilization Mumun pottery period Mycenaean Greece Nordic Bronze Age Okunev culture Ordos culture Penard Period Samus culture South-Western Iberian Bronze Srubnaya culture Tagar culture Tarim Basin Terramare culture Trzciniec Tumulus culture Únětice culture Urnfield culture Wessex culture Wilburton-Wallington Phase Bronze Age (North Caucasus and Transcaucasia) Kurgan Koban Kura–Araxes Shulaveri-Shomu Colchian Trialeti Maykop culture Leyla-Tepe culture Jar-Burial Khojaly–Gadabay ↓ Iron Age Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pmrz6
Cached time: 20250817043601
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.386 seconds
Real time usage: 2.722 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14194/1000000
Revision size: 121840/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 663746/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15865/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 529132/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22087965/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2141.012      1 -total
 33.73%  722.164      2 Template:Reflist
 19.24%  411.978     62 Template:Cite_book
 14.18%  303.540     27 Template:Cite_journal
  5.33%  114.186     11 Template:Sfn
  5.32%  113.846      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  5.19%  111.012      2 Template:Infobox
  4.94%  105.670      3 Template:Transliteration
  4.92%  105.276     22 Template:Navbox
  4.66%   99.798      1 Template:History_of_Greece Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:73327:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043601 and revision id 1305316058. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Minoan_civilization&oldid=1305316058 " Categories : Minoan civilization 27th-century BC establishments 12th-century BC disestablishments States and territories established in the 3rd millennium BC States and territories disestablished in the 12th century BC Pre-Indo-Europeans Prehistoric Crete History of Crete Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1: long volume value CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 10:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Minoan civilization 79 languages Add topic

