Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Theoretical models 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Extreme helium star 13 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano 日本語 Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Low-mass supergiant that is almost devoid of hydrogen An extreme helium star (abbreviated EHe ) is a low-mass supergiant that is almost devoid of hydrogen , the most common chemical element of the Universe . Since there are no known conditions where stars devoid of hydrogen can be formed from molecular clouds , it is theorized that they are the product of the mergers of helium-core and carbon-oxygen core white dwarfs .

Properties [ edit ] Extreme helium stars form a sub-group within the broader category of hydrogen-deficient stars . The latter includes cool carbon stars like R Coronae Borealis variables , helium-rich spectral class O or B stars, population I Wolf–Rayet stars , AM CVn stars , white dwarfs of spectral type WC, and transition stars like PG 1159 .

[ 1 ] The first known extreme helium star, HD 124448 , was discovered in 1942 by Daniel M. Popper at the McDonald Observatory near Fort Davis, Texas , United States. This star displayed no lines of hydrogen in its spectrum, but strong helium lines as well as the presence of carbon and oxygen.

[ 2 ] The second, PV Telescopii , was discovered in 1952, and the class of PV Telescopii variables are all extreme helium stars.  By 1996 a total of 25 candidates had been found. (This list was narrowed to 21 by 2006.) [ 3 ] A common characteristic of these stars is that the abundance ratio of carbon to helium is always in the range of 0.3 to 1%. This is despite wide variation of other abundance ratios in EHe stars.

[ 4 ] The known extreme helium stars are supergiants where hydrogen is underabundant by a factor of 10,000 or more. The surface temperatures of these stars range from 9,000–35,000 K. They are primarily composed of helium, with the second most abundant element, carbon, forming about one atom per 100 atoms of helium. The chemical composition of these stars implies that they have undergone both hydrogen and helium burning at some stage of their evolution .

[ 3 ] Theoretical models [ edit ] Two possible scenarios were proposed to explain the composition of extreme helium stars.

[ 3 ] The double-degenerate (DD) model explained the stars as forming in a binary system consisting of a smaller helium white dwarf and a more massive carbon-oxygen white dwarf. Both stars had ceased to produce energy through nuclear fusion and were now compact objects . The emission of gravitational radiation caused their orbit to decay until they merged. If the combined mass does not exceed the Chandrasekhar limit , the helium will accrete onto the C-O dwarf and ignite to form a supergiant. Later this will become an EHe star before cooling to become a white dwarf.

[ 3 ] The final-flash (FF) model suggested that an EHe star could form as a late evolutionary stage of a star after it had left the asymptotic giant branch . As the star is cooling to form a white dwarf, helium ignites in a shell around the core, causing the outer layers to expand rapidly. If the hydrogen in this envelope is consumed, the star becomes hydrogen-deficient and it contracts to form an EHe.

[ 3 ] Examination of element abundances from seven EHe stars agreed with those predicted by the DD model.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] PG 1159 star References [ edit ] ^ Jeffery, C. S.; Heber, U.; Hill, P. W.; Dreizler, S.; Drilling, J. S.; Lawson, W. A.; Leuenhagen, U.; Werner, K. (August 28 – September 1, 1995). "A catalogue of hydrogen-deficient stars". In Jeffery, C. S.; Heber, U. (eds.).

Hydrogen deficient stars, Proceedings . Vol. 96. Bamberg, Germany: Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series (published 1996).

Bibcode : 1996ASPC...96..471J .

^ Popper, Daniel M. (June 1942).

"A Peculiar B-Type Spectrum" .

Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific .

54 (319): 160– 161.

Bibcode : 1942PASP...54..160P .

doi : 10.1086/125431 .

^ a b c d e f Pandey, Gajendra; Lambert, David L.; Jeffery, C. Simon; Rao, N. Kameswara (February 2006). "An Analysis of Ultraviolet Spectra of Extreme Helium Stars and New Clues to Their Origins".

The Astrophysical Journal .

638 (1): 454– 471.

arXiv : astro-ph/0510161 .

Bibcode : 2006ApJ...638..454P .

doi : 10.1086/498674 .

S2CID 119359673 .

^ Pandey, Gajendra; Kameswara Rao, N.; Lambert, David L.; Jeffery, C. Simon; Asplund, Martin (July 2001).

"Abundance analyses of cool extreme helium stars" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

324 (4): 937– 959.

arXiv : astro-ph/0101518 .

Bibcode : 2001MNRAS.324..937P .

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04371.x .

S2CID 13468557 .

External links [ edit ] faulkes-telescope.com: "Extreme helium stars" "Astronomers Find Origin Of Extreme-Helium Stars" C. Simon Jeffery: "Extreme Helium Stars: Pulsation and Evolution" v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal v t e White dwarf Formation Chandrasekhar limit Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Mira variable PG 1159 star Stellar evolution Fate Black dwarf Type Ia supernova Candidates Neutron star Pulsar Magnetar Related links Stellar black hole Related links Compact star Quark star Exotic star Extreme helium star Subdwarf B star Helium planet In binary systems Nova Remnant List Dwarf nova Micronova Symbiotic nova Cataclysmic variable star AM CVn star Polar Intermediate polar X-ray binary Supersoft X-ray source Binary pulsar Helium flash Carbon detonation Properties Pulsating Urca process Electron-degenerate matter Quasi-periodic oscillations White dwarf cooling anomaly Related Planetary nebula List RAMBOs White dwarf luminosity function Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae List Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Extreme_helium_star&oldid=1275231490 " Categories : Extreme helium star Star types Helium Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 20:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Extreme helium star 13 languages Add topic

