Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Understanding the need Toggle Understanding the need subsection 2.1 Climate change impacts research 2.2 Disaster risks, response and preparedness 3 Aims Toggle Aims subsection 3.1 Policy aims 3.2 Reduce risk factors: vulnerability and exposure 3.3 Increase adaptive capacity 3.4 Strengthening resilience 3.5 Co-benefits with mitigation 4 Options by type of action Toggle Options by type of action subsection 4.1 Infrastructural and technological options 4.1.1 Built environment 4.1.2 Early warning systems 4.1.3 Climate services 4.2 Institutional options 4.2.1 Building codes 4.2.2 Insurance 4.2.3 Coordination mechanisms 4.3 Behavioural and cultural options 4.3.1 Change in diets and food waste 4.3.2 Change in livelihood strategies 4.3.3 Migration and managed retreat 4.4 Nature-based options 4.4.1 Supporting ecosystems and biodiversity 4.4.2 Supporting people and societies 5 Options by type of impact Toggle Options by type of impact subsection 5.1 Flooding 5.2 Sea level rise 5.3 Heat waves 5.4 Changed rainfall patterns in agriculture 5.4.1 More spending on irrigation 5.5 Drought and desertification 6 Options by sector Toggle Options by sector subsection 6.1 Ecosystems and their services 6.1.1 Assisted migration of plants or animals 6.2 Health 6.3 Cities 6.4 Water 6.5 Livelihoods and communities 6.6 International impacts and cascading risk 7 Costs and finance Toggle Costs and finance subsection 7.1 Economic costs 7.2 Cost benefit analysis 7.3 International finance 7.4 Additionality 8 Challenges Toggle Challenges subsection 8.1 Differing time scales 8.2 Maladaptation 8.3 Limits to adaptation 8.4 Incentivizing private investment in adaptation 8.5 Trade-offs with mitigation 9 Planning and monitoring of implementation Toggle Planning and monitoring of implementation subsection 9.1 By country and city 9.2 Global goals 10 History 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Climate change adaptation 34 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Farefare فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Naijá Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Setswana Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Adaptation to global warming ) Process of adjusting to effects of climate change Adapting to climate change involves infrastructural , institutional, behavioral and nature-based approaches. Examples shown here from top left are mangrove planting and habitat conservation , building seawalls to protect against sea level rise , selective breeding for drought-resistant crops , and building green roofs to reduce urban heat island effects.

Climate change adaptation is the process of adjusting to the effects of climate change , both current and anticipated.

Adaptation aims to moderate or avoid harm for people, and is usually done alongside climate change mitigation . It also aims to exploit opportunities. Adaptation can involve interventions to help natural systems cope with changes.

[ 1 ] Adaptation can help manage impacts and risks to people and nature. The four types of adaptation actions are infrastructural , institutional, behavioural and nature-based options.

[ 2 ] : Figure 16.5 Some examples are building seawalls or inland flood defenses, providing new insurance schemes, changing crop planting times or varieties, and installing green roofs or green spaces. Adaptation can be reactive (responding to climate impacts as they happen) or proactive (taking steps in anticipation of future climate change).

The need for adaptation varies from place to place. Adaptation measures vary by region and community, depending on specific climate impacts [ 3 ] : 2417 and vulnerabilities. Worldwide, people living in rural areas are more exposed to food insecurity owing to limited access to food and financial resources.

[ 4 ] For instance, coastal regions might prioritize sea-level rise defenses and mangrove restoration. Arid areas could focus on water scarcity solutions, land restoration and heat management. The needs for adaptation will also depend on how much the climate changes or is expected to change. Adaptation is particularly important in developing countries because they are most vulnerable to climate change.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Adaptation needs are high for food, water and other sectors important for economic output, jobs and incomes. One of the challenges is to prioritize the needs of communities, including the poorest, to help ensure they are not disproportionately affected by climate change.

[ 7 ] : 1253 Adaptation plans, policies or strategies are in place in more than 70% of countries.

[ 8 ] Agreements like the Paris Agreement encourage countries to develop adaptation plans. Other levels of government like cities and provinces also use adaptation planning. So do economic sectors.

Donor countries can give money to developing countries to help develop national adaptation plans. Effective adaptation is not always autonomous; it requires substantial planning, coordination, and foresight. Studies have identified key barriers such as knowledge gaps, behavioral resistance, and market failures that slow down adaptation progress and require strategic policy intervention. Addressing these issues is crucial to prevent long-term vulnerabilities, especially in urban planning and infrastructure investments that determine resilience to climate impacts. Furthermore, adaptation is deeply connected to economic development, with decisions in industrial strategy and urban infrastructure shaping future climate vulnerability.

[ 9 ] Definition [ edit ] The IPCC defines climate change adaptation in this way: "In human systems, as the process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects in order to moderate harm or take advantage of beneficial opportunities." [ 10 ] : 5 "In natural systems, adaptation is the process of adjustment to actual climate and its effects; human intervention may facilitate this." [ 10 ] : 5 Adaptation actions can be incremental and transformative. Incremental actions are actions that aim to maintain the essence and integrity of a system. Transformative actions are actions that change the fundamental attributes of a system in response to climate change and its impacts.

[ 11 ] Understanding the need [ edit ] Research on climate change adaptation has been ongoing since the 1990s. The number and variety of subtopics has greatly increased since then. Adaptation has become an established policy area in the 2010s and since the Paris Agreement, and an important topic for policy research.

[ 12 ] : 167 [ 13 ] Climate change impacts research [ edit ] Further information: Effects of climate change Scientific research into climate change adaptation generally starts with analyses of the likely effects of climate change on people, ecosystems, and the environment. These impacts cover its effects on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, ecosystems and species, economic, social and cultural assets, and infrastructure.

[ 14 ] : 2235 Impacts may include changed agricultural yields, increased floods, and droughts or coral reef bleaching. Analysis of such impacts is an important step in understanding current and future adaptation needs and options.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] As of 2022, the level of warming is 1.2 °C (34.2 °F) above levels before the industrial revolution. It is on track to increase to 2.5 to 2.9 °C (36.5 to 37.2 °F) by the end of the century.

[ 18 ] This is causing a variety of secondary effects.

[ 19 ] Many negative effects of climate change involve changes in extremes or the way conditions vary rather than changes in average conditions.

[ 20 ] For example, the average sea level in a port might not be as important as the height of water during a storm surge. That is because a storm surge can cause flooding. The average rainfall in an area might not be as important as how frequent and severe droughts and extreme precipitation events become.

[ 21 ] Disaster risks, response and preparedness [ edit ] Further information: Natural disaster , Disaster response , and Disaster risk reduction Climate change contributes to disaster risk. So experts sometimes see climate change adaptation as one of many processes within disaster risk reduction .

[ 22 ] In turn, disaster risk reduction is part of the broader consideration of sustainable development . Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction have similar goals (to reduce potential impacts of hazards and increase the resilience of people at risk). They use similar concepts and are informed by similar sources and studies.

[ 23 ] Disasters are often triggered by natural hazards. A natural event such as a fire or flood is not of itself a disaster: it's only when it affects people or is caused by them that is counts as a disaster. It is argued that natural disasters are always linked to human action or inaction or rooted in anthropogenic processes . Disasters, economic loss, and the underlying vulnerabilities that drive risk are increasing. Global risks like climate change are having major impacts everywhere.

[ 24 ] Scientists forecast climate change will increase the frequency and severity of extreme weather events and disasters. So adaptation may include measures to increase preparedness and relevant disaster response capacities.

[ citation needed ] Aims [ edit ] For humans, adaptation aims to moderate or avoid harm, and to exploit opportunities. For natural systems, humans may intervene to help adjustment.

[ 1 ] Policy aims [ edit ] The Paris Agreement of 2015 requires countries to keep global temperature rise this century to less than 2 °C above pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C.

[ 25 ] Even if greenhouse gas emissions are stopped relatively soon, global warming and its effects will last many years. This is due to the inertia of the climate system . So both carbon neutrality ("net zero") and adaptation are necessary.

[ 26 ] The Global Goal on Adaptation was also established under the Paris Agreement. The specific targets and indicators for the Global Goal are in development as of 2023. It will support the long-term adaptation goals of the governments that are parties to the agreement. It also aims to fund support for the most vulnerable countries’ adaptation needs in the context of the 1.5/2 °C goal. It has three core components. These are reducing vulnerability to climate change, enhancing adaptive capacity, and strengthening resilience.

[ 27 ] Reduce risk factors: vulnerability and exposure [ edit ] See also: Climate risk Adaptation can help decrease climate risk by addressing three interacting risk factors. These are hazards , vulnerability , and exposure. It is not possible to directly reduce hazards. This is because hazards are affected by current and future changes in climate. Instead, adaptation addresses the risks of climate impacts that arise from the way climate-related hazards interact with the exposure and vulnerability of human and ecological systems.

[ 12 ] : 145–146 Exposure refers to the presence of people, livelihoods, ecosystems and other assets in places that could suffer negative effects.

[ 1 ] It is possible to reduce exposure by retreating from areas with high climate risks, such as floodplains. Improving systems for early warnings and evacuations are other ways to reduce exposure.

[ 28 ] : 88 The IPCC defines climate change vulnerability as "the propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected" by climate change.

[ 1 ] It can apply to humans but also to natural systems . Human and ecosystem vulnerability are interdependent.

[ 10 ] : 12 According to the IPCC, climate change vulnerability encompasses a variety of concepts and elements, including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and adapt.

[ 10 ] : 5 Sensitivity to climate change could be reduced by for example increasing the storage capacity of a reservoir, or planting crops that are more resistant to climate variability.

[ 29 ] It is also possible to reduce vulnerability in towns and cities with green garden spaces. These can reduce heat stress and food insecurity for low-income neighbourhoods.

[ 30 ] : 800 Ecosystem-based adaptation is one way to reduce vulnerability to climate hazards. For instance, mangroves can dampen storm energy. So they can help prevent flooding. In this way, protection of the mangrove ecosystem can be a form of adaptation. Insurance and livelihood diversification increase resilience and decrease vulnerability. Other ways to decrease vulnerability include strengthening social protection and building infrastructure more resistant to hazards.

[ 28 ] Increase adaptive capacity [ edit ] See also: Adaptive capacity Adaptive capacity in the context of climate change covers human, natural, or managed systems. It looks at how they respond to both climate variability and extremes. It covers the ability of a system to adjust to climate change to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with consequences.

[ 1 ] Adaptive capacity is the ability to reduce the likelihood of negative impacts of climate-related hazards.

[ 31 ] It does this through the ability to design and implement effective adaptation strategies, or to react to evolving hazards and stresses.

Societies that can respond to change quickly and successfully have a high adaptive capacity.

[ 32 ] Conversely, high adaptive capacity does not necessarily lead to successful adaptation action. It does not necessarily succeed in goals of equity and enhancing well-being.

[ 12 ] : 164 In general, adaptation capacity differs between high and low-income countries.

[ 33 ] By some indices such as ND-GAIN , high-income countries tend to have higher adaptive capacity. However, there is strong variation within countries.

[ 12 ] : 164 The determinants of adaptive capacity include: [ 34 ] : 895–897 Economic resources: Wealthier nations are better able to bear the costs of adaptation to climate change than poorer ones.

Technology: Lack of technology can impede adaptation.

Information and skills: Information and trained personnel are necessary to assess and implement successful adaptation options.

Social infrastructure Institutions: Nations with well-developed social institutions are likely to have greater adaptive capacity than those with less effective institutions. These are typically developing nations and economies in transition.

Equity: Some believe that adaptive capacity is greater where there are government institutions and arrangements in place that allow equitable access to resources.

Strengthening resilience [ edit ] See also: Climate resilience The IPCC considers climate resilience to be “the capacity of social, economic and ecosystems to cope with a hazardous event or trend or disturbance”. It includes the abilities to reorganise and learn.

[ 10 ] : 7 This definition is similar to that of climate change adaptation. However, resilience involves a more systematic approach to absorbing change. It involves using those changes to become more efficient. The idea is that people can intervene to reorganise the system when disturbance creates an opportunity to do so.

[ 12 ] : 174 Implemented adaptation most often builds upon resilience as a way of bouncing back to recover after a disturbance. Experts consider it to be incremental rather than transformational.

[ 12 ] : 130, 134 On the other hand, climate resilience-focused projects can be activities to promote and support transformational adaptation. This is because transformational adaptation is connected with implementation at scale and ideally at the system-level.

[ 12 ] : 72 [ 35 ] : 26 Strengthening resilience is therefore important for maintaining a capacity for transformation. Transformations, and the processes of transition, cover the major systems and sectors at scale. These are energy, land and ecosystems, urban and infrastructure, and industrial and societal.

[ 12 ] : 125 Transformations may fail if they do not integrate social justice, consider power differences and political inclusion, and if they do not deliver improvements in incomes and wellbeing for everyone.

[ 12 ] : 171 Climate resilient development is a closely related area of work and research topic that has recently emerged. It describes situations in which adaptation, mitigation and development solutions are pursued together. It is able to benefit from synergies from among the actions and reduce trade-offs.

[ 12 ] : 172 Co-benefits with mitigation [ edit ] Further information: Co-benefits of climate change mitigation and Effects of climate change on human health § Health co-benefits from mitigation and adaptation Strategies to limit climate change are complementary to efforts to adapt to it.

[ 12 ] : 128 Limiting warming, by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and removing them from the atmosphere, is also known as climate change mitigation .

[ 36 ] There are some synergies or co-benefits between adaptation and mitigation. Synergies include the benefits of public transport for both mitigation and adaptation. Public transport has lower greenhouse gas emissions per kilometer travelled than cars. A good public transport network also increases resilience in case of disasters. This is because evacuation and emergency access becomes easier. Reduced air pollution from public transport improves health. This in turn may lead to improved economic resilience, as healthy workers perform better.

[ 37 ] Options by type of action [ edit ] There are many adaptation responses. We sometimes call them adaptation measures, strategies or solutions. They help manage impacts and risks to people and nature.

Current adaptation focuses on near-term climate risks. It also focuses on particular sectors, such as water and agriculture, and on regions, such as Africa and Asia.

[ 10 ] It is important to close gaps between adaptation that is carried out and the needs relative to today's climate in order to reduce risks to a tolerable level. However, future adaptation must also anticipate future climate change risks. Some options may become less effective or entirely unfeasible as global warming increases.

Adaptation responses fall into four categories that all directly aim to reduce risks and exploit opportunities: [ 2 ] : 2433–2434 Infrastructural and technological adaptation (including engineering, built environment, and high-tech solutions); Institutional adaptation (economic organizations, laws and regulation, government policies and programmes); Behavioural and cultural (individual and household strategies as well as social and community approaches); Nature-based solutions (including ecosystem-based adaptation options).

We can also group options into three categories: 1. Structural and physical adaptation (including engineering and built environment, technological, ecosystem-based, services); 2. Social adaptation (educational, informational, behavioural); 3. Institutional adaptation (economic organizations, laws and regulation, government policies and programmes).

[ 11 ] : 845 Other ways to distinguish types of adaptation are anticipatory versus reactive, autonomous versus planned and incremental versus transformational.

[ 12 ] : 134 Incremental adaptation actions aim to maintain the essence and integrity of a system. Transformative actions change the fundamental attributes of a system in response to climate change and its impacts.

[ 1 ] Autonomous adaptation is adaptation response to experienced climate and its effects. It does not involve explicit planning and does not specifically focus on addressing climate change.

[ 1 ] Planned adaptation can be reactive or anticipatory. Anticipatory adaptation is undertaken before impacts are apparent. Relying on autonomous adaptation to climate change can result in substantial costs. It is possible to avoid many of these costs with planned adaptation.

[ 34 ] : 904 Infrastructural and technological options [ edit ] Wetland restoration in Australia Built environment [ edit ] Built environment options include installing or upgrading infrastructure to protect against flooding, sea level rise, heatwaves and extreme heat. They also include infrastructure to respond to changed rainfall patterns in agriculture. This could be infrastructure for irrigation.

[ 38 ] A survey conducted in the European Union revealed that 39% of respondents cited the improvement of infrastructure as a key priority for local climate adaptation, which includes measures such as installing better drainage systems, flood barriers, storm shelters, and more resilient power grids.

[ 39 ] Climate change adaption is on the agenda of European municipal governments. However, apart from new agencies being established with expertise on climate change adaptation and urban planning , the adaptation of the built environment results in significant changes to the daily work of a city's administrative staff.

[ 40 ] Early warning systems [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Early warning system § For climate adaptation .

[ edit ] Because of changes in extreme weather and sea level rise , due to climate change, the UN has recommended early warning systems as key elements of climate change adaptation and climate risk management .

[ 41 ] Flooding, cyclones and other rapidly changing weather events can make communities in coastal areas, along floodzones and reliant on agriculture very vulnerable to extreme events.

[ 41 ] To this end the UN is running a partnership titled "Climate Risk and Early Warning Systems" to aid high risk countries with neglected warning systems in developing them.

[ 41 ] European countries have also seen early warning systems help communities adapt to drought, heat waves, disease, fire, and other related effects of climate change.

[ 42 ] Similarly the WHO recommends early warning systems to prevent increases in heatwave related morbidity and disease outbreaks.

[ 43 ] Climate services [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Climate Information Service .

[ edit ] Climate Information Services (CIS) (or climate services) entail the dissemination of climate data in a way that aids people and organizations in making decisions. CIS helps its users foresee and control the hazards associated with a changing and unpredictable climate.

[ 44 ] It encompasses a knowledge loop that includes targeted user communities' access to, interpretation of, communication of, and use of pertinent, accurate, and trustworthy climate information, as well as their feedback on that use. Climate information services involve the timely production, translation and delivery of useful climate data, information and knowledge.

[ 45 ] Climate services are systems to deliver the best available climate information to end-users in the most usable and accessible formats. They aim to support climate change adaptation, mitigation and risk management decisions. There is a vast range of practices and products for interpreting, analyzing, and communicating climate data. They often combine different sources and different types of knowledge.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] They aim  to fulfil a well-specified need. These climate services mark a shift from supply-driven information products that result from scientific research. Instead they are demand-driven and take greater account of users’ needs and decision-making. To do so they require different types of user–producer engagement, depending on what the service aims to deliver.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] This type of collaboration is called co-design.

Institutional options [ edit ] Launching the Coastal City Adaptation Project in Quelimane, Mozambique Coastal City Adaptation Project, in Quelimane city, Mozambique. It will improve Quelimane's preparation for events like floods, erosion, sea level rise and other weather and climate related events.

Institutional responses include zoning regulations, new building codes , new insurance schemes, and coordination mechanisms.

[ 50 ] Policies are important tools to integrate issues of climate change adaptation.

[ 51 ] At the national level, adaptation strategies appear in National Adaptation Plans (NAPS) and National Adaptation Programmes of Action ( NAPA ). They also occur in national climate change policies and strategies.

[ 52 ] These are at different levels of development in different countries and in cities. This is discussed further in the section below on "implementation".

Cities, states, and provinces often have considerable responsibility in land use planning , public health, and disaster management. Institutional adaptation actions occur more frequently in cities than in other sectors.

[ 2 ] : 2434 Some have begun to adapt to threats intensified by climate change, such as flooding, bushfires, heatwaves, and rising sea levels.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Building codes [ edit ] Managing the codes or regulations that buildings must conform to is important for keeping people healthy and comfortable during extremes of hot and cold and protecting them from floods.

[ 56 ] : 953–954 There are many ways to do this. They include increasing the insulation values, adding solar shading, increasing natural ventilation or passive cooling , codes for green roofs to reduce urban heat island effects or requiring waterfront properties to have higher foundations.

[ 56 ] : 953–954 Land use zoning controls are central to investment in urban development . They can reduce risks to areas threatened by floods and landslides.

[ 56 ] : 942–943 Insurance [ edit ] See also: Climate risk insurance Insurance spreads the financial impact of flooding and other extreme weather events.

[ 57 ] There is an increasing availability of such options.

[ 58 ] : 814 For example, index-based insurance is a new product which triggers payment when weather indices such as precipitation or temperature cross a threshold. It aims to help customers such as farmers deal with production risks. Access to reinsurance may make cities more resilient.

[ 59 ] Where there are failures in the private insurance market, the public sector can subsidize premiums.

[ 60 ] One study identified key equity issues for policy considerations: [ 60 ] Transferring risk to the public purse does not reduce overall risk; Governments can spread the cost of losses across time rather than space; Governments can force home-owners in low-risk areas to cross-subsidize the insurance premiums of those in high-risk areas; Cross-subsidization is increasingly difficult for private sector insurers operating in a competitive market; Governments can tax people to pay for tomorrow's disaster.

Government-subsidized insurance, such as the U.S. National Flood Insurance Program, comes under criticism for providing a perverse incentive to develop properties in hazardous areas. This increases overall risk.

[ 61 ] Insurance can also undermine other efforts such as property level protection and resilience to increase adaptation.

[ 62 ] Appropriate land-use policies can counter this behavioural effect. These policies limit new construction where there are current or future climate risks. They also encourage the adoption of resilient building codes to mitigate potential damages.

[ 63 ] Coordination mechanisms [ edit ] Coordination helps achieve goals shared by a range of people or organizations. Examples are information-sharing or joint implementation of adaptation options. Coordination helps use resources effectively. It avoids duplication, promotes consistency across government, and makes it easier for all people and organizations involved to understand the work.

[ 64 ] : 5 In the food production sector, adaptation projects financed through the UNFCCC often include coordination between national governments and administrations at the state, provincial or city level. There are fewer examples of coordination between community-level and national government.

[ 65 ] Behavioural and cultural options [ edit ] Individuals and households play a central role in adaptation. There are many examples particularly in the global south. Behavioural adaptation is a change in the strategies, practices and actions that help to reduce risk. These can include protecting homes from flooding, protecting crops from drought, and adopting different income-earning activities. Behavioural change is the most common form of adaptation.

[ 2 ] : 2433 Change in diets and food waste [ edit ] Food waste spoilage increases with exposure to higher temperatures and humidity. It also increases with extreme events such as flooding and contamination.

[ 30 ] : 787 This can happen at different points in the food supply chain. Thus it can be a risk to food security and nutrition. Adaptation measures can review the production, processing and other handling practices of suppliers. Examples include further sorting to separate damaged products, drying the product for better storage or improved packaging.

[ 30 ] : 787 Other behaviour change options for retailers and consumers include accepting fruit and vegetables that appear less than perfect, redistributing food surpluses, and lowering prices on nearly expired food.

[ 66 ] Dietary change options in regions with excess consumption of calories include replacing meat and dairy foods with a higher share of plant-based foods . This has both mitigation and adaptation benefits. Plant-based options have much lower energy and water requirements. Adaptation options can investigate the dietary patterns that are better suited to the regional, socioeconomic and cultural context. Social-cultural norms strongly affect preferences for foods. Policies such as subsidies, taxes, and marketing can also support dietary choices that help adaptation.

[ 30 ] : 799 Change in livelihood strategies [ edit ] See also: Climate change adaptation § Changed rainfall patterns in agriculture Agriculture offers many opportunities for adaptation. These include changing planting times, or changing to crops and livestock that are better adapted to climate conditions and presence of pests. Other examples are breeding more resilient crops and selecting genetically modified crops.

[ 30 ] : 787 All these aim to improve food security and nutrition.

Migration and managed retreat [ edit ] See also: Climate migration , Effects of climate change § Displacement and migration , and Managed retreat The Government of Kiribati is addressing the threats of climate change to Kiribati, under the Kiribati Adaptation Program. Island nations in the Pacific are particularly vulnerable to sea level rise .

Migration counts as behavioural climate adaptation for some, although others refer to it as a climate response rather: The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report states: "Some responses, such as migration, relocation and resettlement may or may not be considered to be adaptation".

[ 67 ] : 27 Many factors influence migration decisions. It is difficult to say how much climate change influences migration.

[ 50 ] : 2428 The environment is one of many factors. Economic, demographic or political factors are often important in migration decisions. Climate change is an indirect or less important cause.

[ 68 ] : 1079–1080 Seasonal migration or mobility includes traditional strategies such as pastoralism or seeking seasonal employment in urban centres. These are normally voluntary and economically motivated. Weather fluctuations and extremes can influence migration.

[ 50 ] : 2428 Weather variability is an important contributor to declines in agricultural incomes and employment. Climate change has made these impacts more likely. As a result, migration has increased, particularly rural to urban movement.

[ 50 ] : 2428 Measures to increase adaptive capacity, such as social protection and promoting women's empowerment, can help people with little power in migration decisions.

[ 10 ] : 25 Sometimes people are unwilling or unable to migrate. In such cases it may be necessary for the government to intervene to keep people safe.

[ 68 ] : 1079–1081 This is also referred to as managed retreat .

Nature-based options [ edit ] Main articles: Ecosystem-based adaptation and Nature-based solutions Mangroves protect coastlines against erosion ( Cape Coral , Florida, United States) Nature-based solutions (NBS) work with nature and ecosystems to provide benefits to both societies and overall biodiversity . In the context of climate change, they provide adaptation and mitigation options that benefit and support wild species and habitats. In doing this they often contribute to other sustainable development goals.

[ 69 ] : 303 Nature-based solutions is an overarching term that includes actions known as ecosystem-based adaptation . However NBS is not restricted to climate change, and often also refers to climate change mitigation. So it is a less specific term.

[ 69 ] : 284 Both approaches require benefits to people and nature to be delivered simultaneously.

Supporting ecosystems and biodiversity [ edit ] Ecosystems adapt to global warming depending on their resilience to climate change. Humans can help adaptation in ecosystems in order to strengthen biodiversity . One example is to increase links between ecosystems so that species can migrate on their own to more favourable climate conditions. Another is to assist this migration through human transport of plants or animals. Another example is to use scientific research and development to help coral reefs survive climate change. Protection and restoration of natural and semi-natural areas also helps build resilience, making it easier for ecosystems to adapt.

[ 70 ] Supporting people and societies [ edit ] Many actions that promote adaptation in ecosystems also help humans adapt via ecosystem-based adaptation and nature-based solutions. For instance, restoration of natural fire regimes makes catastrophic fires less likely and reduces the human exposure to this hazard. Giving rivers more space allows natural systems to store more water. This makes floods in inhabited areas less likely. The provision of green spaces and tree planting creates shade for livestock. There is a trade-off between agricultural production and the restoration of ecosystems in some areas.

[ 70 ] Options by type of impact [ edit ] Some adaptation options tackle specific climate hazards like floods or drought. Other options emerge when there are risks from different hazards as well as other factors that contribute to them such as with migration.

Flooding [ edit ] Flood protection for town of Ybbs along the river Donau Further information: Flood control Flooding can occur in cities or towns as urban flooding . It can also take place by the sea as coastal flooding . Sea level rise can make coastal flooding worse. In some areas there are also risks of glacial lake outburst floods .

There are many adaptation options for flooding: [ 71 ] Installing better flood defences such as flood barriers , sea walls and increased pumping capacity [ 72 ] Installing devices to prevent seawater from backflowing into storm drains [ 73 ] Rainwater storage to deal with increased run-off from rainfall. This includes reducing paved areas or changing to water-permeable pavements, adding water-buffering vegetation, adding underground storage tanks, and subsidizing household rain barrels [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Raising pumps at wastewater treatment plants [ 73 ] Buying out homeowners in flood-prone areas [ 76 ] Raising street level to prevent flooding [ 72 ] Using and protecting mangroves [ 77 ] Glacial lakes in danger of outburst flooding can have their moraines replaced with concrete dams to provide protection. This may also provide hydroelectric power [ 78 ] More frequent drenching rains may make it necessary to increase the capacity of stormwater systems. This separates stormwater from blackwater , so that overflows in peak periods do not contaminate rivers. One example is the SMART Tunnel in Kuala Lumpur.

New York City produced a comprehensive report for its Rebuilding and Resiliency initiative after Hurricane Sandy . It includes making buildings less prone to flooding. It also aims to make specific problems encountered during and after the storm less likely to recur. These include weeks-long fuel shortages even in unaffected areas due to legal and transportation problems, flooded health care facilities, insurance premium increases, damage to electricity and steam generation and distribution networks, and flooding of subway and roadway tunnels.

[ 79 ] Sea level rise [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sea level rise § Adaptation .

[ edit ] Oosterscheldekering , the largest barrier of the Dutch Delta Works .

Cutting greenhouse gas emissions can slow and stabilize the rate of sea level rise after 2050. This would greatly reduce its costs and damages, but cannot stop it outright. So climate change adaptation to sea level rise is inevitable.

[ 80 ] : 3–127 The simplest approach is to stop development in vulnerable areas and ultimately move people and infrastructure away from them. Such retreat from sea level rise often results in the loss of livelihoods. The displacement of newly impoverished people could burden their new homes and accelerate social tensions.

[ 81 ] Some communities are responding to sea-level rise by building protective infrastructure, moving away from the coast, or introducing new policies to support long-term adaptation. At the same time, certain coastal ecosystems such as wetlands can naturally adjust by migrating to higher ground if the surrounding conditions allow.

[ 82 ] It is possible to avoid or at least delay the retreat from sea level rise with enhanced protections.

These include dams , levees or improved natural defenses.

[ 83 ] Other options include updating building standards to reduce damage from floods, addition of storm water valves to address more frequent and severe flooding at high tide, [ 84 ] or cultivating crops more tolerant of saltwater in the soil, even at an increased cost.

[ 85 ] [ 83 ] [ 86 ] These options divide into hard and soft adaptation. Hard adaptation generally involves large-scale changes to human societies and ecological systems. It often includes the construction of capital-intensive infrastructure. Soft adaptation involves strengthening natural defenses and local community adaptation. This usually involves simple, modular and locally owned technology. The two types of adaptation may be complementary or mutually exclusive.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Adaptation options often require significant investment. But the costs of doing nothing are far greater. One example would involve adaptation against flooding. Effective adaptation measures could reduce future annual costs of flooding in 136 of the world's largest coastal cities from $1 trillion by 2050 without adaptation to a little over $60 billion annually. The cost would be $50 billion per year.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Some experts argue that retreat from the coast would have a lower impact on the GDP of India and Southeast Asia then attempting to protect every coastline, in the case of very high sea level rise.

[ 90 ] Planning for the future sea level rise used in the United Kingdom .

[ 91 ] To be successful, adaptation must anticipate sea level rise well ahead of time. As of 2023, the global state of adaptation planning is mixed. A survey of 253 planners from 49 countries found that 98% are aware of sea level rise projections, but 26% have not yet formally integrated them into their policy documents. Only around a third of respondents from Asian and South American countries have done so. This compares with 50% in Africa, and over 75% in Europe, Australasia and North America. Some 56% of all surveyed planners have plans which account for 2050 and 2100 sea level rise. But 53% use only a single projection rather than a range of two or three projections. Just 14% use four projections, including the one for "extreme" or "high-end" sea level rise.

[ 92 ] Another study found that over 75% of regional sea level rise assessments from the West and Northeastern United States included at least three estimates. These are usually RCP2.6 , RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, and sometimes include extreme scenarios. But 88% of projections from the American South had only a single estimate. Similarly, no assessment from the South went beyond 2100. By contrast 14 assessments from the West went up to 2150, and three from the Northeast went to 2200. 56% of all localities were also found to underestimate the upper end of sea level rise relative to IPCC Sixth Assessment Report .

[ 93 ] Related to this, a survey conducted in the European Union indicates that 35% believe they may need to relocate to an area less vulnerable to climate impacts, either locally or internationally, to avoid risks such as rising sea levels and floods, forest fires, or other extreme weather events.

[ 94 ] Heat waves [ edit ] See also: Heat wave , Extreme weather , and Urban heat island A 2020 study projects that regions inhabited by one third of the human population could become as hot as the hottest parts of the Sahara within 50 years. This will happen without a change in patterns of population growth and without migration, unless there is a sharp reduction in greenhouse gas emissions to limit warming to 1.5 °C. The most affected regions have little adaptive capacity as of 2020.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Cities are particularly affected by heat waves due to the urban heat island effect. Climate change does not cause urban heat islands. But it leads to more frequent and more intense heat waves which in turn amplify the urban heat island effect in cities.

[ 56 ] : 993 Compact, dense urban development may increase the urban heat island effect. This results in higher temperatures and increased exposure.

[ 98 ] Tree cover and green space can reduce heat in cities. They act as sources of shade and promote evaporative cooling.

[ 99 ] Other options include green roofs , passive daytime radiative cooling applications, and the use of lighter-coloured surfaces and less absorptive building materials in urban areas. These reflect more sunlight and absorb less heat.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] It may be necessary to change city trees to more heat-tolerant varieties.

[ 74 ] [ 103 ] Methods for adapting to increased heat include: The use and development of air conditioning and cooling systems. Adding air conditioning can make schools [ 74 ] and workplaces cooler. But it results in additional greenhouse gas emissions unless it uses renewable energy.

Solar-energy passive cooling systems for houses and/or refrigeration.

Changed rainfall patterns in agriculture [ edit ] See also: Effects of climate change on agriculture § Adaptation Climate change is altering global rainfall patterns. This affects agriculture.

[ 104 ] Rainfed agriculture accounts for 80% of global agriculture.

[ 105 ] Many of the 852 million poor people in the world live in parts of Asia and Africa that depend on rainfall to cultivate food crops. Climate change will modify rainfall , evaporation , runoff , and soil moisture storage. Extended drought can cause the failure of small and marginal farms. This results in increased economic, political and social disruption.

Water availability strongly influences all kinds of agriculture. Changes in total seasonal precipitation or its pattern of variability are both important.

Moisture stress during flowering, pollination, and grain-filling harms most crops. It is particularly harmful to corn, soybeans, and wheat. Increased evaporation from the soil and accelerated transpiration in the plants themselves will cause moisture stress.

There are many adaptation options. One is to develop crop varieties with greater drought tolerance [ 106 ] and another is to build local rainwater storage. Using small planting basins to harvest water in Zimbabwe has boosted maize yields. This happens whether rainfall is abundant or scarce. And in Niger they have led to three or fourfold increases in millet yields.

[ 107 ] Climate change can threaten food security and water security . It is possible to adapt food systems to improve food security and prevent negative impacts from climate change in the future.

[ 108 ] More spending on irrigation [ edit ] Demand for water for irrigation is likely to rise in a warmer climate. This will increase competition between agriculture and urban and industrial users. Agriculture is already the largest consumer of water in semi-arid regions . Falling water tables and the resulting increase in energy to pump water will make irrigation more expensive. This is particularly the case when drier conditions will require more water per acre. Other strategies can make the most efficient use of water resources. The International Water Management Institute has suggested five strategies that could help Asia feed its growing population in light of climate change. These are modernizing existing irrigation schemes to suit modern methods of farming; supporting farmers' efforts to find their own water supplies by tapping into groundwater in a sustainable way; looking beyond conventional Participatory Irrigation Management schemes by working with the private sector; expanding capacity and knowledge; and investing outside the irrigation sector.

[ 109 ] Drought and desertification [ edit ] Reforestation activities in Praslin, Seychelles Reforestation is one way to stop desertification fueled by climate change and non-sustainable land use. One of the most important projects is the Great Green Wall that aims to stop the southward expansion of the Sahara desert. By 2018 only 15% of it had been carried out. But there are already many positive effects. These include the restoration of over 12 million acres (5 million hectares) of degraded land in Nigeria; the planting of roughly 30 million acres of drought-resistant trees across Senegal; and the restoration of 37 million acres of land in Ethiopia. Tree maintenance led to the refilling of groundwater wells with drinking water, additional food supplies for rural towns, and new sources of work and income for villagers.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] Options by sector [ edit ] See also: Climate change vulnerability § Differences by systems and sectors This section looks at the main sectors and systems affected by climate change. Experts have assessed the risks and adaptation options for them.

[ 113 ] : ix Ecosystems and their services [ edit ] Further information: Effects of climate change on biomes and Effects of climate change on oceans The main risks to ecosystems from climate change are biodiversity loss, ecosystem structure change, increased tree mortality, increased wildfire, and ecosystem carbon losses. These risks are linked. Loss of species can increase the risks to ecosystem health.

[ 69 ] : 279 Wildfire is an increasing risk for people as well as to ecosystems in many parts of the world.

[ 69 ] : 290 Wildfires and increased pest infestations due to climate change caused much of the recent tree mortality in North America.

[ 69 ] : 280 Risks to seas and coastal areas include coral bleaching linked with ocean warming . This can change the composition of ecosystems. Coral bleaching and mortality also increase the risks of flooding on nearby shorelines and islands. Ocean acidification attributed to climate change drives change in coral reefs and other ecosystems such as rocky shores and kelp forests.

[ 114 ] : 142 Ecosystems can respond to climatic and other environmental pressures in different ways. Individual organisms can respond through growth, movement and other developmental processes. Species and populations can relocate or genetically adapt. Human interventions can make ecosystems more resilient and help species adapt. Examples are protecting larger areas of semi-natural habitat and creating links between parts of the landscape to help species move.

[ 69 ] : 283 Ecosystem-based adaptation actions provide benefits for both ecosystems and humans. They include restoring coastal and river systems to reduce flood risk and improve water quality, creating more green areas in cities to reduce temperatures, and reinstating natural fire regimes to reduce risk of severe wildfires. There are many ways to reduce the risk of disease outbreaks. They include building surveillance systems of pathogens affecting humans, wildlife and farm animals.

[ 69 ] : 288, 295 Assisted migration of plants or animals [ edit ] Further information: Assisted migration Assisted migration is the act of moving plants or animals to a different habitat . The destination habitat may or may not have once previously held the species. The only requirement is the destination habitat must provide the bioclimatic requirements to support the species. Assisted migration aims to remove the species from a threatening environment . It aims to give them a chance to survive and reproduce in an environment that does not pose an existential threat to the species.

[ 115 ] Assisted migration is a potential solution to changes in environments due to climate change that are faster than natural selection can adapt to.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] It has the potential to allow species that have poor natural dispersal abilities to avoid extinction . However it has also sparked debate over the possibility of the introduction of invasive species and diseases into previously healthy ecosystems. Despite these debates, scientists and land managers have already begun the process of assisted migration for certain species.

[ 118 ] There have been several studies of the climate adaptive potential of butterflies.

[ 69 ] Health [ edit ] See also: Effects of climate change on human health and WASH § Climate change adaptation Climate change-related risks to health include direct risks from extreme weather such as cold waves, storms, or prolonged high temperatures. There are also indirect risks such as mental health impacts of undernutrition or displacement caused by extreme weather.

[ 68 ] : 1076 Similarly there are mental health risks from loss of access to green spaces, reduced air quality, or from anxiety about climate change.

[ 68 ] : 1076, 1078 There are further risks from changes in conditions for transmission of infectious diseases. Malaria and dengue are particularly climate-sensitive.

[ 68 ] : 1062 There are several approaches to adapt to new or increased infectious disease risks. These include vector control through improved housing and better sanitation conditions through WASH services. It could also include insecticide-treated bed nets and indoor spraying. For food-borne diseases it includes food processing and storage.

[ 68 ] : 1107 Adaptation options for heat include expanding access to air conditioning and establishing heat action plans that include early warning systems for heatwaves. Other options are passive cooling systems to include shading and ventilation. These could be part of improved building and urban design and planning, green infrastructure or public cooling centres.

[ 68 ] : 1108–1109 Adaptation options to respond to mental health impacts include increasing funding and access to mental healthcare, incorporating mental health into climate resilience and disaster risk planning, and improving post-disaster support.

[ 68 ] : 1112 Mental health also benefits from broader activities such as design of healthy natural spaces, education and cultural activities. It is also closely related to food security and nutrition.

Cities [ edit ] See also: Climate change and cities , Urban heat island , and Heat wave Rising temperatures and heatwaves are key risks for cities. With warmer temperatures the urban heat island effect is likely to get worse. Population growth and land use change will influence human health and productivity risks in cities.

[ 56 ] : 993 Urban flooding is another key risk. This is especially the case in coastal settlements where flood risks are exacerbated by sea-level rise and storm surges. A further set of risks arises from reduced water availability. When supply cannot meet demand from expanding settlements, urban residents become exposed to water insecurity and climate impacts. This is especially so during periods of lower rainfall. These key risks differ greatly between cities, and between different groups of people in the same city.

[ 56 ] : 993 Adaptation options for cities include flood control measures within and outside properties and urban drainage projects. Other examples are nature-based solutions such as bioswales or other vegetated infrastructure and restoration and/or protection of mangroves along coastlines. Vegetation corridors, greenspace, wetlands and other green infrastructure can also reduce heat risks. Building designs such as installing air conditioning, ‘cool roofs’ with high-reflectance materials or solar chimneys can also help. Several institutional adaptations are particularly important for cities, for example legislation of building codes, zoning and land use measures.

[ 56 ] : 952 Many cities have integrated city-wide adaptation strategies or plans that bring together social and economic activities, civil authorities and infrastructure services. Such actions are more effective if they are implemented in partnership with local communities, national governments, research institutions, and the private and third sector.

[ 56 ] : 994 Water [ edit ] See also: Water security Climate change is affecting the overall and seasonal availability of water across regions. Climate change is projected to increase the variability of rain. There will be impacts on water quality as well as quantity. Floods can wash pollutants into water bodies and damage water infrastructure. In many places, particularly in the tropics and sub-tropics, there are longer dry spells and droughts, sometimes over consecutive years. These have contributed to drier soil conditions, lower groundwater tables and reduced or changed flows of rivers. There are risks to ecosystems, and across many water-using sectors of the economy.

[ 119 ] : 660 Agriculture is likely to be affected by changes in water availability, putting food security at risk. Irrigation has often contributed to groundwater depletion and changes in the water cycle. It can sometimes make a drought worse.

[ 120 ] : 1157 Some of the most popular adaptations in agriculture include choosing less water-intensive crops or drought and flood-resistant varieties. They include shifting the timing of sowing and harvesting according to the start of the rainy season. There are other technological options available for saving water .

[ 119 ] : 584 Water is used for hydroelectric generation, for cooling of power plants, and in other industries such as mining. Adapting hydroelectric plant designs and control systems to operate with less water or diversifying in energy generation with other renewables are effective options.

[ 119 ] : 626 Livelihoods and communities [ edit ] Climate change affects livelihoods and living conditions in significant ways. These include access to natural resources and ecosystems, land and other assets. Access to basic infrastructure services such as water and sanitation, electricity, roads, telecommunications is another aspect of vulnerability of communities and livelihoods to climate change.

[ 7 ] : 1119 The biggest livelihood-related risks stem from losses of agricultural yields, impacts on human health and food security, destruction of homes, and loss of income. There are also risks to fish and livestock that livelihoods depend on.

[ 7 ] : 1178 Some communities and livelihoods also face risks of irreversible losses and challenges to development, as well as more complex disaster risks.

[ 7 ] : 1214 The consequences of climate change are the most severe for the poorest populations. These are disproportionately more exposed to hazards such as temperature extremes and droughts. They usually have fewer resources and assets and less access to funding, support and political influence. There are other forms of disadvantage due to discrimination, gender inequalities and through lack of access to resources This includes people with disabilities or minority groups.

[ 7 ] : 1251 Across livelihoods sectors for households and communities the most common adaptation responses are engineered and technological options. These include traditional infrastructure to protect a specific land use, ecosystem approaches such as watershed restoration or climate-smart agriculture technologies. Adaptation requires public and private investment in various natural assets. It also requires institutions that prioritize the needs of communities, including the poorest.

[ 7 ] : 1253 International impacts and cascading risk [ edit ] International climate risks are climate risks that cross national borders. Sometimes the impacts of climate change in one country or region can have further consequences for people in other countries. Risks can spread from one country to a neighbouring country, or from one country to distant regions. Risks can also cascade and have knock-on effects elsewhere, across multiple borders and sectors. For example, an impact of the floods in Thailand in 2011 was disruption to manufacturing supply chains affecting the automotive sector and electronics industry in Japan, Europe and the USA.

[ 2 ] : 2441–2444 [ 121 ] Options for adapting are less developed. They include developing resilient infrastructure in the originating country, increasing storage facilities to allow more buffer in the recipient country, or diversifying and re-routing trade.

[ 2 ] : 2441–2444 Costs and finance [ edit ] Economic costs [ edit ] For broader coverage of this topic, see Economic analysis of climate change .

The economic costs of adaptation to climate change will depend on how much the climate changes. Higher levels of warming lead to considerably higher costs. Globally, adaptation is likely to cost tens or hundreds of billions of dollars annually for the next several decades. The IPCC's most recent summary states that adaptation will cost $15 to 411 billion per year for climate change impacts to 2030. Most estimates are well above $100 billion." [ 122 ] : Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE Because these costs are much higher than the finance available, there is an adaptation gap. This is especially pressing in developing countries.

[ 122 ] : SPM C1.2 This gap is widening [ 123 ] [ 122 ] : ch 17 and forms a major barrier to adaptation.

[ 124 ] This widening has become apparent because the overwhelming majority of global tracked climate finance goes to mitigation. Only a small proportion goes on adaptation.

[ 67 ] More regional estimates are also available. For example, the Asian Development Bank has a series of studies on the Economics of Climate Change in the Asia-Pacific region.

[ 125 ] These studies provide cost analysis of both adaptation and mitigation measures. The WEAP (Water Evaluation And Planning system) assists water resources researchers and planners in assessing impacts of and adaptations to climate change. The United Nations Development Programme's Climate Change Adaptation Portal includes studies on climate change adaptation in Africa, Europe and Central Asia, and Asia and the Pacific.

[ 126 ] According to a survey conducted in the European Union, 15% of respondents believe that wealthier individuals should bear the costs of climate change adaptations through higher taxes.

[ 94 ] The same survey revealed that over a third (35%) of respondents believe that the expenses should be covered by the companies and industries that contribute most to climate change.

Cost benefit analysis [ edit ] As of 2007 there was still a lack of comprehensive, global cost and benefit estimates for adaptation.

[ 127 ] : 719 Since then, an extensive research literature has emerged. Studies generally focus on adaptation in developing countries or within a sector. For many adaptation options in specific contexts, the investment will be lower than the avoided damages. But global estimates have considerable uncertainty.

[ 128 ] : ch 15 [ 122 ] : Cross-Chapter Box FINANCE International finance [ edit ] Main articles: Climate finance and The Adaptation Fund The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change incorporates a financial mechanism to developing country parties to support them with adaptation.

[ 129 ] This is in Article 11 of the convention. Until 2009, three funds existed under the UNFCCC financial mechanism. The Global Environmental Facility administers the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) [ 130 ] and the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF).

[ 131 ] The Adaptation Fund resulted from negotiations during COP15 and COP16 in 2009 and 2010. It has its own Secretariat. Initially, when the Kyoto Protocol was in operation, the Adaptation Fund was financed by a 2% levy on the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).

At the 2009 Copenhagen Summit , nations committed to the goal of sending $100 billion per year to developing countries for climate change mitigation and adaptation by 2020.

[ 132 ] The Green Climate Fund was created in 2010 as one of the channels for mobilizing this climate finance. The 2015 Paris conference , COP21, clarified that the $100 billion per year should involve a balanced split between mitigation and adaptation. As of December 2020 [update] , the promised $100 billion per year had not been fully delivered. Most developing country finance was still targeted towards mitigation. Adaptation received only 21% of the public finance provided in 2020.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Global adaptation financing from multilateral development banks exceeded €19 billion in 2021. This implies a rising trend in the financing of adaptation.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Multilateral banks made a commitment to increase adaptation financing in a joint declaration on climate change at COP27 .

[ 138 ] This particularly targets low-income nations, small island developing states, and underprivileged people. The European Investment Bank has said that it will raise the share it contributes to 75% for projects focusing on climate adaptation.

[ 136 ] [ 139 ] The bank usually contributes up to 50% to a project it participates in.

Also in 2022, nations agreed on a proposal to establish a loss and damage fund to support communities in averting, minimizing, and addressing damages and risks where adaptation is not enough or comes too late.

[ 140 ] : 63 The Adaptation Gap Report November 2023, published by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), reveals an adaptation finance gap of $194 billion to $366 billion annually. The adaptation needs in developing countries are estimated to range from $215 billion to $387 billion per year, which is 10-18 times the current international public finance flows for adaptation. The report also notes a 15% decline in international public climate finance to developing countries, down to $21.3 billion in 2021. The urgency to increase adaptation finance is highlighted, with an average annual increase of at least 16% required from 2022 to 2025 to align with COP 26 commitments.

[ 141 ] Additionality [ edit ] A key feature of international adaptation finance is the concept of additionality. This reflects the linkages between adaptation finance and other levels of development aid .

[ 142 ] Many developed countries already provide international aid assistance to developing countries. This addresses challenges such as poverty, malnutrition, food insecurity, [ 143 ] availability of drinking water, indebtedness, illiteracy, unemployment, local resource conflicts, and lower technological development. Climate change threatens to exacerbate or stall progress on fixing some of these problems, and creates new ones. Additionality refers to the extra costs of adaptation to avoid existing aid being redirected.

The four main definitions of additionality are: [ 142 ] Climate finance classified as aid, but additional to the Millennium Development Goals ; Increase on previous year's Official Development Assistance (ODA) spent on climate change mitigation; Rising ODA levels that include climate change finance but where it is limited to a specified percentage; and Increase in climate finance not connected to ODA.

A criticism of additionality is that it encourages business as usual. This is because it does not account for the future risks of climate change. Some advocates have proposed integrating climate change adaptation into poverty reduction programs.

[ 144 ] From 2010 to 2020, Denmark increased its global warming adaptation aid by one third, from 0.09% of GDP to 0.12% of GDP. But this did not involve additional funds. Instead, the aid was taken from other foreign assistance funds.

Politiken wrote: "Climate assistance is taken from the poorest." [ 145 ] Challenges [ edit ] Differing time scales [ edit ] Adaptation can occur in anticipation of change or be a response to those changes.

[ 146 ] For example, artificial snow-making in the European Alps responds to current climate trends. The construction of the Confederation Bridge in Canada at a higher elevation takes into account the effect of future sea-level rise on ship clearance under the bridge.

[ 147 ] Effective adaptive policy can be difficult to implement because policymakers are rewarded more for enacting short-term change, rather than long-term planning.

[ 148 ] Since the impacts of climate change are generally not seen in the short term, policymakers have less incentive to act. Furthermore, climate change is occurring on a global scale. This requires a global framework for adapting to and combating climate change.

[ 149 ] The vast majority of climate change adaptation and mitigation policies are being implemented on a more local scale. This is because different regions must adapt differently. National and global policies are often more challenging to enact.

[ 150 ] Maladaptation [ edit ] In climate change mitigation maladaptation describes an adaptation action that results in directly increasing vulnerability to climate change and/or a decreasing overall capacity to take sustainable adaptations in the future.

[ 151 ] The term maladaptation was first introduced by the IPCC in 2001.

[ 152 ] The IPCC explains maladaptation as follows: "actions that may lead to increased risk of adverse climate-related outcomes, including via increased greenhouse gas emissions, increased or shifted vulnerability to climate change, more inequitable outcomes, or diminished welfare, now or in the future. Most often, maladaptation is an unintended consequence." [ 10 ] : 7 Much adaptation takes place in relation to short-term climate variability. But this may cause maladaptation to longer-term climate trends. The expansion of irrigation in Egypt into the Western Sinai desert after a period of higher river flows is maladaptation given the longer-term projections of drying in the region.

[ 153 ] Adaptations at one scale can have impacts at another by reducing the adaptive capacity of other people or organizations. This is often the case when broad assessments of the costs and benefits of adaptation are examined at smaller scales. An adaptation may benefit some people, but have a negative effect on others.

[ 146 ] Development interventions to increase adaptive capacity have tended not to result in increased power or agency for local people.

[ 154 ] Agency is a central factor in all other aspects of adaptive capacity and so planners need to pay more attention to this factor.

In general, "community-driven bottom-up adaptation" approaches have lower risks for maladaption than top-down technical fixes if they do not follow a holistic approach.

[ 155 ] The installation of seawalls , for example, can create problems with waterlogged fields and loss of soil fertility .

[ 155 ] The growing use of fertilizers and pesticides is an example of maladaptation. They generate additional greenhouse gases during their production which contributes to a decrease in crop yields .

[ 152 ] The use of air-conditioning is another example. If the electricity used is based on carbon intensive energy then the extra greenhouse gases produced only add to the problem.

[ 156 ] Limits to adaptation [ edit ] People have always adapted to climate change. Some community coping strategies already exist. Examples include changing sowing times or adopting new water-saving techniques.

[ 153 ] Traditional knowledge and coping strategies must be maintained and strengthened. If not there is a risk of weakening adaptive capacity as local knowledge of the environment is lost. Strengthening these local techniques and building upon them also makes the adoption of adaptation strategies more likely. This is because it creates more community ownership and involvement in the process.

[ 147 ] In many cases this will not be enough to adapt to new conditions. These may be outside the range of those previously experienced, and new techniques will be necessary.

[ 32 ] The incremental adaptations become insufficient as the vulnerabilities and risks of climate change increase. This creates a need for transformational adaptations which are much larger and costlier.

[ 157 ] Current development efforts increasingly focus on community-based climate change adaptation. They seek to enhance local knowledge, participation and ownership of adaptation strategies.

[ 158 ] The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report in 2022 put considerable emphasis on adaptation limits.

[ 10 ] : 26 It makes a distinction between soft and hard adaptation limits . The report stated that some human and natural systems already reached "soft adaptation limits" including human systems in Australia, Small Islands, America, Africa and Europe and some natural systems reach even the "hard adaptation limits" like part of corals, wetland, rainforests, ecosystems in polar and mountain regions. If the temperature rise will reach 1.5 °C (34.7 °F) additional ecosystems and human systems will reach hard adaptation limits, including regions depending on glaciers and snow water and small islands. At 2 °C (36 °F) temperature rise, soft limits will be reached by many staple crops in many areas while at 3 °C (37 °F) hard limits will be reached by parts of Europe.

[ 10 ] : 26 Incentivizing private investment in adaptation [ edit ] Climate change adaptation is a much more complex investment area than mitigation. This is mainly because of the lack of a well-defined income stream or business case with an attractive return on investment on projects. There are several specific challenges for private investment: [ 159 ] [ 160 ] Adaptation is often needed in non-market sectors or is focused on public goods that benefit many. So there is a shortage of projects that are attractive to the private sector; There is a mismatch between the timing of investments needed in the short term and the benefits that may occur in the medium or long term. Future returns are less attractive to investors than short-term returns; There is a lack of information about investment opportunities. This especially concerns uncertainties associated with future impacts and benefits. These are key considerations when returns may accrue over longer timeframes; There are gaps in human resources and capacities to design adaptation projects and understand financial implications of legal, economic and regulatory frameworks.

However, there is considerable innovation in this area. This is increasing the potential for private sector finance to play a larger role in closing the adaptation finance gap.

[ 8 ] Economists state that climate adaptation initiatives should be an urgent priority for business investment.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Trade-offs with mitigation [ edit ] Trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation may occur when climate-relevant actions point in different directions. For instance, compact urban development may lead to reduced greenhouse gas emissions from transport and building. On the other hand, it may increase the urban heat island effect, leading to higher temperatures and increasing exposure, making adaptation more challenging.

[ 163 ] Planning and monitoring of implementation [ edit ] Climate adaptation planning aims to manage the level of risks of negative impacts . Adaptation planning is similar to risk management . It is a continuing process of assessment, action, learning and adjustment, rather than a single set of decisions. In this way planning and implementing adaptation are both closely connected.

[ 12 ] : 133 Adaptation planning is an activity. But it is also associated with a type of adaptation. Planned adaptation is sometimes distinguished from autonomous adaptation.

[ 1 ] Another important concept in adaptation planning is mainstreaming. Mainstreaming means integrating climate change into established strategies, policies or plans. This can be more efficient than developing separate climate adaptation activities and is more likely to succeed.

[ 12 ] : 28 [ 8 ] : 15 It can also be more sustainable. It involves changing the mindsets and practices of policymakers to bring in new issues and have them widely accepted.

[ 56 ] : 968 A key entry point for this type of integration is national development planning. It needs to take into account new and existing national policies, sectoral policies and budgets. Similarly, mainstreaming adaptation in cities should consider existing city plans, such as land use planning.

[ 12 ] : 166 There approach also has shortcomings. One criticism is that it has reduced the visibility of stand-alone adaptation programmes.

[ 12 ] : 166 Adaptation planning usually draws on assessments of risks and vulnerability to climate change. It evaluates the relative benefits and costs of different measures to reduce these risks. Following planning, the next stage is implementation. Guidance has been developed that outline these general stages of an adaptation process, such as the EU Adaptation Support Tool.

[ 164 ] Preparing the ground for adaptation Assessing climate change risks and vulnerabilities Identifying adaptation options Assessing adaptation options Implementing adaptation Monitoring and evaluating adaptation As of 2022, adaptation efforts have focused more on adaptation planning than on implementation. All regions and sectors have made progress. However, the gaps between current needs and current implementation continues to grow.

[ 10 ] : 20 [ 12 ] : 130 Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation is crucial to ensure that adaptation action is proceeding as planned. It also provide lessons to improve them and understand which additional actions are necessary. Development and use of monitoring and evaluation systems is increasing at national and local levels. As of 2020, around a quarter of countries had a monitoring and evaluation framework in place.

[ 10 ] : 28 [ 8 ] : 20 By country and city [ edit ] See also: Climate change scenario § National climate (change) projections National governments typically have the key role in setting policies, planning, coordinating and distributing finance for climate adaptation. They are also accountable to the international community through international agreements.

[ 165 ] Many countries document their adaptation plans in their NDCs submitted under the Paris Agreement and/or national adaptation plans . Developing countries can receive support with international funding to help them develop their national adaptation plans.

[ 166 ] As of 2020, 72% of countries had a high level adaptation instrument – such as a plan, policy or strategy. Relatively few had progressed to the tangible implementation of projects: at least not to significantly reduce the climate risk their populations are exposed to.

[ 8 ] Countries have also made progress in developing plans for subnational government authorities. These include county/provincial level, sectors and city plans. In 2020, around 21% of countries had sub-national plans and 58% had sectoral plans.

[ 8 ] As of 2022, there is better integration of adaptation priorities into other national plans and planning systems. Planning is also more inclusive. This means that climate laws and policies increasingly reference different groups such as persons with disabilities, children, young people and future generations.

[ 167 ] Many cities have integrated city-wide adaptation strategies or plans that bring together their social and economic activities, civil authorities and infrastructure services.

[ 56 ] : 994 A survey of 812 global cities found that 93% reported they are at risk from climate change, 43% did not have an adaptation plan in 2021, and 41% of cities had not carried out a climate risk and vulnerability assessment.

[ 168 ] v t e Climate change by country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Zambia Zimbabwe Global goals [ edit ] Sustainable Development Goal 13 aims to strengthen countries' resilience and adaptive capacities to climate-related issues.

[ 169 ] This adjustment includes many areas such as infrastructure, [ 170 ] agriculture [ 171 ] and education. The Paris Agreement includes several provisions for adaptation. It seeks to promote the idea of global responsibility, improve communication via the adaptation component of the Nationally Determined Contributions , and includes an agreement that developed countries should provide some financial support and technology transfer to promote adaptation in more vulnerable countries.

[ 172 ] The United Nations estimates Africa would need yearly funding of $1.3 trillion to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals in the region, considering population growth.

The International Monetary Fund also estimates that $50 billion may be needed only to cover the expenses of climate adaptation.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] History [ edit ] When climate change first became prominent on the international political agenda in the early 1990s, talk of adaptation was considered an unwelcome distraction from the need to reach agreement on effective measures for mitigation – which has mainly meant reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases. A few voices had spoken out in favour of adaptation even in the late 20th and early 21st century.

[ 176 ] In 2009 and 2010, adaptation began to receive more attention during international climate negotiations. This was after limited progress at the Copenhagen Summit had made it clear that achieving international consensus for emission reductions would be more challenging than had been hoped. In 2009, the rich nations of the world committed to providing a total of $100 billion per year to help developing nations fund their climate adaptation projects. This commitment was underscored at the 2010 Cancún Summit , and again at the 2015 Paris Conference . The promise was not fulfilled, but the amount of funding provided by the rich nations for adaptations did increase over the 2010 – 2020 period.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] Climate change adaptation has tended to be more of a focus for local authorities, while national and international politics has tended to focus on mitigation . There have been exceptions – in countries that feel especially exposed to the effects of climate change, sometimes the focus has been more on adaptation even at national level.

[ 180 ] See also [ edit ] Adaptation in Africa Green bond Climate change adaptation strategies on the German coast Climate finance Climate justice Climate Vulnerability Monitor References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h IPCC, 2022: Annex II: Glossary [Möller, V., R. van Diemen, J.B.R. Matthews, C. Méndez, S. Semenov, J.S. Fuglestvedt, A. Reisinger (eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2897–2930, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.029 ^ a b c d e f O'Neill, B., M. van Aalst, Z. Zaiton Ibrahim, L. Berrang Ford, S. Bhadwal, H. Buhaug, D. Diaz, K. Frieler, M. Garschagen, A. Magnan, G. Midgley, A. Mirzabaev, A. Thomas, and R.Warren, 2022: Chapter 16: Key Risks Across Sectors and Regions . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2411–2538, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.025 ^ O'Neill, B., M. van Aalst, Z. Zaiton Ibrahim, L. Berrang Ford, S. Bhadwal, H. Buhaug, D. Diaz, K. Frieler, M. Garschagen, A. Magnan, G. Midgley, A. Mirzabaev, A. Thomas, and R.Warren, 2022: Chapter 16: Key Risks Across Sectors and Regions . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2411–2538, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.025.

^ Verma, Krishan K.; Song, Xiu-Peng; Kumari, Aradhna; Jagadesh, M.; Singh, Santosh Kumar; Bhatt, Rajan; Singh, Munna; Seth, Chandra Shekhar; Li, Yang-Rui (2025).

"Climate change adaptation: Challenges for agricultural sustainability" .

Plant, Cell & Environment .

48 (4): 2522– 2533.

Bibcode : 2025PCEnv..48.2522V .

doi : 10.1111/pce.15078 .

PMID 39136256 .

^ "Unprecedented Impacts of Climate Change Disproportionately Burdening Developing Countries, Delegate Stresses, as Second Committee Concludes General Debate" .

United Nations . 8 October 2019 . Retrieved 12 December 2019 .

^ Sarkodie, Samuel Asumadu; Ahmed, Maruf Yakubu; Owusu, Phebe Asantewaa (5 April 2022).

"Global adaptation readiness and income mitigate sectoral climate change vulnerabilities" .

Humanities and Social Sciences Communications .

9 (1) 113: 1– 17.

doi : 10.1057/s41599-022-01130-7 .

hdl : 11250/2999578 .

ISSN 2662-9992 .

S2CID 247956525 .

^ a b c d e f Birkmann, J., E. Liwenga, R. Pandey, E. Boyd, R. Djalante, F. Gemenne, W. Leal Filho, P.F. Pinho, L. Stringer, and D. Wrathall, 2022: Poverty, Livelihoods and Sustainable Development . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1171–1274, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.010 ^ a b c d e f UNEP (9 January 2021).

"Adaptation Gap Report 2020" .

UNEP – UN Environment Programme . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ Smith, John (2022). "Adapting to Climate Change: Decision-Making and Development".

Climate Policy Review .

14 (2): 103– 118.

doi : 10.1016/j.climate.2022.02.003 (inactive 1 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l IPCC, 2022: Summary for Policymakers [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, M. Tignor, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem (eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 3–33, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.001 ^ a b Noble, I.R., S. Huq, Y.A. Anokhin, J. Carmin, D. Goudou, F.P. Lansigan, B. Osman-Elasha, and A. Villamizar, 2014: " Chapter 14: Adaptation needs and options ". In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 833–868.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Ara Begum, R., R. Lempert, E. Ali, T.A. Benjaminsen, T. Bernauer, W. Cramer, X. Cui, K. Mach, G. Nagy, N.C. Stenseth, R. Sukumar, and P. Wester, 2022: Chapter 1: Point of Departure and Key Concepts . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 121–196, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.003 ^ Klein, R.J.T., Adams, K.M., Dzebo, A., and Siebert, C.K. (2017).

Advancing climate adaptation practices and solutions: emerging research priorities.

SEI Working Paper 2017-07. Stockholm, Sweden.

^ IPCC, 2021: Annex VII: Glossary [Matthews, J.B.R., V. Möller, R. van Diemen, J.S. Fuglestvedt, V. Masson-Delmotte, C. Méndez, S. Semenov, A. Reisinger (eds.)]. In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2215–2256, doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.022 ^ Fei, Chengcheng; Jägermeyr, Jonas; McCarl, Bruce; Contreras, Erik Mencos; Mutter, Carolyn; Phillips, Meridel; Ruane, Alex C.; Sarofim, Marcus C.; Schultz, Peter; Vargo, Amanda (June 2023).

"Future climate change impacts on U.S. agricultural yields, production, and market" .

Anthropocene .

42 100386.

Bibcode : 2023Anthr..4200386F .

doi : 10.1016/j.ancene.2023.100386 .

PMC 11492982 .

PMID 39434981 .

^ Ionno, Alexandre; Arsenault, Richard; Troin, Magali; Martel, Jean-Luc; Brissette, François (1 February 2024).

"Impacts of climate change on flood volumes over North American catchments" .

Journal of Hydrology .

630 130688.

Bibcode : 2024JHyd..63030688I .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.130688 .

ISSN 0022-1694 .

^ van Woesik, Robert; Shlesinger, Tom; Grottoli, Andréa G.; Toonen, Rob J.; Vega Thurber, Rebecca; Warner, Mark E.; Marie Hulver, Ann; Chapron, Leila; McLachlan, Rowan H.; Albright, Rebecca; Crandall, Eric; DeCarlo, Thomas M.; Donovan, Mary K.; Eirin-Lopez, Jose; Harrison, Hugo B.; Heron, Scott F.; Huang, Danwei; Humanes, Adriana; Krueger, Thomas; Madin, Joshua S.; Manzello, Derek; McManus, Lisa C.; Matz, Mikhail; Muller, Erinn M.; Rodriguez-Lanetty, Mauricio; Vega-Rodriguez, Maria; Voolstra, Christian R.; Zaneveld, Jesse (July 2022).

"Coral-bleaching responses to climate change across biological scales" .

Global Change Biology .

28 (14): 4229– 4250.

Bibcode : 2022GCBio..28.4229V .

doi : 10.1111/gcb.16192 .

ISSN 1365-2486 .

PMC 9545801 .

PMID 35475552 .

^ "Temperatures" .

climateactiontracker . Retrieved 3 November 2022 .

^ Raihan, Asif (17 September 2023).

"A review of the global climate change impacts, adaptation strategies, and mitigation options in the socio-economic and environmental sectors" .

Journal of Environmental Science and Economics .

2 (3): 36– 52.

doi : 10.56556/jescae.v2i3.587 .

ISSN 2832-6032 .

^ "Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability" . Grida.no. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Climate change impacts | National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" .

noaa Government . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ Kelman, Ilan; Gaillard, J C; Mercer, Jessica (March 2015).

"Climate Change's Role in Disaster Risk Reduction's Future: Beyond Vulnerability and Resilience" .

International Journal of Disaster Risk Science .

6 (1): 21– 27.

Bibcode : 2015IJDRS...6...21K .

doi : 10.1007/s13753-015-0038-5 .

ISSN 2095-0055 .

^ "Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation — IPCC" . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2022. Our world at risk transforming governance for a resilient future . Geneva: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction. 2022.

ISBN 978-92-1-232028-1 .

OCLC 1337569431 .

^ "The Paris Agreement" .

unfccc international . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ Farber, Daniel A. (2007).

"Adapting to Climate Change: Who Should Pay?" .

Journal of Land Use & Environmental Law .

23 : 1.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.980361 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 153945185 . Archived from the original on 15 December 2019 . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

^ Adaptation Committee, 2021, Approaches to reviewing the overall progress made in achieving the global goal on adaptation ^ a b Abram, N.; Gattuso, J.-P.; Prakash, A.; Cheng, L.; et al. (2019).

"Chapter 1: Framing and Context of the Report" (PDF) .

The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate . IPCC.

^ Adger, W. Neil, Nigel W. Arnell, and Emma L. Tompkins. " Successful adaptation to climate change across scales ." Global environmental change 15, no. 2 (2005): 77–86.

^ a b c d e Bezner Kerr, R., T. Hasegawa, R. Lasco, I. Bhatt, D. Deryng, A. Farrell, H. Gurney-Smith, H. Ju, S. Lluch-Cota, F. Meza, G. Nelson, H. Neufeldt, and P. Thornton, 2022: Chapter 5: Food, Fibre, and Other Ecosystem Products . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 713–906, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.007 ^ Brooks, N and Adger, WN (2005) Assessing and enhancing adaptive capacity.

In: Adaptation Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: Developing Strategies, Policies and Measures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 165–181.

^ a b Smit, Barry; Wandel, Johanna (2006).

"Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change .

16 (3): 282– 292.

Bibcode : 2006GEC....16..282S .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.03.008 .

hdl : 11059/15091 .

S2CID 14884089 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ Lea Berrang-Ford, James D. Ford, Jaclyn Paterson. (2011).

Are we adapting to climate change? 2011 . Science Direct.

^ a b Smit, B.; et al. (2001).

"18. Adaptation to Climate Change in the Context of Sustainable Development and Equity" (PDF) . In McCarthy, J. J.; et al. (eds.).

Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF) . Cambridge, UK, and New York, N.Y.: Cambridge University Press. pp.

877– 912 . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Watkiss, P. and Cimato, F. (eds) (2020).

What Does Transformational Adaptation Look Like? Literature review synthesis paper.

Deliverable 10 of the Resilient Regions: Clyde Rebuilt project. Published by Clyde Rebuilt, Glasgow, Scotland Copyright: Resilient Regions: Clyde Rebuilt, 2020 ^ "Point of Departure and Key Concepts" .

Climate Change 2022 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability . Cambridge University Press. 2023. pp.

121– 196.

doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.003 .

ISBN 978-1-009-32584-4 .

^ Sharifi, Ayyoob (1 January 2021).

"Co-benefits and synergies between urban climate change mitigation and adaptation measures: A literature review" .

Science of the Total Environment .

750 141642.

Bibcode : 2021ScTEn.75041642S .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.141642 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 32858298 .

S2CID 221365818 .

^ Gao, Kai; Haddad, Shamila; Paolini, Riccardo; Feng, Jie; Altheeb, Muzahim; Mogirah, Abdulrahman Al; Moammar, Abdullatif Bin; Santamouris, Mattheos. "The use of green infrastructure and irrigation in the mitigation of urban heat in a desert city".

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ European Investment Bank. (2024).

The EIB Climate Survey . European Investment Bank.

doi : 10.2867/4661519 .

ISBN 978-92-861-5848-3 .

^ Hubert Heinelt; Wolfram Lamping, eds. (2018).

Policy Choice in Local Responses to Climate Change: A Comparison of Urban Strategies . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781317206521 .

^ a b c Nations, United.

"Early Warning Systems" .

United Nations . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ "Establishment of early warning systems — Climate-ADAPT" .

climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ "Early warning systems" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ "Climate Information Services" .

CARE Climate Change . Retrieved 23 March 2023 .

^ Machingura, Fortunate; Nyamwanza, Admire; Hulme, David; Stuart, Elizabeth (2018).

"Climate information services, integrated knowledge systems and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development" .

Sustainable Earth .

1 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2018SuEa....1....1M .

doi : 10.1186/s42055-018-0003-4 .

ISSN 2520-8748 .

S2CID 169424138 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ Makondo, Cuthbert Casey; Thomas, David S.G. (October 2018). "Climate change adaptation: Linking indigenous knowledge with western science for effective adaptation".

Environmental Science & Policy .

88 : 83– 91.

doi : 10.1016/j.envsci.2018.06.014 .

S2CID 158092034 .

^ Jellason, Nugun P.; Salite, Daniela; Conway, John S.; Ogbaga, Chukwuma C. (September 2022).

"A systematic review of smallholder farmers' climate change adaptation and enabling conditions for knowledge integration in Sub-Saharan African (SSA) drylands" .

Environmental Development .

43 : 100733.

doi : 10.1016/j.envdev.2022.100733 .

S2CID 250251074 .

^ Arias, P.A., N. Bellouin, E. Coppola, R.G. Jones, G. Krinner, J. Marotzke, V. Naik, M.D. Palmer, G.-K. Plattner, J. Rogelj, M. Rojas, J. Sillmann, T. Storelvmo, P.W. Thorne, B. Trewin, K. Achuta Rao, B. Adhikary, R.P. Allan, K. Armour, G. Bala, R. Barimalala, S. Berger, J.G. Canadell, C. Cassou, A. Cherchi, W. Collins, W.D. Collins, S.L. Connors, S. Corti, F. Cruz, F.J. Dentener, C. Dereczynski, A. Di Luca, A. Diongue Niang, F.J. Doblas-Reyes, A. Dosio, H. Douville, F. Engelbrecht, V.  Eyring, E. Fischer, P. Forster, B. Fox-Kemper, J.S. Fuglestvedt, J.C. Fyfe, et al., 2021: Technical Summary Archived 21 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine . In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Archived 9 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 33−144.

^ Ranasinghe, R., A.C. Ruane, R. Vautard, N. Arnell, E. Coppola, F.A. Cruz, S. Dessai, A.S. Islam, M. Rahimi, D. Ruiz Carrascal, J. Sillmann, M.B. Sylla, C. Tebaldi, W. Wang, and R. Zaaboul, 2021: Chapter 12: Climate Change Information for Regional Impact and for Risk Assessment . In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A.  Pirani, S.L.  Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1767–1926, doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.014 ^ a b c d New, M., D. Reckien, D. Viner, C. Adler, S.-M. Cheong, C. Conde, A. Constable, E. Coughlan de Perez, A. Lammel, R. Mechler, B. Orlove, and W. Solecki, 2022: Chapter 17: Decision-Making Options for Managing Risk . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2539–2654, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.026 ^ "The politics of climate change: national responses to the challenge of global warming (Library resource)" .

European Institute for Gender Equality . Archived from the original on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 8 August 2019 .

^ "National Adaptation Plans" .

United Nations Climate Change (UNFCCC) . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

^ Preston, B.L.; Brooke, C.; Measham, T.G.; Smith, T.F.; Gorddard, R. (2009). "Igniting change in local government: Lessons learned from a bushfire vulnerability assessment".

Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change .

14 (3): 251– 283.

Bibcode : 2009MASGC..14..251P .

doi : 10.1007/s11027-008-9163-4 .

S2CID 154962315 .

^ Kuhl, Laura; Rahman, M. Feisal; McCraine, Samantha; Krause, Dunja; Hossain, Md Fahad; Bahadur, Aditya Vansh; Huq, Saleemul (18 October 2021).

"Transformational Adaptation in the Context of Coastal Cities" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

46 (1): 449– 479.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-012420-045211 .

ISSN 1543-5938 .

^ Solecki, William; Friedman, Erin (1 April 2021).

"At the Water's Edge: Coastal Settlement, Transformative Adaptation, and Well-Being in an Era of Dynamic Climate Risk" .

Annual Review of Public Health .

42 (1): 211– 232.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-090419-102302 .

ISSN 0163-7525 .

PMID 33428464 .

S2CID 231583918 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Dodman, D., B. Hayward, M. Pelling, V. Castan Broto, W. Chow, E. Chu, R. Dawson, L. Khirfan, T. McPhearson, A. Prakash, Y. Zheng, and G. Ziervogel, 2022: Chapter 6: Cities, Settlements and Key Infrastructure . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 907–1040, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.008 ^ Kousky, Carolyn (5 October 2019).

"The Role of Natural Disaster Insurance in Recovery and Risk Reduction" .

Annual Review of Resource Economics .

11 (1): 399– 418.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-resource-100518-094028 .

ISSN 1941-1340 .

S2CID 159178389 .

^ Ranasinghe, R., A.C. Ruane, R. Vautard, N. Arnell, E. Coppola, F.A. Cruz, S. Dessai, A.S. Islam, M. Rahimi, D. Ruiz Carrascal, J. Sillmann, M.B. Sylla, C. Tebaldi, W. Wang, and R. Zaaboul, 2021: Chapter 12: Climate Change Information for Regional Impact and for Risk Assessment . In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1767–1926, doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.014 ^ "Mind the risk: cities under threat from natural disasters" . SwissRe. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2014 .

^ a b McAneney, J, Crompton, R, McAneney, D, Musulin, R, Walker, G & Pielke Jr, R 2013, "Market-based mechanisms for climate change adaptation: Assessing the potential for and limits to insurance and market based mechanisms for encouraging climate change adaptation." National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility, Gold Coast, p. 99 ^ Holloway, J.M.; Burby, R.J. (1990). "The effects of floodplain development controls on residential land values".

Land Economics .

66 (3): 259– 271.

Bibcode : 1990LandE..66..259H .

doi : 10.2307/3146728 .

JSTOR 3146728 .

^ O'Hare, Paul; White, Iain; Connelly, Angela (1 September 2015).

"Insurance as maladaptation: Resilience and the 'business as usual' paradox" (PDF) .

Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy .

34 (6): 1175– 1193.

doi : 10.1177/0263774X15602022 .

ISSN 0263-774X .

S2CID 155016786 .

^ Bagstad, Kenneth J.; Stapleton, K.; D'Agostino, J.R. (2007). "Taxes, subsidies, and insurance as drivers of United States coastal development".

Ecological Economics .

63 ( 2– 3): 285– 298.

Bibcode : 2007EcoEc..63..285B .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.09.019 .

^ Coordination Challenges in Climate Finance . Erik Lundsgaarde, Kendra Dupuy, Åsa Persson, Danish Institute for International Studies. Copenhagen: DIIS. 2018.

ISBN 978-87-7605-924-8 .

OCLC 1099681274 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Conevska, Aleksandra; Ford, James; Lesnikowski, Alexandra; Harper, Sherilee (2 January 2019).

"Adaptation financing for projects focused on food systems through the UNFCCC" .

Climate Policy .

19 (1): 43– 58.

Bibcode : 2019CliPo..19...43C .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2018.1466682 .

ISSN 1469-3062 .

S2CID 159007875 .

^ Rosenzweig, Cynthia; Mbow, Cheikh; Barioni, Luis G.; Benton, Tim G.; Herrero, Mario; Krishnapillai, Murukesan; Liwenga, Emma T.; Pradhan, Prajal; Rivera-Ferre, Marta G.; Sapkota, Tek; Tubiello, Francesco N.; Xu, Yinlong; Mencos Contreras, Erik; Portugal-Pereira, Joana (2020).

"Climate change responses benefit from a global food system approach" .

Nature Food .

1 (2): 94– 97.

doi : 10.1038/s43016-020-0031-z .

ISSN 2662-1355 .

PMID 37128000 .

S2CID 212894930 .

^ a b IPCC, 2023: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report .

Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 184 pp., doi : 10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647 ^ a b c d e f g h Cissé, G., R. McLeman, H. Adams, P. Aldunce, K. Bowen, D. Campbell-Lendrum, S. Clayton, K.L. Ebi, J. Hess, C. Huang, Q. Liu, G. McGregor, J. Semenza, and M.C. Tirado, 2022: Health, Wellbeing, and the Changing Structure of Communities.

In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1041–1170, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.009 ^ a b c d e f g h Parmesan, C., M.D. Morecroft, Y. Trisurat, R. Adrian, G.Z. Anshari, A. Arneth, Q. Gao, P. Gonzalez, R. Harris, J. Price, N. Stevens, and G.H. Talukdarr, 2022: Terrestrial and Freshwater Ecosystems and Their Services . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 197–377, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.004 ^ a b Morecroft, Michael D.; Duffield, Simon; Harley, Mike; Pearce-Higgins, James W.; Stevens, Nicola; Watts, Olly; Whitaker, Jeanette (2019).

"Measuring the success of climate change adaptation and mitigation in terrestrial ecosystems" .

Science .

366 (6471): eaaw9256.

doi : 10.1126/science.aaw9256 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31831643 .

S2CID 209339286 .

^ Rosenzweig, Cynthia.

"All Climate Is Local: How Mayors Fight Global Warming" .

Scientific American . No. September 2011 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ a b As Waters Rise, Miami Beach Builds Higher Streets And Political Willpower Archived 8 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Koch, Wendy (15 August 2011).

"Cities combat climate change" .

USA Today .

^ a b c Kaufman, Leslie (23 May 2011).

"A City Prepares for a Warm Long-Term Forecast" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Revkin, Andrew C. (23 May 2011).

"Cities Embrace the Adaptation Imperative" .

The New York Times .

^ Hillary Russ (3 July 2013).

"New Jersey homeowners to get buyout offers after Superstorm Sandy" .

Reuters . Reuters . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Menéndez, Pelayo; Losada, Iñigo J.; Torres-Ortega, Saul; Narayan, Siddharth; Beck, Michael W. (10 March 2020).

"The Global Flood Protection Benefits of Mangroves" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (1): 4404.

Bibcode : 2020NatSR..10.4404M .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-61136-6 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 7064529 .

PMID 32157114 .

^ Kate Ravilious (2016).

"Many hydroelectric plants in Himalayas are at risk from glacial lakes" .

environmentalresearchweb . Archived from the original on 7 March 2018 . Retrieved 6 March 2018 .

Schwanghart, Wolfgang; Worni, Raphael; Huggel, Christian; Stoffel, Markus; Korup, Oliver (1 July 2016).

"Uncertainty in the Himalayan energy–water nexus: estimating regional exposure to glacial lake outburst floods" .

Environmental Research Letters .

11 (7): 074005.

Bibcode : 2016ERL....11g4005S .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/074005 .

ISSN 1748-9326 .

S2CID 133059262 . 074005.

^ NYC Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency (2013).

"A Stronger, More Resilient New York" .

nyc Government . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Cooley, S., D. Schoeman, L. Bopp, P. Boyd, S. Donner, D.Y. Ghebrehiwet, S.-I. Ito, W. Kiessling, P. Martinetto, E. Ojea, M.-F. Racault, B. Rost, and M. Skern-Mauritzen, 2022: Ocean and Coastal Ecosystems and their Services (Chapter 3) Archived 2023-07-12 at the Wayback Machine . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.

Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press. In Press. - Cross-Chapter Box SLR: Sea Level Rise ^ Dasgupta, Susmita; Wheeler, David; Bandyopadhyay, Sunando; Ghosh, Santadas; Roy, Utpal (February 2022).

"Coastal dilemma: Climate change, public assistance and population displacement" .

World Development .

150 105707.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2021.105707 .

ISSN 0305-750X .

S2CID 244585347 .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 .

^ Balderas Guzman, Celina (1 July 2025).

"Networked shorelines: A review of vulnerability interactions between human adaptation to sea level rise and wetland migration" .

Global Environmental Change .

92 102985.

Bibcode : 2025GEC....9202985B .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2025.102985 .

ISSN 0959-3780 .

^ a b Thomsen, Dana C.; Smith, Timothy F.; Keys, Noni (2012).

"Adaptation or Manipulation? Unpacking Climate Change Response Strategies" .

Ecology and Society .

17 (3) art20.

doi : 10.5751/es-04953-170320 .

hdl : 10535/8585 .

JSTOR 26269087 .

^ "Climate Adaptation and Sea Level Rise" .

US EPA, Climate Change Adaptation Resource Center (ARC-X) . 2 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ Nagothu, Udaya Sekhar (18 January 2017).

"Food security threatened by sea-level rise" . Nibio.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 21 October 2018 .

^ a b Fletcher, Cameron (2013).

"Costs and coasts: an empirical assessment of physical and institutional climate adaptation pathways" .

Apo .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ Sovacool, Benjamin K. (2011).

"Hard and soft paths for climate change adaptation" (PDF) .

Climate Policy .

11 (4): 1177– 1183.

Bibcode : 2011CliPo..11.1177S .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2011.579315 .

S2CID 153384574 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ "Coastal cities face rising risk of flood losses, study says" . Phys.org. 18 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ Hallegatte, Stephane; Green, Colin; Nicholls, Robert J.; Corfee-Morlot, Jan (18 August 2013).

"Future flood losses in major coastal cities" .

Nature Climate Change .

3 (9): 802– 806.

Bibcode : 2013NatCC...3..802H .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate1979 .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ Bachner, Gabriel; Lincke, Daniel; Hinkel, Jochen (29 September 2022).

"The macroeconomic effects of adapting to high-end sea-level rise via protection and migration" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 5705.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.5705B .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-33043-z .

PMC 9522673 .

PMID 36175422 .

^ van der Hurk, Bart; Bisaro, Alexander; Haasnoot, Marjolijn; Nicholls, Robert J.; Rehdanz, Katrin; Stuparu, Dana (28 January 2022). "Living with sea-level rise in North-West Europe: Science-policy challenges across scales".

Climate Risk Management .

35 100403.

Bibcode : 2022CliRM..3500403V .

doi : 10.1016/j.crm.2022.100403 .

S2CID 246354121 .

^ Hirschfeld, Daniella; Behar, David; Nicholls, Robert J.; Cahill, Niamh; James, Thomas; Horton, Benjamin P.; Portman, Michelle E.; Bell, Rob; Campo, Matthew; Esteban, Miguel; Goble, Bronwyn; Rahman, Munsur; Appeaning Addo, Kwasi; Chundeli, Faiz Ahmed; Aunger, Monique; Babitsky, Orly; Beal, Anders; Boyle, Ray; Fang, Jiayi; Gohar, Amir; Hanson, Susan; Karamesines, Saul; Kim, M. J.; Lohmann, Hilary; McInnes, Kathy; Mimura, Nobuo; Ramsay, Doug; Wenger, Landis; Yokoki, Hiromune (3 April 2023).

"Global survey shows planners use widely varying sea-level rise projections for coastal adaptation" .

Communications Earth & Environment .

4 (1): 102.

Bibcode : 2023ComEE...4..102H .

doi : 10.1038/s43247-023-00703-x .

PMC 11041751 .

PMID 38665203 .

Text and images are available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ Garner, Andra J.; Sosa, Sarah E.; Tan, Fangyi; Tan, Christabel Wan Jie; Garner, Gregory G.; Horton, Benjamin P. (23 January 2023).

"Evaluating Knowledge Gaps in Sea-Level Rise Assessments From the United States" .

Earth's Future .

11 (2): e2022EF003187.

Bibcode : 2023EaFut..1103187G .

doi : 10.1029/2022EF003187 .

S2CID 256227421 .

^ a b European Investment Bank. (2024).

The EIB Climate Survey . European Investment Bank.

doi : 10.2867/4661519 .

ISBN 978-92-861-5848-3 .

^ "Climate change: More than 3bn could live in extreme heat by 2070" .

BBC News . 5 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2020 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ Xu, Chi; Kohler, Timothy A.; Lenton, Timothy M.; Svenning, Jens-Christian; Scheffer, Marten (26 May 2020).

"Future of the human climate niche – Supplementary Materials" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (21): 11350– 11355.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11711350X .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1910114117 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 7260949 .

PMID 32366654 .

^ Xu, Chi; Kohler, Timothy A.; Lenton, Timothy M.; Svenning, Jens-Christian; Scheffer, Marten (2020).

"Future of the human climate niche" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (21): 11350– 11355.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..11711350X .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1910114117 .

PMC 7260949 .

PMID 32366654 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2020 . Retrieved 25 June 2020 .

^ Sharifi, Ayyoob (2020).

"Trade-offs and conflicts between urban climate change mitigation and adaptation measures: A literature review" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

276 122813.

Bibcode : 2020JCPro.27622813S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122813 .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

S2CID 225638176 .

^ Waldrop, M. Mitchell (19 October 2022).

"What can cities do to survive extreme heat?" .

Knowable Magazine .

doi : 10.1146/knowable-101922-2 . Retrieved 6 December 2022 .

^ "Nature of Cities" .

Regeneration . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ Younes, Jaafar; Ghali, Kamel; Ghaddar, Nesreen (August 2022).

"Diurnal Selective Radiative Cooling Impact in Mitigating Urban Heat Island Effect" .

Sustainable Cities and Society .

83 103932.

Bibcode : 2022SusCS..8303932Y .

doi : 10.1016/j.scs.2022.103932 .

S2CID 248588547 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Khan, Ansar; Carlosena, Laura; Feng, Jie; Khorat, Samiran; Khatun, Rupali; Doan, Quang-Van; Santamouris, Mattheos (January 2022).

"Optically Modulated Passive Broadband Daytime Radiative Cooling Materials Can Cool Cities in Summer and Heat Cities in Winter" .

Sustainability .

14 (3): 1110.

Bibcode : 2022Sust...14.1110K .

doi : 10.3390/su14031110 .

hdl : 2454/46738 .

^ Simire, Michael (16 July 2019).

"Climate change: Farm embarks on planting heat-resistant trees" .

EnviroNews Nigeria - . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ Jennings, Paul A. (February 2008).

"Dealing with Climate Change at the Local Level" (PDF) .

Chemical Engineering Progress .

104 (2).

American Institute of Chemical Engineers : 40– 44. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 29 February 2008 .

^ Falkenmark, Malin; Rockstrom, Johan; Rockström, Johan (2004).

Balancing Water for Humans and Nature: The New Approach in Ecohydrology . Earthscan. pp.

67– 68.

ISBN 978-1-85383-926-9 .

^ Berthouly-Salazar, Cécile; Vigouroux, Yves; Billot, Claire; Scarcelli, Nora; Jankowski, Frédérique; Kane, Ndjido Ardo; Barnaud, Adeline; Burgarella, Concetta (2019).

"Adaptive Introgression: An Untapped Evolutionary Mechanism for Crop Adaptation" .

Frontiers in Plant Science .

10 : 4.

Bibcode : 2019FrPS...10....4B .

doi : 10.3389/fpls.2019.00004 .

ISSN 1664-462X .

PMC 6367218 .

PMID 30774638 .

^ "Diverse water sources key to food security: report" .

Reuters . 6 September 2010 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ "Adapting to climate change to sustain food security" .

International Livestock Research Institute . 16 November 2020.

^ Mukherji, Aditi; Facon, Thierry; et al. (2009).

Revitalising Asia's Irrigation: To sustainably meet tomorrow's food needs (PDF) .

IWMI and FAO .

ISBN 9789290907091 .

^ Corbley, McKinley (31 March 2019).

"Dozens of Countries Have Been Working to Plant 'Great Green Wall' – and It's Holding Back Poverty" .

Good News Network .

^ Puiu, Tibi (3 April 2019).

"More than 20 African countries are planting an 8,000-km-long 'Great Green Wall' " .

ZME Science . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ Goyal, Nidhi (29 October 2017).

"Great Green Wall to Combat Climate Change in Africa" . Industry Tap . Retrieved 7 June 2019 .

^ Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change (Ipcc) (2023).

Climate Change 2022 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability (PDF) .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change .

doi : 10.1017/9781009325844 .

ISBN 9781009325844 .

S2CID 259568239 .

^ Cooley, S., D. Schoeman, L. Bopp, P. Boyd, S. Donner, D.Y. Ghebrehiwet, S.-I. Ito, W. Kiessling, P. Martinetto, E. Ojea, M.-F. Racault, B. Rost, and M. Skern-Mauritzen, 2022: Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and Their Services . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 379–550, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.005 ^ McLachlan, J. S.; Hellmann, J. J.; Schwartz, M. W. (2007).

"A Framework for Debate of Assisted Migration in an Era of Climate Change" .

Conservation Biology .

21 (2): 297– 302.

Bibcode : 2007ConBi..21..297M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2007.00676.x .

PMID 17391179 .

^ Allen, C. D.; MacAlady, A. K.; Chenchouni, H.; Bachelet, D.

; McDowell, N.; Vennetier, M.; Kitzberger, T.; Rigling, A.; Breshears, D. D.; Hogg, E. H. T.; Gonzalez, P.; Fensham, R.; Zhang, Z.; Castro, J.; Demidova, N.; Lim, J. H.; Allard, G.; Running, S. W.; Semerci, A.; Cobb, N. (2010).

"A global overview of drought and heat-induced tree mortality reveals emerging climate change risks for forests" (PDF) .

Forest Ecology and Management .

259 (4): 660.

Bibcode : 2010ForEM.259..660A .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2009.09.001 .

S2CID 4144174 .

^ Zhu, K.; Woodall, C. W.; Clark, J. S. (2012). "Failure to migrate: Lack of tree range expansion in response to climate change".

Global Change Biology .

18 (3): 1042.

Bibcode : 2012GCBio..18.1042Z .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2486.2011.02571.x .

S2CID 31248474 .

^ Heller, N. E.; Zavaleta, E. S.

(2009). "Biodiversity management in the face of climate change: A review of 22 years of recommendations".

Biological Conservation .

142 (1): 14– 32.

Bibcode : 2009BCons.142...14H .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2008.10.006 .

S2CID 3797951 .

^ a b c Caretta, M.A., A. Mukherji, M. Arfanuzzaman, R.A. Betts, A. Gelfan, Y. Hirabayashi, T.K. Lissner, J. Liu, E. Lopez Gunn, R. Morgan, S. Mwanga, and S. Supratid, 2022: Water . In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 551–712, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.006 ^ Douville, H., K. Raghavan, J. Renwick, R.P. Allan, P.A. Arias, M. Barlow, R. Cerezo-Mota, A. Cherchi, T.Y. Gan, J. Gergis, D. Jiang, A. Khan, W. Pokam Mba, D. Rosenfeld, J. Tierney, and O. Zolina, 2021: Water Cycle Changes . In Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1055–1210, doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.010 ^ Adaptation Without Borders (2017), Transboundary climate risks An overview ^ a b c d "Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability" .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ d Nations Environment Programme (31 October 2021).

"Adaptation Gap Report 2021: The gathering storm – Adapting to climate change in a post-pandemic world – Executive Summary" . Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations Environment Programme . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ Eisenack, Klaus (2014).

"Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate change adaptation" .

Nature Climate Change .

4 (10): 867– 872.

Bibcode : 2014NatCC...4..867E .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate2350 . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Westphal, Michael; Hughes, Gordon; Brömmelhörster, Jörn (1 October 2013).

Economics of Climate Change in East Asia . Asian Development Bank.

ISBN 978-92-9254-288-7 .

^ "Home | UNDP Climate Change Adaptation" .

www.adaptation-undp.org . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ Adger, W. N.; et al. (2007).

"17. Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity" (PDF) . In Parry, M. L.; et al. (eds.).

Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF) . Cambridge, UK, and New York, N.Y.: Cambridge University Press. pp.

717– 744 . Retrieved 19 January 2020 .

^ "Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change" .

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Retrieved 24 October 2022 .

^ "Climate finance" .

Climate finance .

^ "The Special Climate Change Fund" .

UNFCCC . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ "Funding" .

Global Environment Facility . 4 April 2016 . Retrieved 20 December 2020 .

^ Conference of the Parties to the Framework Convention on Climate Change .

Copenhagen . 7–18 December 2009. un document= FCCC/CP/2009/L.7.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2010 . Retrieved 24 October 2010 .

^ Cui, Lianbiao; Sun, Yi; Song, Malin; Zhu, Lei (2020).

"Co-financing in the green climate fund: lessons from the global environment facility" .

Climate Policy .

20 (1): 95– 108.

Bibcode : 2020CliPo..20...95C .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2019.1690968 .

ISSN 1469-3062 .

S2CID 213694904 .

^ "António Guterres on the climate crisis: 'We are coming to a point of no return' " .

The Guardian . 11 June 2021.

^ "DELIVERING ON THE $100 BILLIONCLIMATE FINANCE COMMITMENTAND TRANSFORMING CLIMATE FINANCE" (PDF) .

www.UN.org . December 2020 . Retrieved 19 June 2021 .

^ a b "How to finance adaptation to climate change" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved 23 December 2022 .

^ "Multilateral development banks' climate finance in low and middle-income countries reaches $51 billion in 2021" .

www.isdb.org . 14 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2022 .

^ "COP27 Reaches Breakthrough Agreement on New "Loss and Damage" Fund for Vulnerable Countries" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 27 December 2022 .

^ "EIB sets 15% climate adaptation target by 2025" . 3 November 2021.

^ United Nations Environment Programme (2023).

Adaptation Gap Report 2023: Underfinanced.Underprepared. Inadequate investment and planning on climate adaptation leaves world exposed . Nairobi.

doi : 10.59117/20.500.11822/43796 ^ Environment, U. N. (2 November 2023).

"Adaptation Gap Report 2023" .

UNEP - UN Environment Programme . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ a b Jessica Brown, Neil Bird and Liane Schalatek (2010) Climate finance additionality: emerging definitions and their implications Archived 3 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine Overseas Development Institute ^ "Chapter 2. Food security: concepts and measurement[21]" . Fao.org.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ Poverty in a Changing Climate Archived 13 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Institute of Development Studies Bulletin 39(4), September 2008 ^ "Klimabistand bliver taget fra de fattigste" . 12 November 2019.

^ a b Neil Adger, W.; Arnell, Nigel W.; Tompkins, Emma L. (2005).

"Successful adaptation to climate change across scales" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change .

15 (2): 77– 86.

Bibcode : 2005GEC....15...77N .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.12.005 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2012 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ a b "Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ Rosenbaum, Walter A. (2017).

Environmental Politics and Policy . Thousand Oaks, CA: CQ Press.

ISBN 978-1-4522-3996-5 .

^ "Climate Change" .

United Nations . 11 January 2016. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ Wood, Robert; Hultquist, Andy; Romsdahl, Rebecca (1 November 2014).

"An Examination of Local Climate Change Policies in the Great Plains" .

Review of Policy Research .

31 (6): 529– 554.

doi : 10.1111/ropr.12103 .

^ Eisenhauer, David C. (2020).

"Climate Change; Adaptation" .

International Encyclopedia of Human Geography . pp.

281– 291.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-102295-5.10756-5 .

ISBN 978-0-08-102296-2 . Retrieved 24 February 2025 .

^ a b Antoci, Angelo; Borghesi, Simone; Galeotti, Marcello; Russu, Paolo (April 2022).

"Maladaptation to environmental degradation and the interplay between negative and positive externalities" .

European Economic Review .

143 104023.

doi : 10.1016/j.euroecorev.2021.104023 .

hdl : 1814/74275 . Retrieved 24 February 2025 .

^ a b "Adaptation to Climate Change in the Developing World" (PDF) . Iied.org. 16 June 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2008 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Changing focus? How to take adaptive capacity seriously. Evidence from Africa shows that development interventions could do more" (PDF) .

Overseas Development Institute . Briefing paper 71. January 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

^ a b Burgess, Claire; Chakraborty, Ritodhi (29 October 2023).

"Climate adaptation projects sometimes exacerbate the problems they try to solve – a new tool hopes to correct that" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 18 July 2024 .

^ Watson, Sara Kiley (19 March 2022).

"Why some climate change adaptations just make things worse" .

Popular Science . Retrieved 24 February 2025 .

^ Kates, Robert W.; Travis, William R.; Wilbanks, Thomas J. (14 March 2012).

"Transformational adaptation when incremental adaptations to climate change are insufficient" .

PNAS .

109 (19): 7156– 7161.

Bibcode : 2012PNAS..109.7156K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1115521109 .

PMC 3358899 .

PMID 22509036 .

^ McNamara, Karen Elizabeth; Buggy, Lisa (5 August 2016). "Community-based climate change adaptation: a review of academic literature".

Local Environment .

22 (4): 443– 460.

doi : 10.1080/13549839.2016.1216954 .

S2CID 156119057 .

^ OECD (7 July 2015).

Climate Change Risks and Adaptation: Linking Policy and Economics . OECD.

doi : 10.1787/9789264234611-en .

ISBN 978-92-64-23460-4 .

^ UNEP (2018).

The Adaptation Gap Report 2018 . United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Kenya.

^ Chidambaram, Ravi; Khanna, Parag (1 August 2022).

"It's Time to Invest in Climate Adaptation" .

Harvard Business Review .

ISSN 0017-8012 . Retrieved 7 September 2022 .

^ Dolšak, Nives; Prakash, Aseem (17 October 2018).

"The Politics of Climate Change Adaptation" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

43 (1): 317– 341.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-102017-025739 .

ISSN 1543-5938 .

^ Sharifi, Ayyoob (10 December 2020).

"Trade-offs and conflicts between urban climate change mitigation and adaptation measures: A literature review" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

276 122813.

Bibcode : 2020JCPro.27622813S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122813 .

ISSN 0959-6526 .

S2CID 225638176 .

^ EC–European Commission. (2013).

Guidelines on developing adaptation strategies .

Staff working document , 134 .

^ Schipper, E.L.F., A. Revi, B.L. Preston, E.R. Carr, S.H. Eriksen, L.R. Fernandez-Carril, B.C. Glavovic, N.J.M. Hilmi, D. Ley, R. Mukerji, M.S. Muylaert de Araujo, R. Perez, S.K. Rose, and P.K. Singh, 2022: Climate Resilient Development Pathways.

In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2655–2807, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.027 ^ Trisos, C.H., I.O. Adelekan, E. Totin, A. Ayanlade, J. Efitre, A. Gemeda, K. Kalaba, C. Lennard, C. Masao, Y. Mgaya, G. Ngaruiya, D. Olago, N.P. Simpson, and S. Zakieldeen, 2022: Africa.

In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1285–1455, doi : 10.1017/9781009325844.011 ^ United Nations Environment Programme (2022).

Adaptation Gap Report 2022: Too Little, Too Slow – Climate adaptation failure puts world at risk . Nairobi.

https://www.unep.org/adaptation-gap-report-2022 ^ "Nearly half of cities lack plans to keep populations safe from climate threats" .

Carbon Disclosure Project . 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 May 2021 .

^ Campbell, Bruce M.; Hansen, James; Rioux, Janie; Stirling, Clare M.; Twomlow, Stephen; (Lini) Wollenberg, Eva (2018).

"Urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts (SDG 13): transforming agriculture and food systems" .

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability .

34 : 13– 20.

Bibcode : 2018COES...34...13C .

doi : 10.1016/j.cosust.2018.06.005 .

S2CID 158757940 .

^ "The Varsity: Quantifying the climate crisis: how changes could impact road maintenance" . 10 November 2019.

^ "The Guardian: Benefits to farmers of global heating outweighed by losses, says report" .

The Guardian . 4 September 2019.

^ Ngwadla, X; El-Bakri, S. (2016).

The Global Goal for Adaptation under the Paris Agreement: Putting ideas into action (PDF) (Report). London, UK: Climate and Development Knowledge Network. pp.

11– 17.

^ Bank, European Investment (19 October 2022).

Finance in Africa – Navigating the financial landscape in turbulent times . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-92-861-5382-2 .

^ Inter-agency Task Force on Financing for Development.

"Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2021" (PDF) .

UN .

^ Nations, United.

"Population growth, environmental degradation and climate change" .

United Nations . Retrieved 28 October 2022 .

^ Ford, James (2007). "Emerging trends in climate change policy: the role of adaptation".

Journal of Climate .

3 : 5– 14.

^ "Climate adaptation policies are needed more than ever" .

The Economist . May 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2023 .

In the early days of political action on climate change adaptation was seen as, at best, a poor relation to cutting greenhouse-gas emissions—at worst as a distraction. In his first book on the subject, Earth in the Balance (1992) Al Gore, who became America's vice-president the following year, described it as 'a kind of laziness'.

^ "Why tackling global warming is a challenge without precedent" .

The Economist . April 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2021 .

To talk of such adaptation was equated with capitulating on emission cuts.

^ Jocelyn Timperley (2021).

"The broken $100-billion promise of climate finance — and how to fix it" .

Nature .

598 (7881): 400– 402.

Bibcode : 2021Natur.598..400T .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-021-02846-3 .

PMID 34671142 .

^ Di Gregorio, Monica; Fatorelli, Leandra; Paavola, Jouni; Locatelli, Bruno; Pramova, Emilia; Nurrochmat, Dodik Ridho; May, Peter H.; Brockhaus, Maria; Sari, Intan Maya; Kusumadewi, Sonya Dyah (2019).

"Multi-level governance and power in climate change policy networks" .

Global Environmental Change .

54 : 64– 77.

Bibcode : 2019GEC....54...64D .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.10.003 .

External links [ edit ] Portals : Climate change Economics Renewable Energy Climate change adaptation at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Data from Wikidata The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group II assesses the scientific literature on adaptation: Working Group II — IPCC The weADAPT platform encourages the sharing of experiences from adaptation projects to accelerate learning and climate action.

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐g9jjd
Cached time: 20250818033921
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.255 seconds
Real time usage: 2.625 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 35495/1000000
Revision size: 143262/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 522253/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10319/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 243/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 692727/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.411/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11493954/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2303.810      1 -total
 44.21% 1018.615      1 Template:Reflist
 19.54%  450.168     62 Template:Cite_journal
 17.27%  397.774     99 Template:Rp
 16.50%  380.144     99 Template:R/superscript
 10.82%  249.330      1 Template:World_topic
  8.85%  203.949     50 Template:Cite_web
  8.29%  190.952    297 Template:R/where
  8.16%  187.910      3 Template:Excerpt
  3.75%   86.286      1 Template:Subject_bar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4607152:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818033921 and revision id 1300031194. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Climate_change_adaptation&oldid=1300031194 " Categories : Climate change adaptation Climate change and society Animal ecology Plant ecology Climate change policy National security Climate change Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 errors: requires URL Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 22:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Climate change adaptation 34 languages Add topic

