Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Social science research 2 Descriptive science 3 Descriptive versus design sciences 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Descriptive research 6 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Used to describe characteristics of a phenomenon being studied Descriptive research is used to describe characteristics of a population or phenomenon being studied. It does not answer questions about how/when/why the characteristics occurred.  Rather it addresses the "what" question (what are the characteristics of the population or situation being studied?).

[ 1 ] The characteristics used to describe the situation or population are usually some kind of categorical scheme also known as descriptive categories. For example, the periodic table categorizes the elements. Scientists use knowledge about the nature of electrons, protons and neutrons to devise this categorical scheme. We now take for granted the periodic table , yet it took descriptive research to devise it.  Descriptive research generally precedes explanatory research . For example, over time the periodic table's description of the elements allowed scientists to explain chemical reaction and make sound prediction when elements were combined.

Hence, descriptive research cannot describe what caused a situation.  Thus, descriptive research cannot be used as the basis of a causal relationship , where one variable affects another. In other words, descriptive research can be said to have a low requirement for internal validity .

The description is used for frequencies , averages , and other statistical calculations.  Often the best approach, prior to writing descriptive research, is to conduct a survey investigation.

Qualitative research often has the aim of description and researchers may follow up with examinations of why the observations exist and what the implications of the findings are.

Social science research [ edit ] In addition, the conceptualizing of descriptive research (categorization or taxonomy) precedes the hypotheses of explanatory research.

[ 2 ] (For a discussion of how the underlying conceptualization of exploratory research , descriptive research and explanatory research fit together, see: Conceptual framework .) Descriptive research can be statistical research. The main objective of this type of research is to describe the data and characteristics of what is being studied. The idea behind this type of research is to study frequencies, averages, and other statistical calculations. Although this research is highly accurate, it does not gather the causes behind a situation. Descriptive research is mainly done when a researcher wants to gain a better understanding of a topic. That is, analysis of the past as opposed to the future. Descriptive research is the exploration of the existing certain phenomena. The details of the facts won't be known. The existing phenomena's facts are not known to the person.

Descriptive science [ edit ] Descriptive science is a category of science that involves descriptive research; that is, observing, recording, describing, and classifying phenomena .  Descriptive research is sometimes contrasted with hypothesis-driven research , which is focused on testing a particular hypothesis by means of experimentation .

[ 3 ] David A. Grimaldi and Michael S. Engel suggest that descriptive science in biology is currently undervalued and misunderstood: "Descriptive" in science is a pejorative, almost always preceded by "merely," and typically applied to the array of classical -ologies and -omies: anatomy, archaeology, astronomy, embryology, morphology, paleontology, taxonomy, botany, cartography, stratigraphy, and the various disciplines of zoology, to name a few. [...] First, an organism, object, or substance is not described in a vacuum, but rather in comparison with other organisms, objects, and substances. [...] Second, descriptive science is not necessarily low-tech science, and high tech is not necessarily better. [...] Finally, a theory is only as good as what it explains and the evidence (i.e., descriptions) that supports it.

[ 4 ] A negative attitude by scientists toward descriptive science is not limited to biological disciplines: Lord Rutherford's notorious quote , "All science is either physics or stamp collecting," displays a clear negative attitude about descriptive science, and it is known that he was dismissive of astronomy , which at the beginning of the 20th century was still gathering largely descriptive data about stars, nebulae, and galaxies, and was only beginning to develop a satisfactory integration of these observations within the framework of physical law , a cornerstone of the philosophy of physics .

[ according to whom?

] Descriptive versus design sciences [ edit ] Ilkka Niiniluoto has used the terms "descriptive sciences" and " design sciences " as an updated version of the distinction between basic and applied science .  According to Niiniluoto, descriptive sciences are those that seek to describe reality, while design sciences seek useful knowledge for human activities.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Methodology Normative science Procedural knowledge Scientific method References [ edit ] ^ Shields, Patricia and Rangarajan, N. 2013.

A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and Project Management . Stillwater, OK: New Forums Press. See Chapter 4 for an in-depth discussion of descriptive research.

^ Shields, Patricia and Hassan Tajalli. 2006. "Intermediate Theory: The Missing Link in Successful Student Scholarship".

Journal of Public Affairs Education . Vol. 12, No. 3. Pp. 313-334.

http://ecommons.txstate.edu/polsfacp/39/ Archived 2021-02-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ Casadevall, Arturo ; Fang, Ferric C. (September 2008).

"Descriptive Science" .

Infection and Immunity .

76 (9): 3835– 3836.

doi : 10.1128/IAI.00743-08 .

PMC 2519409 .

PMID 18625736 .

^ BioScience Volume 57, Issue 8 (September 2007) article Why Descriptive Science Still Matters by D.A. Grimaldi & M.S. Engel ^ Heikki J. Koskinen et al. (eds.) Science – A Challenge to Philosophy? - Peter Lang GmbH, Frankfurt am Man, 2006.

Archived 2011-06-10 at the Wayback Machine article The scope and limits of value-freedom in science - Panu Raatikainen External links [ edit ] Descriptive Research from BYU linguistics department v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Descriptive_research&oldid=1282598781 " Categories : Research Descriptive statistics Philosophy of science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2014 This page was last edited on 27 March 2025, at 12:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Descriptive research 6 languages Add topic

