Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 History of research 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Trophic mutualism 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Trophic mutualism is a key type of ecological mutualism . Specifically, "trophic mutualism" refers to the transfer of energy and nutrients between two species . This is also sometimes known as resource-to-resource mutualism. Trophic mutualism often occurs between an autotroph and a heterotroph .

[ 1 ] Although there are many examples of trophic mutualisms, the heterotroph is generally a fungus or bacteria.  This mutualism can be both obligate and opportunistic.

Examples [ edit ] Rhizobia – Rhizobia are bacteria that conduct nitrogen fixation for legume plants. Specifically, these bacteria can be from genera Allorhizobium, Azorhizobium, Bradyrhizobium, Mesorhizobium, Rhizobium, or Sinorhizobium .

[ 2 ] In this mutualistic relationship, the bacteria grow on or within the root hair and penetrate into the plant tissues [ 3 ] Although the exact means of interaction between the Rhizobia and plant varies with genus and species, all forms of this interaction are made up of the infection of bacteria, bacteria colonization, control of O 2 , and exchange of carbon and nitrogen .

[ 2 ] The role that rhizobia play in fixing nitrogen for legumes is the basis for why legumes can be used in crop rotation .

[ 4 ] Mycorrhizae – Mycorrhizae are similar to rhizobia in that they interact with plants at their roots. Whereas rhizobia are bacteria that fix nitrogen, mycorrhizae are fungi that bring nutrients to the plants in return for carbon. Mycorrhizas are also capable of improving water uptake and communicating to their hosts to resist to pathogens .

[ 5 ] Three main types of mycorrhizae exist: Arbuscula: found in non-woody and tropical plants Ectomycorrhiza: found in boreal and temperate forests Ericoid: found in species of the heathland.

[ 3 ] Digestive symbiotes – Digestive symbiotes are an example of an important trophic mutualism that does not occur between an autotroph and heterotroph. Bacteria known as "extracellular symbionts" [ 3 ] live within the gastrointestinal tracts of vertebrates , where they aid in the digestion of food. The bacteria benefits by extracting substrates from the eaten food, while the animal’s assimilation is increased by being able to digest certain foods that its natural system cannot. (book) In addition, these bacteria create short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), providing the vertebrate with energy totaling up to anywhere from 29%-79% of the vertebrate’s maintenance energy depending on the species.

[ 6 ] History of research [ edit ] Ecologists first began to understand trophic mutualisms in the mid-20th century with the investigation of nutrient abundance and distribution. One of the first trophic mutualisms was discovered in 1958 by Professor Leonard Muscatine of UCLA, the relationship between endozoic algae and coral.

[ 7 ] In this relationship, the algae provides the coral with a Carbon source to develop its CaCO 3 skeleton and the coral secretes a protecting nutrient-rich mucus which benefits the algae. Perhaps one of the most famous discoveries made by Muscatine in the field of trophic mutualism came about 10 years later in another aquatic based system-the relationship between algae and water hydra.

[ 8 ] This work was significant in establishing the presence of mutualistic relationships in both aquatic and terrestrial environments.

Perhaps the most widely acclaimed example of a trophic mutualism was the discovery of the leafcutter ant that engage in trophic mutualism with a fungus.

[ 9 ] These ants cultivate a certain type of fungus by providing it with leaves and other nutrients. In turn, the ants will feed on a special nutrient that is only created by the fungus they nurture. This trophic mutualism was studied in detail in the 1970s and since.

See also [ edit ] Ecology Mutualism (biology) Symbiosis References [ edit ] ^ Odum, Eugene. Fundamentals of Ecology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 1971.

^ a b Vessey, K.J., K. Pawlowski, and B. Bergman, Root-based N2-fixing symbioses: Legumes, actinorhizal plants, Parasponiasp. and cycads. Plant and Soil 2005. 266(1-2): p. 205-230.

^ a b c Townsend, C.R., M. Begon, and J.L. Harper, Essentials Of Ecology Third Edition 2008, Malden, MA: Backwell Publishing ^ Saito, K., B. Linquist, and B. Keobualapha, Stylosanthes guianensis as a short-term fallow crop for improving upland rice productivity in northern Laos. Field Crops Research 2006. 96(2/3): p. 438-447.

^ Douglas H. Boucher, Sam James and Kathleen H. Keeler 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, Vol. 13, (1982), pp. 315–347 ^ Stevens, C.E. and I.D. Hume, Contributions of Microbes in Vertebrate Gastrointestinal Tract to Production and Conservation of Nutrients. Physiological Reviews, 1998. 72(2): p. 383-427.

^ Hoegh-Guldberg, O., et al., Len Muscatine (1932–2007) and his contributions
to the understanding of algal-invertebrate endosymbiosis. Coral Reefs, 2007. 26(4): pp. 731–739.

^ Muscatine, Leonard, and Howard Lenhoff. "Symbiosis: On the Role of Algae Symbiotic with Hydra." Science 142 (19681): 956-58.e ^ Weber, Neal A.  1972.  Gardening Ants the Attines.  The American Philosophical 
Society.  Philadelphia v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trophic_mutualism&oldid=1148165031 " Categories : Ecology terminology Behavioral ecology Mutualism (biology) This page was last edited on 4 April 2023, at 13:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trophic mutualism 1 language Add topic

