Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Topics Toggle Topics subsection 1.1 Ownership 1.2 Support 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Mining law in German-speaking countries 2.1.1 Today 2.2 Mining law in English-speaking countries 2.3 Mining law in French-speaking countries 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mining law 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Hausa ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Polski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of law relating to the legal requirements affecting minerals and mining Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Mining law is the branch of law relating to the legal requirements affecting minerals and mining . Mining law covers several basic topics, including the ownership of the mineral resource and who can work them. Mining is also affected by various regulations regarding the health and safety of miners, as well as the environmental impact of mining.

Topics [ edit ] Ownership [ edit ] Main article: mineral rights An aspect of property law that is central to mining law is the question of who "owns" the mineral, such that they may legally extract it from the earth. This is often dependent on the type of mineral in question, the mining history of the jurisdiction, as well as the general background legal tradition and its treatment of property.

For instance, in many jurisdictions, rights to mine gold and silver are retained by the sovereign , as the two metals traditionally served as currency in many a given society.

Support [ edit ] Main article: lateral and subjacent support In addition to ownership of the mineral, the method of extraction may affect nearby property owners.

Subsidence (be it dramatic or subtle) results when a mine (or similar area) collapses or drops, causing above or nearby structures to drop with it, often damaging or destroying them. The issue of support rights determines the legal rights and relationships between parties in these situations.

By country [ edit ] Mining law varies both by the legal tradition of the jurisdiction, as well as the individual jurisdiction.

Mining law in German-speaking countries [ edit ] Mining law in Europe originated from medieval common law . From at least the 12th century, German kings claimed mining rights to silver and other metals, taking precedence over the local lords. But by the late Middle Ages, mining rights, known as the Bergregal were transferred from the king to territorial rulers. Initially, mining rights were granted orally or in writing by individuals. From the early 15th century, mining law was enacted by territorial rulers in the form of decrees or regulations (mining regulations or Bergordnungen ), which often remained in force until the 19th century. A new, far-reaching, legal basis was created with the General Mining Act for the Prussian States of 1865 ( Allgemeines Berggesetz für die Preußischen Staaten von 1865 ), which, with local variations, was adopted in Brunswick (1867), Bavaria (1869), Württemberg (1874), Baden (1890) and other countries. With the exception of the Kingdom of Saxony , where a similarly important legal statute, the General Mining Act of the Kingdom of Saxony ( Allgemeines Berggesetz für das Königreich Sachsen ) came into force on 16 June 1868, it became law in all the larger states of Germany.

Today [ edit ] In Germany, under Article 74 (1) no. 11 of the Basic Law Basic Law , mining law is subject to concurrent legislation. The central legal standard is the Federal Mining Act ( Bundesberggesetz ).

In Austria the legal basis is quite similar to German law. The primary legislation since 1 January 1999 has been the Mineral Raw Material Act ( Mineralrohstoffgesetz ) or MinroG.

In Switzerland mining law is a cantonal business and governed by cantonal law.

Mining law in Liechtenstein is restricted to just a few minerals (metallic ores, fossil fuels and related materials like graphite, anthracite, stone coal, lignite, slate coal, asphalt, bitumen and mineral oils, sulphur, rock salt and salt springs) and governed mainly by the Liechtenstein Property Act, articles 484 to 497. As in Switzerland mining in Liechtenstein is no longer important and the regulations in the property act are largely only procedural regulations.

Mining law in English-speaking countries [ edit ] Unlike German mining law, in Great Britain and the Commonwealth the principle of mining by landowners prevails. The crown only lays claim to gold and silver reserves. In exceptional cases (e.g. where land ownership is divided) mining rights may be given to a third party, whereby the landowners have to be compensated. The mining company pays the landowner a lease , dead rent or a royalty . The rights to above- and below-ground minerals (as a rule quarries and mines) may be awarded separately. One exception among Commonwealth common law countries is Australian mining law , under which virtually all mineral rights are held by the Crown.

Mining law in the United States is also based on English common law . Here the landowner is likewise the owner of all raw materials to unlimited depth. However, the state retains rights over phosphate, nitrate, potassium salts, asphalt, coal, oil shale and sulphur, and a right of appropriation (not ownership) by the state for oil and gas. Sand and gravel come under the Department of the Interior .

Mining law in French-speaking countries [ edit ] In France and Belgium the Code civil is the basis for mining law.

See also [ edit ] Law portal Look up concession in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Bergamt - German mining office Bergregal - Medieval mining rights and royalties Bergordnung - German mining regulations Law on Mining Concessions (Chile) Mining act General Mining Act of 1872 (United States) Minerals and Mining Law of 1986 ( Ghana ) Environmental impact assessment References [ edit ] Literature [ edit ] Reinhart Piens, Hans-Wolfgang Schulte, Stephan Graf Vitzthum: Bundesberggesetz. (BBergG). Kommentar.

Kohlhammer Verlag , Stuttgart, 1983, ISBN 3-17-007505-5 .

Raimund Willecke: Die Deutsche Berggesetzgebung. Von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart.

Glückauf, Essen, 1977, ISBN 3-7739-0210-7 .

Eduard Kremer, Peter U. Neuhaus gen. Wever: Bergrecht.

Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart, u. a. 2001, ISBN 3-17-016287-X .

Julius Hesemann et al.: Untersuchung und Bewertung von Lagerstätten der Erze, nutzbarer Minerale und Gesteine (= Vademecum 1). Geologisches Landesamt Nordrhein-Westfalen, Krefeld, 1981, pp. 95–105: Abschnitt: Rechtsverhältnisse (Berggesetzgebung) .

External links [ edit ] Rechtliches.de: Bergrecht – Deutsche Rechtsnormen zum Bergrecht BMWFJ.gv.at: Rechtsgrundlagen Bergbau [ permanent dead link ] Entry about Austrian Mining Law at : Austria-Forum, dem österreichischen Wissensnetz – online  (auf AEIOU) v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐578f99f475‐f9hdh
Cached time: 20250812005816
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.343 seconds
Real time usage: 0.454 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1522/1000000
Revision size: 7510/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 60934/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2848/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34363/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.236/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4994274/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  378.118      1 -total
 21.30%   80.532      3 Template:ISBN
 18.62%   70.391      1 Template:Environmental_law
 18.26%   69.063      1 Template:Sidebar
 17.47%   66.064      4 Template:Navbox
 15.26%   57.705      1 Template:Natural_resources
 14.33%   54.193      1 Template:Short_description
  9.14%   34.554      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.62%   28.829      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.02%   26.528      1 Template:Dead_link Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2808878:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812005816 and revision id 1225234893. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mining_law&oldid=1225234893 " Category : Mining law and governance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 23 May 2024, at 05:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mining law 8 languages Add topic

