Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1910 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 4.1 In Spanish Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Argentina Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the History of Argentina Pre-Columbian Indigenous peoples in Argentina Inca Empire Colonial Argentina Governorate of New Andalusia (1534-1542) Governorate of the Río de la Plata (1549-1776) Calchaquí Wars Battle of Mbororé Siege of Colonia del Sacramento (1807) Spanish–Portuguese War (1735–1737) Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires (1661-1671), (1759-1788) Guaraní War First Cevallos expedition Capture of Port Egmont Bourbon Reforms in Buenos Aires Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata (1776–1814) Second Cevallos expedition War of the Oranges British invasions of the River Plate Chuquisaca Revolution Independence May Revolution Primera Junta War of Independence Assembly of the Year XIII Crossing of the Andes Congress of Tucumán United Provinces of the Río de la Plata Civil Wars Federal League Bernardino Rivadavia Confederation Juan Manuel de Rosas Guerra Grande (Great War) Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata Battle of Caseros State of Buenos Aires Argentine Unification War Revolution of 1880 Rise of Argentine Republic 1853 Constitution British investment in Argentina Paraguayan War Conquest of the Desert Generation of '80 Revolution of the Park Great European immigration Argentine Antarctica South American dreadnought race Radical Phase (1916–30) Patagonia Rebelde Nacionalismo The Infamous Decade World War II 1943 Argentine Revolution San Juan earthquake Foundation of Peronism Peronist Era Juan Perón and Eva Perón General Confederation of Labour Five-Year Plans Railway nationalisation in Argentina 1949 Constitution reform Hope Bay incident Bombing of Plaza de Mayo Argentina in Cold War Revolución Libertadora Arturo Frondizi and José María Guido 1963 Argentine Navy revolt Arturo Umberto Illia Laguna del Desierto incident Operativo Cóndor Argentine Revolution Montoneros and ERP Return of Peron Ezeiza massacre Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Rodrigazo 1976 Argentine coup d'état National Reorganization Process Dirty War Operation Independence Operation Charly Operation Soberanía Falklands War ( Guerra de las Malvinas ) Return to democracy Raúl Alfonsín Trial of the Juntas Carapintadas uprisings 1989 hyperinflation Carlos Menem Israeli embassy and AMIA bombings 1994 Constitution reform Argentine great depression December 2001 riots Kirchnerism Javier Milei Topics Corruption Economy Etymology LGBT Jewish Argentines Military Nationality Postal Rail transport Folkloric music Science and technology See also Timeline Years in Argentina Argentina portal v t e The Historiography of Argentina is composed of the works of the authors that have written about the History of Argentina . The first historiographical works are usually considered to be those by Bartolomé Mitre and other authors from the middle 19th century.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Historia de Belgrano y de la Independencia Argentina , one of the first books about the History of Argentina The pre-Columbian indigenous populations of Argentina did not develop writing , and had no written records of events. There have been written records of events since the time of the first European arrivals to Argentine territory, but most of them were referred to ongoing events or very close ones and are not considered to be real historiographical works.

The first authors to write about events long past were the members of the "'37 Generation" , romantic authors born by the time of the May Revolution , who were educated in the time of the unitarian government of Bernardino Rivadavia . By that time they received a secular education and shared studies with students from other provinces, which promoted in them a national view over a localist one. At first they tried to act as an enlightened influence beyond the unitarian-federalist dichotomy, but the increased strengthening of the policies of Juan Manuel de Rosas made most of them flee into exile to foreign countries. Thus, those authors are considered with care, as they were distant enough from the events of the Argentine War of Independence but still contemporary of the Argentine Civil War and the government of Rosas, making their opinions about the later to be of a political nature. Those authors tried to adapt the European Romantic nationalism to the Argentine context, and develop a national identity. As they despised both Rosas and the Spanish heritage, they aimed their efforts in glorifying the events and peoples of the Revolution.

One of the first works done for this purpose was Historia de Belgrano y de la Independencia Argentina ( Spanish : History of Belgrano and of the Independence of Argentina ), by Bartolomé Mitre . This book was criticized by Vicente Fidel López , Dalmacio Vélez Sársfield or Juan Bautista Alberdi , who would write other books in answer, and Mitre would reply with more books strengthening his perspectives.

Rómulo Carbia described this dispute in 1925 as a dispute between "philosophists" and "erudits", with Vicente López, Lucio López and José Manuel Estrada in the first group and Mitre, Luis Domínguez, Paul Groussac the new historical school and Carbia himself.

[ 2 ] Such book was used for self-affiliation and legitimization, but became canonical afterwards.

[ 3 ] 1910 [ edit ] The first centennial of the May Revolution was a period of transition. Three new concerns were added to the historiographical view: the social, political and national issue: Social issues were motivated by the massive immigration wave of the time and the rise of leftist, socialist and anarchist movements; and influenced a bigger concern about the role of society itself in the events of history, which so far had been described around key figures.

The national issue was the need to define, in a time when the majority of the population was foreign immigrants, the identity of the country and its role in the world.

The political concern derives from the fact that none of the historians from this periods works exclusively in the historiographical fields, and had steady political works at the same time. Despite keeping a rigorous scientific approach, their works were marked by their political views: when Ramos Mejía rote about the popular participation and how it led to either the May Revolution or the tyranny of Rosas, he was indirectly pointing his opinions about popular participation in his own context. This period ends by 1920, with the creation of the New Historical School .

Historiography would take two main divergent paths since then. On one side, the state would sponsor Ricardo Levene and the National Academy of History into writing a definitive and unquestionable version of national history, which follows the most important basic features of the one designed by Mitre and was deemed as "official history" because of its state-sponsored nature. The opposing viewpoint was held by a number of revisionist authors, who wrote the history of Argentina from a nationalist and anti-liberalist perspective. Those authors restored the image of Juan Manuel de Rosas , rejected by previous authors, considering him an example of defense of national sovereignty. Former national heroes like Bernardino Rivadavia , Justo José de Urquiza , Bartolomé Mitre and Domingo Faustino Sarmiento were accused instead of favoring foreign imperialism. The concepts about the revolutionary period, on the other hand, weren't modified very much, and José de San Martín was exalted as strongly as by their historiographical adversaries.

See also [ edit ] Historiography#Latin America History of Argentina Historiography of Juan Manuel de Rosas References [ edit ] ^ Devoto, p. 14 ^ Devoto, p. 14 ^ Devoto, p. 14-15 Further reading [ edit ] Goebel, Michael.

Argentina's Partisan Past: Nationalism and the politics of history (Liverpool University Press, 2011).

online review Leonard, Thomas M. "United States-Latin American Relations: Recent Historiography." Journal of Third World Studies 16.2 (1999): 163-79.

In Spanish [ edit ] Adamovsky, Ezequiel, Andrés Bisso, and Gabriel Di Meglio. "Mesa de Debate:“¿Hay nuevos relatos históricos para la Argentina actual?”." Sociohistórica (2012).

online Azzolini, Nicolás. "Democracia, sufragio universal e yrigoyenismo. Un ensayo sobre la historiografía y la historia política argentina de principios del siglo XX." Prohistoria 22 (2014) pp107–126.

Gelman, Jorge ; Raúl Fradkin (2010).

Doscientos años pensando la Revolución de Mayo . Buenos Aires: Sudamericana.

ISBN 978-950-07-3179-9 .

Devoto, Fernando ; Nora Pagano (2009).

Historia de la Historiografía Argentina . Buenos Aires: Sudamericana.

ISBN 978-950-07-3076-1 .

Molina, Eugenia. "Relatos sobre los orígenes de la nación. Un balance historiográfico de la producción argentina sobre el proceso revolucionario desde el Bicentenario." Iberoamericana 12.46 (2012): 185-203.

online Tato, María Inés. "La Gran Guerra en la historiografía argentina. Balance y perspectivas de investigación." Iberoamericana 14.53 (2014): 91-101. covers World War I era.

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_Argentina&oldid=1264075159 " Categories : Historiography of Argentina Culture of Argentina Hidden category: Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 20 December 2024, at 08:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Argentina Add languages Add topic

