Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sociology 2 Political theory Toggle Political theory subsection 2.1 Left-wing criticism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Privatism 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Privatism is a generic term generally describing any belief that people have a right to the private ownership of certain things. According to different perspectives, it describes also the attitude of people to be concerned only about ideas or facts that affect them as individuals.

There are many degrees of privatism, from the advocacy of limited private property over specific kinds of items ( personal property ) to the advocacy of unrestricted private property over everything; such as in anarcho-capitalism . Regarding public policy, it gives primacy to the private sector as the central agent for action, necessitates the social and economic benefits for private initiatives and competition, and "legitimizes the public consequences of private action" [ 1 ] Sociology [ edit ] Privatism is based on the concept of individual sphere of interactions. According to this point of view, collective efforts can not be meaningful by themselves, but they can gain meaning only if considered as a sum of individual activities.

Hence, every single action (economical, social, spiritual and so on) can be seen only as the result of an individual choice. For this reason, privatism is based on the concept of individual consumption. Indeed, the private consumption reflects the singular choice of the consumer that according to his own value and prerogatives decide how to consume its own income.

[ 2 ] Political theory [ edit ] The political ideals of privatism are directly consequent of the interpretation of society as just the sum of individuals that compose it. Indeed, privatism supporters believe that the economic role of the welfare state should be reduced, giving more freedom to consumers and private volunteering organizations to operate inside the economic environment. According to this view, the private allocation of resources would be more efficient and less authoritarian than the one provided by the state.

From this point of view, the formation of common social and political views on various topics, is connected to the free choice of individuals. Moreover, as considered by Jürgen Habermas , their ability to create these opinions would be damaged by the excessive role of the state that would limit the creation of volunteering and private societies and so the social and political debate inside a society.

[ 3 ] One of the main examples of privatism-driven action in politics, can be represented by the action of Margaret Thatcher towards the British welfare state, that during the 80’s was deeply defunded and reduced of importance.

[ 4 ] Left-wing criticism [ edit ] In general, privatism is used in the context of left-wing politics to distinguish ideologies which support private ownership of an economy's means of production and those who desire abolishing it in favour of either collective ownership or common ownership . The term is not held as being synonymous with capitalism, however, as the capitalist mode of production is generally understood to be characterized by attributes beyond the private ownership of the means of production.

According to an interpretation given by George Lipsitz , privatism needs to be considered hostile towards social life of a community, because it results in segregation and extreme inequalities. Moreover, in his perspective, privatism supporters tend to be less involved in social life leading to severe consequences on the social environment.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalism Propertarianism Privatization References [ edit ] ^ Barnekov, Timothy; Boyle, Robin; Rich, Daniel (1989).

Privatism and Urban Policy in Britain and the United States . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

1 .

ISBN 978-0-19-823275-9 .

^ Gerald, Turkel (July 1980). "Privatism and orientations toward political action".

Journal of Contemporary Ethnography .

9 (2): 217– 235.

doi : 10.1177/089124168000900207 .

S2CID 144205342 .

^ Wuthnow, Robert; Nass, Clifford (1988). "Government Activity and Civil Privatism: Evidence from Voluntary Church Membership".

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

27 (2): 157– 174.

doi : 10.2307/1386713 .

JSTOR 1386713 .

^ Taylor-Gooby, Peter (1986). "Privatisation, Power and the Welfare State".

Sociology .

20 (2): 228– 246.

doi : 10.1177/0038038586020002005 .

JSTOR 42854246 .

S2CID 153907868 .

^ Lipsitz, George (2006). "Learning from New Orleans: The Social Warrant of Hostile Privatism and Competitive Consumer Citizenship".

Cultural Anthropology .

21 (3): 451– 468.

doi : 10.1525/can.2006.21.3.451 .

JSTOR 3805133 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Privatism&oldid=1223002198 " Category : Economic ideologies This page was last edited on 9 May 2024, at 07:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Privatism 1 language Add topic

