Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Medical works 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Further reading 4.2 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Tamimi (physician) 4 languages العربية Català Français עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Al-Tamimi, the physician ) 10th-century Islamic physician This article is about the physician. For the alchemist, see Muhammed ibn Umail al-Tamimi .

Muhammad Al-Tamimi Born early 10th century CE Jerusalem , Jund Filastin , Palestine , Abbasid Caliphate Died 990 CE Egypt, Abbasid Caliphate Academic background Influences Aristotle , Dioscorides , Galen , Paul of Aegina , Hunayn ibn Ishaq , Isaac Israeli ben Solomon , Ibn al-Jazzar Academic work Era Islamic Golden Age Main interests Islamic medicine Notable works Al-Murshid ilā Jawāhir-il-Aghdhiyah Influenced Maimonides , `Ali ibn `Abd al-`Azim al-Ansari, Ibn al-Baitar , Al-Nuwayri , Daniel Le Clerc Muhammad ibn Sa'id al-Tamimi ( Arabic : أبو عبد الله محمد بن سعيد التميمي ), (died 990), known by his kunya , "Abu Abdullah," but more commonly as Al-Tamimi , was a tenth-century physician , who came to renown on account of his medical works. Born in Jerusalem , Al-Tamimi spent his early years in and around Jerusalem where he studied medicine under the tutelage of two local physicians, Al-Hasan ibn Abi Nu'aym, and a Christian monk, Anba Zecharia ben Thawabah.

[ 1 ] Al-Tamimi possessed an uncommon knowledge of plants and their properties, such that his service in this field was highly coveted and brought him to serve as the personal physician of the Ikhshidid Governor of Ramla , al-Hassan bin Abdullah bin Tughj al-Mastouli, before being asked to render his services in Old Cairo, Egypt. Around 970, Al-Tamimi had settled in Fustat , Egypt, and there prospered in his medical field, writing a medical work for the vizier , Ya'qub ibn Killis (930–991), a Baghdadi Jew who came to work in Egypt under the auspices of the Fatimids .

[ 2 ] He specialized in compounding simple drugs and medicines, but is especially known for his having concocted a theriac reputed as a proven antidote in snakebite and other poisons, which he named tiryaq al-fārūq (the antidote of salvation) [ 3 ] because of its exceptional qualities.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Little is known of al-Tamimi's personal life. Among al-Tamimi's contemporaries was the famed Arab geographer, Al-Muqaddasi , also a fellow Jerusalemite . Like Al-Muqaddasi, he brings down in his writings curious anecdotes about the geography of Palestine and the agronomic practices of its inhabitants, as well as its mineral resources.

[ 5 ] Medical works [ edit ] Al-Tamimi's most-prized medical work is The Guidebook to Basics in Food Nutrition and the Properties of non-compounded Medicines ( Arabic : كتاب المرشد الى جواهر الأغذيه وقوت المفردات من الأدويه ), known also under its abbreviated name, Al-Murshid , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] of which only portions have survived. This work which treats on the properties of certain plants (antidotes) and minerals has laid the foundation for subsequent works written on medicine by other authors, particularly that composed by Ibn al-Baytar in Cairo (d. 1248/646 H), in which he treats on various antidotes used to remedy poisons inflicted by snakebite and scorpion stings, and an important Arabic treatise on antidotes for poisons written by `Ali ibn `Abd al-`Aẓim al-Anṣāri in Syria in 1270 (669 H), entitled Dhikr al-tiryaq al-faruq (Memoir on Antidotes for Poisons), where he quotes from al-Tamimi's works, [ 8 ] some of which are no longer extant.

Maimonides (1138–1204), the Jewish rabbi and physician, also made use of his works, and is quoted as saying of him: "This man who was in Jerusalem, and whose name was al-Tamimi , composed a book, calling it ' al-Murshid ,' that is to say, 'Guide' ['that which leads aright']. They say that he was [a man] of a great learning experience. Now although most of his words were accounts drawn from others, and occasionally he would err by bringing down the words of others, nevertheless he has generally mentioned many peculiar remedies in the nature of foods, what are seen as affecting many cures [for ailments]. I have therefore deemed it fitting to speak of them, what seemed to me of them to be right in foods and in medicines." [ 9 ] Although only portions of al-Tamimi's seminal work have survived, a section of the book (chapters 12, 13 and 14) which treats on rocks and minerals, including asphalt , is today held at the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris, in manuscript form (Paris MS. no. 2870), consisting of 172 pages.

[ 10 ] Other sections of al-Tamimi's original work were copied by `Ali ibn `Abd al-`Aẓim al-Anṣāri in 1270, now preserved at the U.S. National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland.

[ 11 ] Spanish-born pharmacologist, Ibn al-Baytar , cites al-Tamimi some seventy times  . Abstracts of these manuscripts have been published in Hebrew by Yaron Serri and Zohar Amar of Bar-Ilan University , in the Hebrew book, "The Land of Israel and Syria as Described by al-Tamimi." [ 12 ] Al-Tamimi's works on materia medica are an invaluable source for understanding the curative remedies that were in use in Syria and Palestine during the early Muslim period (until 1099). They often relate to the daily life and beliefs of the local residents, as well as the practical usages of plants, particularly in the region of greater Jerusalem and the Dead Sea basin.

[ 13 ] He also sheds light on the process of Islamization of Jerusalem and its environs during that period.

[ 5 ] Al-Tamimi's theriac recension is of particular importance to botanists , as he describes in great detail the recognizable features of the plants used as electuaries , as also the proper season for gathering such plants. His other important medical works include: Māddat-ul-Baqā' fi Iṣlāḥ Fasad il-Ḥawā w-al-taḥarruz min Ḍarar-il-Awbā` (The Extension of Life by Purifying the Corrupt Air and Guarding against the Evil Effects of Pestilences), a book written for his friend, the Fatimid vizier, Ya'qub ibn Killis.

[ 14 ] Maqālah fī Māhīyat-ul-Ramad wa Anwā'uhū wa Asbābuhū wa 'Ilājuh (Treatise on the Nature of Ophthalmology and its Types, Causes and Treatment) [ 15 ] Ḥabīb al-'arūs, wa-rayḥān al-nufūs (The Beloved of the Bride, and the [Fragrant] Basil of Souls) [ 16 ] Miftāḥ al-Surrūr fī kul al-Hummūm (The Key to Pleasure in all Worries) [ 17 ] Several works on how to compound Theriac References [ edit ] ^ Amar, Z.

& Serri, Y. (2004), p. 13; Hitti, P.

(2002), p. 627 ^ Amar, Z.

(1996), p. 24 ^ Said, H.M. & Elahie R.E. (1973), p. 88. According to Al-Biruni (1973), " Faruq means a thing that relieves, or something that acts as a vanguard against poison." Others explain this word to mean, "the one who distinguishes between the right and the wrong," in this case, between life and death, or disease and health (See: Ibn Sa'ad, The Book of the Major Classes [ Tabaqat al-Kubra ], 3/ p. 281; Lane, E.W.

(1968), VI, 2386 ^ Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿa (1965), p. 546 ^ a b Amar, Z.

(1996), p. 23 ^ Shortened name for: "Al-Murshid ilā Jawāhir-il-Aghdhiyah".

^ Chipman, L. N. (2006-01-01). "Syrups from the Apothecary's Shop: a Genizah Fragment Containing one of the Earliest Manuscripts of Minhaj Al-Dukkan".

Journal of Semitic Studies .

51 (1): 137– 168.

doi : 10.1093/jss/fgi086 .

ISSN 0022-4480 .

^ On Anṣāri's works, see: Greenberg, S.J. (1996), p. 14 (item # 16).

^ Amar, Z.

(1996), p. 24, citing Suessmann Muntner, Moshe ben Maimon (Medical) Aphorisms of Moses – [In Twenty Five Treatises] , Jerusalem 1961, p. 240.

^ De Slane, M.

(1883); Vajda, G. (1953).

^ Dhikr al-tiryāq al-fārūq Archived 2016-10-05 at the Wayback Machine , Maryland MS. A-64. See Greenberg, S.J. (1996), p. 14 [item # 16]).

^ The book can be accessed online. See "The Land of Israel and Syria as Described by al-Tamimi" (Hebrew) Archived 2016-10-27 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Fishman, P. & Goell, Y. (1996), p. 183 ^ Conrad, L.

(1982), p. 281 ^ Ali, A. (1996), p, 20, citing Al-A'lām , vol. V, p. 313 ^ Amar, Z.

(2004), p. 14 ^ Amar, Z.

(2004), p. 15 Bibliography [ edit ] Al-Biruni (1973). Hakim Mohammed Said (ed.).

Al-Biruni's Book of Pharmacy and Materia Medica (based on Ṣaydanah fī al-ṭibb) . Vol.

1– 2. Karachi, Pakistan: Rashid and Sons.

OCLC 61993659 .

Ali, Abdul (1996).

Islamic Dynasties of the Arab East: State and Civilization During the Later Medieval Times . New Delhi.

ISBN 81-7533-008-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Amar, Z.

(1996). "Traditions and Realia in the Writings of a Tenth-Century Physician in Jerusalem".

Cathedra: For the History of Eretz Israel and Its Yishuv (in Hebrew).

81 . Jerusalem: Ben-Zvi Institute : 23– 34.

JSTOR 23403696 .

Amar, Z.

; Serri, Yaron (2004).

The Land of Israel and Syria as Described by al-Tamimi – Jerusalem Physician of the 10th Century (in Hebrew). Ramat-Gan.

ISBN 965-226-252-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) -- ( OCLC 607157392 ) Chipman, Leigh N.; Lev, Efraim (Spring 2006).

"Syrups from the Apothecary's Shop: A Geniza Fragment Containing One of the Earliest Manuscripts of Minhāj al-Dukkān" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Conrad, L.I.

(1982). "Tāʿūn and Wabāʾ Conceptions of Plague and Pestilence in Early Islam".

Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient .

25 (3). Leiden: Brill .

doi : 10.2307/3632188 .

JSTOR 3632188 .

De Slane, M.

, ed. (1883), Catalogue des manuscrits arabes de la Bibliothèque nationale , vol. 2, Paris {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Fishman, Priscilla; Goell, Yohai (1996). "Book Review".

Cathedra: For the History of Eretz Israel and Its Yishuv (in Hebrew).

81 . Jerusalem: Ben-Zvi Institute .

Greenberg, S.J. (1996).

A Shelflist of Islamic Medical Manuscripts at the National Library of Medicine Archived 2016-11-01 at the Wayback Machine , Maryland Hitti, P.

(2002).

History of The Arabs . New-York.

ISBN 978-0-333-63141-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿa (1965).

ʿUyūn ul-Anbāʾ fī Ṭabaqāt ul-Aṭibbāʾ (عيون الأنباء في طبقات الأطباء) (in Arabic). Beirut.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Lane, E.W.

, ed. (1968), An Arabic-English Lexicon (1–8) , vol. 6, Beirut {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Said, H.M.; Elahie, R.E. (1973).

Al-Biruni's Book on Pharmacy and Materia Medica . Vol. 1. Karachi.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Vajda, G., ed. (1953), Index général des manuscrits arabes musulmans de La bibliothèque nationale de Paris , Paris {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Lucien Leclerc , Histoire de la médicine arabe , vol. 1, Paris 1876, pp. 388–391 (Al-Tamimi) (French) Fuat Sezgin , Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums , vol. iii: Medizin, Pharmazie, Zoologie, Tierheilkunde , Leiden: E.J. Brill 1970, pp. 317–318 (German) External links [ edit ] Pharmaceutics and Alchemy "The Land of Israel and Syria as Described by al-Tamimi" (Hebrew) v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Israel Portals : Medicine Middle Ages Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Tamimi_(physician)&oldid=1282686239 " Categories : 990 deaths Physicians from the Fatimid Caliphate Medieval Syrian physicians Pharmacologists of the medieval Islamic world 10th-century physicians 10th-century Arabic-language books Scientists from Jerusalem 10th-century Egyptian people Scholars from the Fatimid Caliphate Natural history of Palestine (region) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Hebrew-language sources (he) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 00:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Tamimi (physician) 4 languages Add topic

