Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Yonkers 1.2 Cornell University 2 Programs 3 Technology transfer Toggle Technology transfer subsection 3.1 HighFive 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Boyce Thompson Institute 1 language Esperanto Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Independent plant-based research group at Cornell University The Boyce Thompson Institute (previously: Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research) is an independent research institute devoted to using plant sciences to improve agriculture , protect the environment , and enhance human health . The Boyce Thompson Institute (BTI) is located on the campus of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York , United States, and is fully integrated in the research infrastructure of the university. Faculty at BTI are members of several Cornell Departments, including Plant Biology, Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Molecular Biology & Genetics, as well as Plant Pathology and Plant-Microbe Biology. BTI is governed by a board of directors, which is in part appointed by Cornell.

BTI main entrance History [ edit ] William Boyce Thompson became wealthy from the copper mining industry and visited Russia in 1917, where he saw the effects of hunger on its people. This trip persuaded Thompson of the importance of ensuring food supply for the world population, and in 1920, he decided to establish the Institute for Plant Research. He wanted the institute to further the understanding of plants, to use this understanding for improving world food supply, and to promote conservation of natural areas.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The founding managing director was William Crocker , an associate professor of plant physiology at the University of Chicago who along with Herbert Hice Whetzel had been academic advisers to Thompson when he planned the institute.

[ 2 ] Yonkers [ edit ] The Yonkers building in 2009 Thompson named the institute in honor of his parents, Anne Boyce Thompson and William Thompson, and endowed it with $10 million. Subsequently, the BTI has been funded by government support and revenues from the licensing of institute patents. Thompson played an active role in the early years of BTI and sought to encourage commercial development of the institute's research results. Therefore, rather than locating BTI on a university campus, Thompson built the laboratories in 1924 across the street from his country estate Alder Manor , in Yonkers, New York .

[ 3 ] The Yonkers campus, used by BTI until the 1970s, was leased out for use as late as 1997, and then sold to the City of Yonkers Board of Education in 1999. In 2015 the city sold the property for $4.25 million to Simone Development Cos.

[ 4 ] As of 2015 [update] the plans for the campus were to re-develop it into a mixed-use center with medical offices, restaurants and retail stores.

[ 5 ] Cornell University [ edit ] BTI remained on its Yonkers campus until the 1970s, when Yonkers property taxes and urban pollution posed major problems. Managing Director George L. McNew favored an affiliation with a major research university, and soon a 'bidding war' broke out between Oregon State University and Cornell University to attract BTI. The New York State Legislature wanted to keep BTI in New York and appropriated $8.5 million for construction of facilities on the Cornell campus if BTI agreed to stay.

[ 6 ] Oregon also appropriated funds as a relocation incentive. Ultimately, it was decided that affiliation with Cornell offered the most varied research opportunities.

In 1978 a new 116,854 sq ft (10,856.1 m 2 ) building designed by Ulrich Franzen was built next to the Cornell Veterinary School , and the move was made.

[ 7 ] Although affiliated with Cornell, the institute maintains its independence with a separate endowment, Board of Directors, business office, and employee benefits program. Close ties between BTI and Cornell foster collaborative relationships.

[ 8 ] In 2015, in an effort to revamp the brand, the institute changed its name from Boyce Thompson Institute of Plant Research to Boyce Thompson Institute (BTI).

[ 9 ] Programs [ edit ] Faculty investigators at BTI conduct research on plants and other organisms, train postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates, and teach classes through adjunct appointments at Cornell University . Current faculty members at BTI are: Gary Blissard, Carmen Catala, Zhangjun Fei, Jim Giovannoni, Maria Harrison , Georg Jander , Magda Julkowska, Fay-Wei Li, Greg Martin, Lukas Mueller, Andrew Nelson, Eric Richards, Frank Schroeder, Aleksandra Skirycz, David Stern, and Joyce Van Eck .

[ 10 ] The Scientist magazine survey of post doctoral fellows ranked BTI the 12th best place to work.

[ 11 ] For example, BTI is part of the consortium that is sequencing the tomato genome and creating a database of genomic sequences and information on the tomato and related plants.

[ 12 ] Each summer, BTI's 10-week Plant Genome Research Experience for Undergraduates program enables undergraduates selected nationally to conduct individual research. BTI also runs after-school science enrichment programs at local grade schools.

[ citation needed ] BTI's research facilities, including the BTI Mass Spectrometry Facility and the Plant Cell Imaging Center, are available to researchers from Cornell University and SUNY Cortland .

[ 13 ] Technology transfer [ edit ] HighFive [ edit ] The HighFive cell line was originally developed at BTI. The cell line and its virus-free sub-clones remain the sole property of BTI . The High Five cells have been used to produce the VLP-based HPV vaccine Cervarix .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Boyce Thompson Arboretum State Park - Sonoran Desert arboretum in Arizona.

References [ edit ] ^ "History Overview" . cornell.edu. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010 . Retrieved February 10, 2010 .

^ a b "History Overview" . Archived from the original on January 18, 2010 . Retrieved February 17, 2010 .

^ Hudson Valley Ruins: Alder Manor by Rob Yasinsac ; hudsonvalleyruins.org ^ Seward, Ardina.

"Old Yonkers Building Gets New Life" .

www.hamlethub.com . Retrieved March 11, 2016 .

^ "New office complex for Boyce Thompson site" .

lohud.com . Retrieved March 11, 2016 .

^ Cliness, Francis (July 26, 1973).

"Session Starts in Albany With Expanded Agenda (subsscription required)" .

New York Times . Retrieved February 17, 2010 .

^ Boyce Thompson Institute - Facility Information Archived 2012-03-02 at the Wayback Machine , cornell.edu ^ Cornell.edu Archived July 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "BTI name change reflects scope of discoveries, mission" .

www.news.cornell.edu . Retrieved March 11, 2016 .

^ "Welcome to Boyce Thompson Institute - Inspired by how plants work for humanity" .

Boyce Thompson Institute . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ "Postdocs Blossom at Plant Science Centers" .

The Scientist . March 1, 2006.

^ "Tomato genome project gets $1.8M" .

Cornell News . January 2007.

^ "Facilities & Services" . cornell.edu. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010 . Retrieved February 10, 2010 .

^ Schiller, John T.; Castellsagué, Xavier; Villa, Luisa L.; Hildesheim, Allan (August 2008).

"An update of prophylactic human papillomavirus L1 virus-like particle vaccine clinical trial results" .

Vaccine .

26 (Suppl 10): K53 – K61 .

doi : 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.06.002 .

PMC 2631230 .

PMID 18847557 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boyce Thompson Institute for Plant Research .

Boyce Thompson Institute website v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boyce_Thompson_Institute&oldid=1293411805 " Categories : Cornell University Botanical research institutes Universities and colleges established in 1920 Embedded educational institutions Education in Yonkers, New York Ithaca, New York 1920 establishments in New York (state) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 15:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boyce Thompson Institute 1 language Add topic

