Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common assumptions of most theories 2 Structural analysis 3 Strategic analysis 4 Process analysis 5 Integrative analysis 6 Bad faith negotiation Toggle Bad faith negotiation subsection 6.1 Inherent bad faith model in international relations and political psychology 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Negotiation theory 4 languages العربية Deutsch Español हिन्दी Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of negotiations See also: Negotiation and Bargaining This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Negotiation theory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Conflict resolution Principles Democracy Might makes right Non-aggression Nonviolence Pacifism Rule of man Speaking truth to power Toleration paradox Law Collaborative Dispute resolution Right to an effective remedy Rule of law Management Arbitration Alternative dispute resolution Auction Conciliation Family therapy Mediation Party-directed Negotiation Nonviolent Communication Peacebuilding International relations Appeasement Armistice Ceasefire Diplomacy Multilateralism Peacebuilding Peacemaking Peace process Peace treaty Track II diplomacy War Models and theories Brinkmanship Conflict escalation Conflict avoidance Conflict continuum Conflict style inventory Deterrence theory Game theory Prisoner's dilemma v t e The foundations of negotiation theory are decision analysis , behavioral decision-making , game theory , and negotiation analysis .
Another classification of theories distinguishes between Structural Analysis, Strategic Analysis, Process Analysis, Integrative Analysis, and behavioral analysis of negotiations.

Negotiation is a strategic discussion that resolves an issue in a way that both parties find acceptable. Individuals should make separate, interactive decisions; and negotiation analysis considers how groups of reasonably bright individuals should and could make joint, collaborative decisions. These theories are interleaved and should be approached from the synthetic perspective.

Common assumptions of most theories [ edit ] Negotiation is a specialized and formal version of conflict resolution , most frequently employed when important issues must be agreed upon. Negotiation is necessary when one party requires the other party's agreement to achieve its aim. The aim of negotiating is to build a shared environment leading to long-term trust, and it often involves a third, neutral party to extract the issues from the emotions and keep the individuals concerned focused. It is a powerful method for resolving conflict and requires skill and experience.

Henry Kissinger defined negotiation as "a process of combining conflicting positions into a common position under a decision rule of unanimity , a phenomenon in which the outcome is determined by the process." [ 1 ] Druckman adds that negotiations pass through stages that consist of agenda-setting, a search for guiding principles, defining the issues, bargaining for favorable concession exchanges, and a search for implementing details. Transitions between stages are referred to as turning points.

[ 2 ] Most theories of negotiations share the notion of negotiations as a process, but they differ in their description of the process.

Structural, strategic, and procedural analysis builds on rational actors , who are able to prioritize clear goals, are able to make trade-offs between conflicting values, are consistent in their behavioral patterns, and are able to take uncertainty into account.

Negotiations differ from mere coercion , in that negotiating parties have the theoretical possibility to withdraw from negotiations. It is easier to study bilateral negotiations, as opposed to multilateral negotiations.

Structural analysis [ edit ] Structural Analysis is based on a distribution of empowering elements among two negotiating parties.  Structural theory moves away from traditional Realist notions of power in that it does not only consider power to be a possession, manifested for example in economic or military resources, but also thinks of power as a relation.

Based on the distribution of elements, in structural analysis we find either power-symmetry between equally strong parties or power-asymmetry between a stronger and a weaker party. All elements from which the respective parties can draw power constitute structure. They may be of material nature, i.e., hard power (such as weapons ), or of social nature, i.e., soft power (such as norms , contracts , or precedents ).

These instrumental elements of power, are either defined as parties’ relative position (resources position) or as their relative ability to make their options prevail.

According to structural analysis, negotiations can be described with matrices , such as the Prisoner's dilemma , a concept taken from game theory . Another common example is the game of Chicken .

Structural analysis is easy to criticize, because it predicts that the strongest will always win. This, however, does not always hold true.

Strategic analysis [ edit ] Strategic analysis starts with the assumption that both parties have a veto . Thus, in essence, negotiating parties can cooperate (C) or defect (D). Structural analysis then evaluates Á outcomes of negotiations (C, C; C, D; D, D; D, C), by assigning values to each of the possible outcomes. 
Often, cooperation of both sides yields the best outcome. The problem is that the parties can never be sure that the other is going to cooperate, mainly because of two reasons: first, decisions are made at the same time or, second, concessions of one side might not be returned. Therefore, the parties have contradicting incentives to cooperate or defect. If one party cooperates or makes a concession and the other does not, the defecting party might relatively gain more.

Trust may be built only in repetitive games through the emergence of reliable patterns of behavior, such as tit-for-tat .

Process analysis [ edit ] Process analysis is the theory closest to haggling . 
Process Analysis focuses on the study of the dynamics of processes. E.g., both Zeuthen and Cross tried to find a formula in order to predict the behavior of the other party in finding a rate of concession, in order to predict the likely outcome. Process analysis is the main resource in this chapter of negotiation.

The process of negotiation, therefore, is considered to unfold between fixed points: starting point of discord, endpoint of convergence. The so-called security point, which is the result of optional withdrawal, is also taken into account.

An important feature of negotiation processes is the idea of turning points (TPs). A considerable amount of research has been devoted to analyses of TPs in single and comparative case studies, as well as experiments. Considered as departures in the process, Druckman has proposed a three-part framework for analysis in which precipitating events precede (and cause) departures which have immediate and delayed consequences.

[ 3 ] Precipitating events can be external as when a mediator becomes involved, substantive as when a new idea is proposed, or procedural as when the formal plenary structure becomes divided into committees. Departures can be abrupt or relatively slow and consequences can escalate, moving away from agreement, or they might move in the direction of agreement. Using this framework in a comparative study of 34 cases, Druckman discovered that external events were needed to move talks on security or arms control toward agreement.

[ 4 ] However, new ideas or changed procedures were more important for progress in trade or political negotiations. Different patterns were also found for interest-based, cognitive-based, and values-based conflicts [ 5 ] and between domestic and international negotiations.

[ 6 ] Turning points are also analyzed in relation to negotiation crises or disruptions in the flow of the talks. Earlier research showed that TPs are more likely to occur in the context of crises, often in the form of changes that put the talks back on track and transition to a new stage (Druckman, 1986, 2001). A key to resolving crises is reframing the issues being discussed. The choice to reframe was shown to occur more frequently among negotiators when their trust is low and transaction costs are high.

[ 7 ] The research to date on TPs has generated ideas likely to stimulate further studies. Some of these ideas include a search for the underlying mechanisms that can explain the emergence of TPs. Foremost among these are flexibility and adaptability in response to crises or violations of expected behavior.  The key challenge is to discover the conditions that foster progress toward a solution to the dilemma of balancing the desire to agree with the desire to come out favorably.  For a review of the research on turning points, see Druckman and Olekalns.

[ 8 ] Integrative analysis [ edit ] Integrative analysis divides the process into successive stages, rather than talking about fixed points. It extends analysis to pre-negotiations stages, in which parties make first contacts. The outcome is explained as the performance of the actors at different stages. Stages may include pre-negotiations, finding a formula of distribution, crest behavior, settlement Bad faith negotiation [ edit ] Bad faith is a concept in negotiation theory whereby parties pretend to reason to reach settlement, but have no intention to do so, for example, one political party may pretend to negotiate, with no intention to compromise, for political effect.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Inherent bad faith model in international relations and political psychology [ edit ] Bad faith in political science and political psychology refers to negotiating strategies in which there is no real intention to reach compromise, or a model of information processing .

[ 11 ] The " inherent bad faith model " of information processing is a theory in political psychology that was first put forth by Ole Holsti to explain the relationship between John Foster Dulles ’ beliefs and his model of information processing.

[ 12 ] It is the most widely studied model of one's opponent.

[ 13 ] A state is presumed to be implacably hostile, and contra-indicators of this are ignored.  They are dismissed as propaganda ploys or signs of weakness.  Examples are John Foster Dulles ’ position regarding the Soviet Union, or Israel's initial position on the Palestine Liberation Organization .

See also [ edit ] Argumentation theory Dispute resolution List of books about negotiation Morphological analysis Negotiation Vicente Blanco Gaspar References [ edit ] ^ Kissinger, Henry.

Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 9780393004946 .

^ Druckman, D.

(1986). "Stages, crises, and turning points: Negotiating military base rights, Spain and the United States." Journal of Conflict Resolution , 30 (2): 327-360.

^ Druckman, D. (2004). Departures in negotiation: Extensions and new directions.

Negotiation Journal , 20: 185–204.

^ Druckman, D. (2001). Turning points in international negotiation: A comparative analysis.

Journal of Conflict Resolution , 45: 519–544.

^ Druckman, D. (2005). "Conflict Escalation and Negotiation: A Turning Points Analysis." In I.W. Zartman and G. O. Faure (eds.) Escalation and Negotiation . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

^ Hall, W. E. (2014).

Turning Points in Environmental Negotiation: Exploring Conflict Resolution Dynamics in Domestic and International Cases . Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Republic-of-Letters ^ Druckman, D. and Olekalns, M. (2013). "Motivational primes, trust and negotiators' reactions to a crisis." Journal of Conflict Resolution , 57: 959–983.

^ Druckman, D. and Olekalns, M. (2013a). “Punctuated Negotiations: Transitions, Interruptions, and Turning Points.” In M. Olekalns and W. Adair (eds,) Handbook of Negotiation . Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar ^ "negotiating in bad faith" , example of use of "bad faith" from definition in Oxford Online Dictionary, [1] ^ "Bad Faith Negotiation", Union Voice ^ example of use – "the Republicans accused the Democrats of negotiating in bad faith " , Oxford Online Dictionary, [2] ^ The "Inherent Bad Faith Model" Reconsidered: Dulles, Kennedy, and Kissinger, Douglas Stuart and Harvey Starr, Political Psychology, [3] (subscription required) ^ “…the most widely studied is the inherent bad faith model of one’s opponent..." , The handbook of social psychology , Volumes 1–2, edited by Daniel T. Gilbert, Susan T. Fiske, Gardner Lindzey Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Negotiation_theory&oldid=1283225788 " Categories : Negotiation Decision theory Dispute resolution Game theory Hidden categories: Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 05:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Negotiation theory 4 languages Add topic

