Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Officers 3 Controversy 4 Former officers 5 Sabbatical Officers 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Students' Union Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cambridge University Students' Union ) Representative body for students at the University of Cambridge Not to be confused with Cambridge Union .

Cambridge Students' Union Institution University of Cambridge Location Students' Union, 3rd Floor University Centre, Granta Pl, Mill Lane,
Cambridge, CB2 1RU Established 1971 (as CSU , later CUSU ) 2020 (as Cambridge SU ) Sabbatical officers President (UG): Sarah Anderson ( Fitzwilliam ) President (PG): Sumouli Bhattacharjee ( Fitzwilliam ) Access, Education & Participation (UG): Katie Clarke ( Sidney Sussex ) Access, Education & Participation (PG): Neela Maadhuree ( Queens' ) BME: Maroof Rafique ( Darwin ) Disabled Students': Chalo Waya ( St Catharine's ) Welfare & Community: Elleni Eshete ( Lucy Cavendish ) Women's: Nowsha Farha ( Hughes Hall ) Affiliations National Union of Students , UKCISA Website cambridgesu .co .uk Cambridge Students' Union , known as Cambridge SU , is the university-wide representative body for students at the University of Cambridge , England . Its predecessor union was known as Cambridge University Students' Union or CUSU until its dissolution in July 2020.

[ 1 ] Cambridge SU should not be confused with the Cambridge Union Society (often referred to as simply 'the Union'); membership of both is open to all students at Cambridge, but the Cambridge Union Society is a private society, whereas all students at the University of Cambridge are automatically members of Cambridge SU (although they can opt-out), and Cambridge SU is partially funded by grants from the university.

Until 2020, graduate students at the University of Cambridge were eligible for membership of CUSU as well as the University of Cambridge Graduate Union , specifically for graduate student affairs. In November 2019, students voted by referendum to dissolve both CUSU and the Graduate Union to form one student union, Cambridge SU.

[ 2 ] The new single Students' Union was established on 13 July 2020.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] CUSU was founded as the Cambridge Students' Union (CSU) in 1971 to represent all higher education students studying in Cambridge, that is students attending the University of Cambridge plus undergraduates at CCAT (the then Cambridgeshire College of Arts and Technology, which in 1993 became Anglia Polytechnic University, Cambridge, renamed to Anglia Ruskin University in 2005). CSU also represented students at Homerton College, then a separate teacher training college in the city.

CSU during its early years from 1971 to 1974 received support from CCAT Students' Union as CCATSU was from the 1960s the only large NUS-affiliated, and conventionally funded, students' union in Cambridge. CSU in turn supported CCATSU in its campaigns to get more student housing provided for CCAT degree students, a serious issue for the college by the early 1970s. CCATSU and CSU went their separate ways after 1974.

CSU was formally recognised by the University of Cambridge authorities on 25 May 1984 and renamed, following a student referendum in March 1985, as CUSU – Cambridge University Students Union. CSU's second president, in 1972, was Charles Clarke , later a Labour MP , Secretary of State for Education and Home Secretary .

There had been previous university-wide groups, such as CAMNUS (Cambridge NUS ), which was founded in 1964 by Gordon Heald , John Bibby and others. CAMNUS arranged certain university-wide student facilities, such as 'CAMNUS Coaches' (an end-of-term bus service to all parts of the country), and an inter-collegiate mail service.

Following a referendum of members of CUSU and the University of Cambridge Graduate Union in 2019, the two agreed to merge. The new union, Cambridge SU, was established in July 2020.

[ 1 ] Between 2020 and 2024, Cambridge SU had seven SU Campaigns , which were free to differ from the central SU on policy matters, with six of which representing a particular subset of students.  They were: LGBT+ ( Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender ) International Students' Campaign: international students Black and Minority Ethnic (BME) Campaign: Black and minority ethnic students Women's Campaign, known as "WomCam" Disabled Students' Campaign Class Act, representing students from working-class and disadvantaged educational backgrounds Ethical Affairs Campaign, which leads Cambridge SU's work on ethical and environmental issues in the university and wider society The Campaigns were dissolved in the 2024 Governance Review.

[ 3 ] Officers [ edit ] Cambridge SU holds elections annually for 8 full-time officers, several part-time officers and a number of delegates to the National Union of Students (NUS) Annual Conference.

The full-time officers take a one-year sabbatical from their studies (or directly after they have graduated) and are: President (PG) President (UG) Access, Education and Participation Officer (PG) Access, Education and Participation Officer (UG) Disabled Students' Officer Welfare & Community Officer Women's Officer BME Officer Cambridge SU is unusual in having 8 full time sabbatical roles, with this number placing it at the highest end of all UK students' unions in terms of number of full-time, elected officers. This number is due to be reduced to five for 2025-26 onwards as part of the 2024 Governance Review.

[ 3 ] Controversy [ edit ] In March 2006, the largest Cambridge college students' union, Trinity College Students' Union voted to disaffiliate from CUSU for the academic year 2006/2007. Several other colleges were reported to be also considering the option.

[ 4 ] Trinity College Students' Union reaffiliated in early 2007, following re-engagement work by the incumbent sabbatical officers. On 14 November 2010, both the JCR and MCR of Corpus Christi College disaffiliated, following a college-wide ballot in which 71% of undergraduates and 86% of postgraduates voted in favour of disaffiliation.

[ 5 ] Also, in November 2013 Gonville and Caius College disaffiliated following a referendum which saw a result of 213 votes for disaffiliation and 91 votes against.

[ 6 ] In 2015 the university had to give CUSU a £100,000 bailout, but incumbent president Priscilla Mensah denied that this was due to financial mismanagement.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 2019, CUSU presented a surplus budget, ending what the Union described as “a few difficult years in recent history” with regards to its financial situation.

[ 9 ] Former officers [ edit ] Notable former officers and sabbaticals include: Charles Clarke ( King's ), former Labour Member of Parliament (MP) for Norwich South and Home Secretary , President 1971–72 Mike Gapes ( Fitzwilliam ), former Labour and Co-operative and, subsequently, Change UK Member of Parliament (MP) for Ilford South , Secretary 1973 Tom Hayhoe ( Corpus Christi ), Chairman of West London NHS Trust , President 1977–78 David Lidington ( Sidney Sussex ), former Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Aylesbury and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster , Deputy President 1977–78 Natalie Ceeney ( Newnham ), senior civil servant and businessperson, President 1990–91 Paul Lewis ( King's ), journalist at The Guardian , President 2002–03 Wes Streeting ( Selwyn ), Labour Member of Parliament (MP) for Ilford North and former President of the National Union of Students (NUS), President 2004–05 Mark Fletcher ( Jesus ), Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) for Bolsover , President 2007–09 Lola Olufemi ( Selwyn ), writer and activist, Women's Officer 2017–18 Sabbatical Officers [ edit ] Between 2020-21 and 2024-25, the 8 Sabbatical Officer roles elected at Cambridge SU were: President (UG), President (PG), Access, Education and Participation Officer (UG), Access, Education and Participation Officer (PG), BME Officer, Disabled Students' Officer, Welfare and Community Officer, and Women's Officer.

Cambridge SU Sabbatical Officers Year President (UG) President (PG) Access, Education and Participation Officer (UG) Education and Participation Officer (PG) BME Officer Disabled Students' Officer Welfare and Community Officer Women's Officer 2020-21 [ 10 ] Ben Margolis Aastha Dahal Esme Cavendish Siyang Wei Howard Chae Kerensa Gaunt Alice Gilderdale Chloe Newbold 2021-22 [ 11 ] Zak Coleman Anjum Nahar Zaynab Ahmed Amelia Jabry Tara Choudhury Anna Ward Ben Dalitz Milo Eyre-Morgan 2022-23 [ 12 ] Zaynab Ahmed Amelia Jabry Neve Atkinson Savannah Phillips Kefeshe Bernard Elia Chitwa Daisy Thomas Eseosa Akojie 2023-24 [ 13 ] Fergus Kirman Vareesh Pratap Caredig ap Tomos Ani Perysinakis Maroof Rafique Ell Gardner-Thomas Harvey Brown Rosie Freeman 2024-25 [ 14 ] Sarah Anderson Sumouli Bhattacharjee Katie Clarke Neela Maadhuree Maroof Rafique Chalo Waya Elleni Eshete Nowsha Farha In 2025, for the first time, 5 Sabbatical Officers were elected to serve (in 2025-26) in the new roles created in the 2024 Governance Review. These roles were: President (UG), President (PG), Vice-President (Education & Widening Participation), Vice-President (Liberation & Welfare), Vice-President (Student Community & Societies).

Cambridge SU Sabbatical Officers Year President (UG) President (PG) Vice-President (Education & Widening Participation) Vice-President (Liberation & Welfare) Vice-President (Student Community & Societies) 2025-26 [ 15 ] Matthew Copeman Augustin Denis Jessica Asiedu-Kwatchey Melanie Benedict Olivia Ledger References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Welcome, we are your new Students' Union!" .

Cambridge SU . Retrieved 13 July 2020 .

^ "Cambridge Students voted yes to a new single students' union – CUSU" .

CUSU . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ a b "What's Changing at Your SU" .

Cambridge SU . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "Trinity reaffiliation greeted with "absolute apathy"; Varsity Online" . Varsity.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023 . Retrieved 23 May 2023 .

^ "corpusJCR – News article" .

cam.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 19 January 2014 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ "Caius votes to disaffiliate" .

^ "CUSU in cash crisis" .

varsity.co.uk . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ "Another £100,000 please! CUSU is CU-Screwed after finance goes astray" .

thetab.com . 2 October 2015 . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ "CUSU 2019–20 budget predicts surplus for first time in recent years" .

varsity.co.uk . Retrieved 1 April 2019 .

^ "Few surprises in SU Sabbatical Officer elections, with only one role contested" . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "Lent Elections: Meet Your Winners!" . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "Zaynab Ahmed elected SU President" . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "New SU president: 'We're in a pit and we've got to get out of it' " . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "Sarah Anderson wins SU presidency" . Retrieved 13 January 2025 .

^ "Leadership Elections: Results Announced" . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Aldwych Group Birmingham Bristol Cambridge Cardiff Edinburgh Glasgow Imperial College London King's College London Leeds Liverpool LSE Manchester Newcastle Nottingham Oxford Queen's Belfast Sheffield Southampton UCL Warwick v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_Students%27_Union&oldid=1281121565 " Categories : Organisations associated with the University of Cambridge Student organizations established in 1971 Students' unions in England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 12:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Students' Union Add languages Add topic

