Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Rejecting the American New Left and McGovern's New Politics 2.2 Leo Strauss and his students 2.3 Jeane Kirkpatrick 2.3.1 Skepticism towards democracy promotion 2.4 1990s 2.5 Early 2000s: Administration of George W. Bush and Bush Doctrine 2.6 2008 presidential election and aftermath 2.7 2010s and early 2020s 2.8 War on cartels 3 Evolution of opinions Toggle Evolution of opinions subsection 3.1 Usage and general views 3.2 Opinions concerning foreign policy 3.3 Views on economics 3.4 Friction with other conservatives 3.5 Friction with paleoconservatism 3.5.1 Trotskyism allegation 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Adherence to conservatism 4.2 Imperialism and secrecy 5 Notable people associated with neoconservatism Toggle Notable people associated with neoconservatism subsection 5.1 Politicians 5.2 Government officials 5.3 Public figures 6 Related publications and institutions Toggle Related publications and institutions subsection 6.1 Institutions 6.2 Publications 6.3 Defunct publications 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Identity 10.2 Critiques 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Neoconservatism 47 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political movement "Neocon" redirects here; not to be confused with Necon or Paleoconservatism .

Not to be confused with New conservatism .

This article is about the political movement in the United States. For other regions, see Conservatism and Neoconservatism (disambiguation) . For the furnishing trade fair known as NeoCon, see Merchandise Mart § Trade fairs .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Neoconservatism (colloquially neocon ) is a political movement which began in the United States during the 1960s among liberal hawks who became disenchanted with the increasingly pacifist Democratic Party along with the growing New Left and counterculture of the 1960s . Neoconservatives typically advocate the unilateral promotion of democracy and interventionism in international relations together with a militaristic and realist philosophy of " peace through strength ". They are known for espousing opposition to communism and radical politics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Many adherents of neoconservatism became politically influential during Republican presidential administrations from the 1960s to the 2000s, peaking in influence during the presidency of George W. Bush , when they played a major role in promoting and planning the 2003 invasion of Iraq . Prominent neoconservatives in the Bush administration included Paul Wolfowitz , Elliott Abrams , Richard Perle , Paul Bremer , and Douglas Feith .

Although U.S. vice president Dick Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld had not self-identified as neoconservatives, they worked closely alongside neoconservative officials in designing key aspects of the Bush administration's foreign policy ; especially in their support for Israel , promotion of American influence in the Arab world and launching the war on terror .

[ 3 ] The Bush administration's domestic and foreign policies were heavily influenced by major ideologues affiliated with neoconservatism, such as Bernard Lewis , Lulu Schwartz , Richard and Daniel Pipes , David Horowitz , and Robert Kagan .

[ 4 ] Critics of neoconservatism have used the term to describe foreign policy and war hawks who support aggressive militarism or neocolonialism . Historically speaking, the term neoconservative refers to Americans who moved from the anti-Stalinist left to conservatism during the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 5 ] The movement had its intellectual roots in the magazine Commentary , edited by Norman Podhoretz .

[ 6 ] They spoke out against the New Left, and in that way helped define the movement.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Terminology [ edit ] The term neoconservative was popularized in the United States during 1973 by the socialist leader Michael Harrington , who used the term to define Daniel Bell , Daniel Patrick Moynihan , and Irving Kristol , whose ideologies differed from Harrington's.

[ 9 ] Earlier during 1973, he had described some of the same ideas in a brief contribution to a symposium on welfare sponsored by Commentary .

[ 10 ] The neoconservative label was adopted by Irving Kristol in his 1979 article "Confessions of a True, Self-Confessed 'Neoconservative ' ".

[ 11 ] His ideas have been influential since the 1950s, when he co-founded and edited the magazine Encounter .

[ 12 ] Another source was Norman Podhoretz , editor of the magazine Commentary , from 1960 to 1995. By 1982, Podhoretz was terming himself a neoconservative in The New York Times Magazine article titled "The Neoconservative Anguish over Reagan's Foreign Policy".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The term itself was the product of a rejection among formerly self-identified liberals of what they considered a growing leftward turn of the Democratic Party in the 1970s. Neoconservatives perceived in the new left liberalism an ideological effort to distance the Democratic Party and American liberalism from Cold War liberalism as it was espoused by former Presidents such as Harry S. Truman , John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson . After the Vietnam War, the anti-communist, internationalist and interventionist roots of this Cold War liberalism seemed increasingly brittle to the neoconservatives. As a consequence they migrated to the Republican Party and formed one pillar of the Reagan Coalition and of the conservative movement. Hence, they became Neo-conservatives.

[ 15 ] History [ edit ] Senator Henry M. Jackson , an inspiration for neoconservative foreign policy during the 1970s According to James Nuechterlein, prior to the formation of the movement, all future neoconservatives endorsed the civil rights movement , racial integration , and Martin Luther King Jr.

[ 16 ] Neoconservatism was initiated by liberals' repudiation of the Cold War and by the "New Politics" of the American New Left , which Norman Podhoretz said was too sympathetic to the counterculture and too alienated from the majority of the population, and by the repudiation of "anti- anticommunism " by liberals, which included substantial endorsement of Marxist–Leninist politics by the New Left during the late 1960s. Some neoconservatives were particularly alarmed by what they believed were the antisemitic sentiments of Black Power advocates.

[ 17 ] Irving Kristol edited the journal The Public Interest (1965–2005), featuring economists and political scientists, which emphasized ways that government planning in the liberal state had produced unintended harmful consequences.

[ 18 ] Some early neoconservative political figures were disillusioned Democratic politicians and intellectuals, such as Daniel Patrick Moynihan , who served in the Nixon and Ford administrations, and Jeane Kirkpatrick , who served as United States Ambassador to the United Nations in the Reagan administration. Some left-wing academics such as Frank Meyer and James Burnham eventually became associated with the conservative movement at this time.

[ 19 ] A substantial number of neoconservatives were originally moderate socialists who were originally associated with the moderate wing of the Socialist Party of America (SP) and its successor party, the Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA).

Max Shachtman , a former Trotskyist theorist who developed strong feelings of antipathy towards the New Left , had numerous devotees in the SDUSA with strong links to George Meany 's AFL-CIO. Following Shachtman and Meany, this faction led the SP to oppose immediate withdrawal from the Vietnam War and oppose George McGovern in the Democratic primary race and, to some extent, the general election. They also chose to cease their own party-building and concentrated on working within the Democratic Party, eventually influencing it through the Democratic Leadership Council .

[ 20 ] Thus the Socialist Party dissolved in 1972, and the SDUSA emerged that year. (Most of the left-wing of the party, led by Michael Harrington, immediately abandoned the SDUSA.) [ 21 ] [ 22 ] SDUSA leaders associated with neoconservatism include Carl Gershman , Penn Kemble , Joshua Muravchik and Bayard Rustin .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Norman Podhoretz's magazine Commentary , originally a journal of liberalism, became a major publication for neoconservatives during the 1970s.

Commentary published an article by Jeane Kirkpatrick, an early and prototypical neoconservative.

Rejecting the American New Left and McGovern's New Politics [ edit ] As the policies of the New Left made the Democrats increasingly leftist, these neoconservative intellectuals became disillusioned with President Lyndon B. Johnson 's Great Society domestic programs. The influential 1970 bestseller The Real Majority by Ben Wattenberg expressed that the "real majority" of the electorate endorsed economic interventionism but also social conservatism and that it could be disastrous for Democrats to adopt liberal positions on certain social and crime issues.

[ 27 ] The neoconservatives rejected the countercultural New Left and what they considered anti-Americanism in the non-interventionism of the activism against the Vietnam War . After the anti-war faction took control of the party during 1972 and nominated George McGovern , the Democrats among the neoconservatives endorsed Washington Senator Henry "Scoop" Jackson for his unsuccessful 1972 and 1976 campaigns for president. Among those who worked for Jackson were the incipient neoconservatives Paul Wolfowitz , Doug Feith , and Richard Perle .

[ 28 ] During the late 1970s, neoconservatives tended to endorse Ronald Reagan , the Republican who promised to confront Soviet expansionism. Neoconservatives organized in the American Enterprise Institute and The Heritage Foundation to counter the liberal establishment.

[ 29 ] Author Keith Preston named the successful effort on behalf of neoconservatives such as George Will and Irving Kristol to cancel Reagan's 1980 nomination of Mel Bradford , a Southern Paleoconservative academic whose regionalist focus and writings about Abraham Lincoln and Reconstruction alienated the more cosmopolitan and progress-oriented neoconservatives, to the leadership of the National Endowment for the Humanities in favor of longtime Democrat William Bennett as emblematic of the neoconservative movement establishing hegemony over mainstream American conservatism.

[ 19 ] In another (2004) article, Michael Lind also wrote: [ 30 ] Neoconservatism ... originated in the 1970s as a movement of anti-Soviet liberals and social democrats in the tradition of Truman, Kennedy, Johnson, Humphrey and Henry ('Scoop') Jackson, many of whom preferred to call themselves 'paleoliberals.' [After the end of the Cold War] ... many 'paleoliberals' drifted back to the Democratic center ... Today's neocons are a shrunken remnant of the original broad neocon coalition. Nevertheless, the origins of their ideology on the left are still apparent. The fact that most of the younger neocons were never on the left is irrelevant; they are the intellectual (and, in the case of William Kristol and John Podhoretz, the literal) heirs of older ex-leftists.

Leo Strauss and his students [ edit ] C. Bradley Thompson , a professor at Clemson University, claims that most influential neoconservatives refer explicitly to the theoretical ideas in the philosophy of Leo Strauss (1899–1973), [ 31 ] although there are several writers who claim that in doing so they may draw upon meaning that Strauss himself did not endorse . Eugene Sheppard notes: "Much scholarship tends to understand Strauss as an inspirational founder of American neoconservatism".

[ 32 ] Strauss was a refugee from Nazi Germany who taught at the New School for Social Research in New York (1938–1948) and the University of Chicago (1949–1969).

[ 33 ] Strauss asserted that "the crisis of the West consists in the West's having become uncertain of its purpose". His solution was a restoration of the vital ideas and faith that in the past had sustained the moral purpose of the West. The Greek classics ( classical republican and modern republican ), political philosophy and the Judeo-Christian heritage are the essentials of the Great Tradition in Strauss's work.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Strauss emphasized the spirit of the Greek classics and Thomas G. West (1991) argues that for Strauss the American Founding Fathers were correct in their understanding of the classics in their principles of justice.

[ 36 ] For Strauss, political community is defined by convictions about justice and happiness rather than by sovereignty and force. A classical liberal, he repudiated the philosophy of John Locke as a bridge to 20th-century historicism and nihilism and instead defended liberal democracy as closer to the spirit of the classics than other modern regimes.

[ 37 ] For Strauss, the American awareness of ineradicable evil in human nature and hence the need for morality, was a beneficial outgrowth of the pre-modern Western tradition.

[ 38 ] O'Neill (2009) notes that Strauss wrote little about American topics, but his students wrote a great deal and that Strauss's influence caused his students to reject historicism and positivism as morally relativist positions.

[ 39 ] They instead promoted a so-called Aristotelian perspective on America that produced a qualified defense of its liberal constitutionalism.

[ 40 ] Strauss's emphasis on moral clarity led the Straussians to develop an approach to international relations that Catherine and Michael Zuckert (2008) call Straussian Wilsonianism (or Straussian idealism ), the defense of liberal democracy in the face of its vulnerability.

[ 39 ] [ 41 ] Strauss influenced The Weekly Standard editor Bill Kristol , William Bennett , Newt Gingrich , Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas , as well as Paul Wolfowitz .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Jeane Kirkpatrick [ edit ] Main article: Jeane Kirkpatrick Jeane Kirkpatrick A theory of neoconservative foreign policy during the final years of the Cold War was articulated by Jeane Kirkpatrick in " Dictatorships and Double Standards ", [ 44 ] published in Commentary Magazine during November 1979. Kirkpatrick criticized the foreign policy of Jimmy Carter , which endorsed détente with the Soviet Union. She later served the Reagan Administration as Ambassador to the United Nations.

[ 45 ] Skepticism towards democracy promotion [ edit ] See also: Authoritarian conservatism In "Dictatorships and Double Standards", Kirkpatrick distinguished between authoritarian regimes and the totalitarian regimes such as the Soviet Union. She suggested that in some countries democracy was not tenable and the United States had a choice between endorsing authoritarian governments, which might evolve into democracies, or Marxist–Leninist regimes, which she argued had never been ended once they achieved totalitarian control. In such tragic circumstances, she argued that allying with authoritarian governments might be prudent. Kirkpatrick argued that by demanding rapid liberalization in traditionally autocratic countries, the Carter administration had delivered those countries to Marxist–Leninists that were even more repressive. She further accused the Carter administration of a "double standard" and of never having applied its rhetoric on the necessity of liberalization to communist governments . The essay compares traditional autocracies and Communist regimes: [Traditional autocrats] do not disturb the habitual rhythms of work and leisure, habitual places of residence, habitual patterns of family and personal relations. Because the miseries of traditional life are familiar, they are bearable to ordinary people who, growing up in the society, learn to cope.

[Revolutionary Communist regimes] claim jurisdiction over the whole life of the society and make demands for change that so violate internalized values and habits that inhabitants flee by the tens of thousands.

Kirkpatrick concluded that while the United States should encourage liberalization and democracy in autocratic countries, it should not do so when the government risks violent overthrow and should expect gradual change rather than immediate transformation.

[ 46 ] She wrote: "No idea holds greater sway in the mind of educated Americans than the belief that it is possible to democratize governments, anytime and anywhere, under any circumstances ... Decades, if not centuries, are normally required for people to acquire the necessary disciplines and habits. In Britain, the road [to democratic government] took seven centuries to traverse. ... The speed with which armies collapse, bureaucracies abdicate, and social structures dissolve once the autocrat is removed frequently surprises American policymakers".

[ 47 ] 1990s [ edit ] During the 1990s, neoconservatives were once again opposed to the foreign policy establishment, both during the Republican Administration of President George H. W. Bush and that of his Democratic successor, President Bill Clinton . Many critics charged that the neoconservatives lost their influence as a result of the end of the Soviet Union.

[ 48 ] After the decision of George H. W. Bush to leave Saddam Hussein in power after the first Iraq War during 1991, many neoconservatives considered this policy and the decision not to endorse indigenous dissident groups such as the Kurds and Shiites in their 1991–1992 resistance to Hussein as a betrayal of democratic principles.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Some of those same targets of criticism would later become fierce advocates of neoconservative policies. During 1992, referring to the first Iraq War , then United States Secretary of Defense and future Vice President Richard Cheney said: I would guess if we had gone in there, I would still have forces in Baghdad today. We'd be running the country. We would not have been able to get everybody out and bring everybody home.
And the question in my mind is how many additional American casualties is Saddam [Hussein] worth? And the answer is not that damned many. So, I think we got it right, both when we decided to expel him from Kuwait, but also when the president made the decision that we'd achieved our objectives and we were not going to go get bogged down in the problems of trying to take over and govern Iraq.

[ 54 ] A key neoconservative policy-forming document, A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm (commonly known as the "Clean Break" report) was published in 1996 by a study group of American-Jewish neoconservative strategists led by Richard Perle on the behest of newly-elected Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu . The report called for a new, more aggressive Middle East policy on the part of the United States in defense of the interests of Israel, including the removal of Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq and the containment of Syria through a series of proxy wars , the outright rejection of any solution to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict that would include a Palestinian state , and an alliance between Israel, Turkey and Jordan against Iraq, Syria and Iran . Former United States Assistant Secretary of Defense and leading neoconservative Richard Perle was the "Study Group Leader", but the final report included ideas from fellow neoconservatives, pro-Israel right-wingers and affiliates of Netanyahu's Likud party, such as Douglas Feith , James Colbert, Charles Fairbanks Jr., Jonathan Torop, David Wurmser , Meyrav Wurmser , and IASPS president Robert Loewenberg.

[ 55 ] Within a few years of the Gulf War in Iraq , many neoconservatives were endorsing the ousting of Saddam Hussein. On 19 February 1998, an open letter to President Clinton was published, signed by dozens of pundits, many identified with neoconservatism and later related groups such as the Project for the New American Century , urging decisive action to remove Saddam from power.

[ 56 ] Neoconservatives were also members of the so-called " Blue Team ", which argued for a confrontational policy toward the People's Republic of China (the communist government of mainland China) and for strong military and diplomatic endorsement of the Republic of China (also known as Taiwan), as they believed that China will be a threat to the United States in the future .

Early 2000s: Administration of George W. Bush and Bush Doctrine [ edit ] See also: Rationale for the Iraq War and Prelude to the Iraq War The Bush campaign and the early Bush administration did not exhibit strong endorsement of neoconservative principles. As a presidential candidate, Bush had argued for a restrained foreign policy, stating his opposition to the idea of nation-building .

[ 57 ] Also early in the administration, some neoconservatives criticized Bush's administration as insufficiently supportive of Israel and suggested Bush's foreign policies were not substantially different from those of President Clinton.

[ 58 ] During November 2010, former U.S. President George W. Bush (here with the former President of Egypt Hosni Mubarak at Camp David in 2002) wrote in his memoir Decision Points that Mubarak endorsed the administration's position that Iraq had WMDs before the war with the country, but kept it private for fear of "inciting the Arab street ".

[ 59 ] Bush's policies changed dramatically immediately after the 11 September 2001 attacks .

During Bush's State of the Union speech of January 2002, he named Iraq, Iran and North Korea as states that "constitute an axis of evil " and "pose a grave and growing danger". Bush suggested the possibility of preemptive war : "I will not wait on events, while dangers gather. I will not stand by, as peril draws closer and closer. The United States of America will not permit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons".

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Some major defense and national-security persons have been quite critical of what they believed was a neoconservative influence in getting the United States to go to war against Iraq.

[ 62 ] Former Nebraska Republican U.S. senator and Secretary of Defense, Chuck Hagel , who has been critical of the Bush administration's adoption of neoconservative ideology, in his book America: Our Next Chapter wrote: So why did we invade Iraq? I believe it was the triumph of the so-called neo-conservative ideology, as well as Bush administration arrogance and incompetence that took America into this war of choice. ... They obviously made a convincing case to a president with very limited national security and foreign policy experience, who keenly felt the burden of leading the nation in the wake of the deadliest terrorist attack ever on American soil.

President Bush, VP Dick Cheney, and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice meet with Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and his staff at the Pentagon, 14 August 2006.

The Bush Doctrine of preemptive war was stated explicitly in the National Security Council (NSC) text "National Security Strategy of the United States". published 20 September 2002: "We must deter and defend against the threat before it is unleashed ... even if uncertainty remains as to the time and place of the enemy's attack. ... The United States will, if necessary, act preemptively".

[ 63 ] The choice not to use the word "preventive" in the 2002 National Security Strategy and instead use the word "preemptive" was largely in anticipation of the widely perceived illegality of preventive attacks in international law via both Charter Law and Customary Law.

[ 64 ] In this context, disputes over the non-aggression principle in domestic and foreign policy, especially given the doctrine of preemption , alternatively impede and facilitate studies of the impact of libertarian precepts on neo-conservatism.

Policy analysts noted that the Bush Doctrine as stated in the 2002 NSC document had a strong resemblance to recommendations presented originally in a controversial Defense Planning Guidance draft written during 1992 by Paul Wolfowitz , during the first Bush administration.

[ 65 ] The Bush Doctrine was greeted with accolades by many neoconservatives. When asked whether he agreed with the Bush Doctrine, Max Boot said he did and that "I think [Bush is] exactly right to say we can't sit back and wait for the next terrorist strike on Manhattan. We have to go out and stop the terrorists overseas. We have to play the role of the global policeman. ... But I also argue that we ought to go further".

[ 66 ] Discussing the significance of the Bush Doctrine, neoconservative writer Bill Kristol claimed: "The world is a mess. And, I think, it's very much to Bush's credit that he's gotten serious about dealing with it. ... The danger is not that we're going to do too much. The danger is that we're going to do too little".

[ 67 ] 2008 presidential election and aftermath [ edit ] President George W. Bush and Senator John McCain at the White House, 5 March 2008, after McCain became the Republican presumptive presidential nominee John McCain , who was the Republican candidate for the 2008 United States presidential election , endorsed continuing the second Iraq War , "the issue that is most clearly identified with the neoconservatives".

The New York Times reported further that his foreign policy views combined elements of neoconservatism and the main competing conservative opinion, pragmatism , also known as realism: [ 68 ] Among [McCain's advisers] are several prominent neoconservatives, including Robert Kagan ... [and] Max Boot...
'It may be too strong a term to say a fight is going on over John McCain's soul,' said Lawrence Eagleburger ... who is a member of the pragmatist camp, ... [but he] said, "there is no question that a lot of my far right friends have now decided that since you can't beat him, let's persuade him to slide over as best we can on these critical issues.

Barack Obama campaigned for the Democratic nomination during 2008 by attacking his opponents, especially Hillary Clinton , for originally endorsing Bush's Iraq-war policies. Obama maintained a selection of prominent military officials from the Bush administration including Robert Gates (Bush's Defense Secretary) and David Petraeus (Bush's ranking general in Iraq). Neoconservative politician Victoria Nuland , former U.S. Ambassador to NATO under Bush, was made United States Under Secretary of State by Obama.

[ 69 ] 2010s and early 2020s [ edit ] By 2010, U.S. forces had switched from combat to a training role in Iraq and they left in 2011.

[ 70 ] The neocons had little influence in the Obama White House, [ 71 ] [ 72 ] and neo-conservatives have lost much influence in the Republican party since the rise of the Tea Party Movement .

Several neoconservatives played a major role in the Stop Trump movement in 2016, in opposition to the Republican presidential candidacy of Donald Trump , due to his criticism of interventionist foreign policies, as well as their perception of him as an "authoritarian" figure.

[ 73 ] After Trump took office, some neoconservatives joined his administration, such as John Bolton , Mike Pompeo , Elliott Abrams [ 74 ] and Nadia Schadlow . Neoconservatives have supported the Trump administration's hawkish approach towards Iran [ 75 ] and Venezuela, [ 76 ] while opposing the administration's withdrawal of troops from Syria [ 77 ] and diplomatic outreach to North Korea.

[ 78 ] Although neoconservatives have served in the Trump administration, they have been observed to have been slowly overtaken by the nascent populist and national conservative movements, and to have struggled to adapt to a changing geopolitical atmosphere.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] The Lincoln Project , a political action committee consisting of current and former Republicans with the purpose of defeating Trump in the 2020 United States presidential election and Republican Senate candidates in the 2020 United States Senate elections , has been described as being primarily made of neoconservative activists seeking to return the Republican party to Bush-era ideology.

[ 81 ] Although Trump was not reelected and the Republicans failed to retain a majority in the Senate, surprising success in the 2020 United States House of Representatives elections and internal conflicts led to renewed questions about the strength of neoconservatism.

[ 82 ] In the Biden administration , neoconservative Victoria Nuland retained the portfolio of Under Secretary of State she had held under Obama. President Joe Biden 's top diplomat for Afghanistan, Zalmay Khalilzad , was also a neocon and a former Bush administration official.

[ 83 ] In the 2024 U.S. presidential election , neoconservatives including the Cheney family (Dick & Liz) and Adam Kinzinger supported Vice President Kamala Harris ' campaign. After losing the election, Harris' campaign team was criticized by those within the Democratic camp for allying with neoconservatives.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] War on cartels [ edit ] From the 2020s onward, several U.S. neoconservatives, such as Marco Rubio , Mike Pompeo, [ 86 ] [ page needed ] and Nikki Haley , [ 87 ] [ 88 ] among others, have supported highly punitive and militaristic measures in the context of the war on cartels . In the 2020s, the escalating opioid crisis, particularly due to fentanyl, has intensified the debate over these measures. The designation of cartels as Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs) has been a key step, paving the way for counterterrorism measures. Marco Rubio, a Florida senator and nominee for Secretary of State in 2025, has shown strong support for punitive actions against cartels. During his confirmation hearing, Rubio emphasized that cartels have "operational control" over large areas of the border and advocated for designating them as terrorist organizations, a move that was officially implemented, potentially enabling military actions.

[ 89 ] Evolution of opinions [ edit ] Usage and general views [ edit ] During the early 1970s, socialist Michael Harrington was one of the first to use "neoconservative" in its modern meaning. He characterized neoconservatives as former leftists – whom he derided as "socialists for Nixon " – who had become more conservative.

[ 9 ] These people tended to remain endorsers of social democracy , but distinguished themselves by allying with the Nixon administration with respect to foreign policy, especially by their endorsement of the Vietnam War and opposition to the Soviet Union. They still endorsed the welfare state , but not necessarily in its contemporary form.

External videos Booknotes interview with Irving Kristol on Neoconservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea , 1995 , C-SPAN Irving Kristol remarked that a neoconservative is a " liberal mugged by reality ", one who became more conservative after seeing the results of liberal policies. Kristol also distinguished three specific aspects of neoconservatism from previous types of conservatism: neo-conservatives had a forward-looking attitude from their liberal heritage, rather than the reactionary and dour attitude of previous conservatives; they had a meliorative attitude, proposing alternate reforms rather than simply attacking social liberal reforms; and they took philosophical ideas and ideologies very seriously.

[ 90 ] During January 2009, at the end of President George W. Bush's second term in office, Jonathan Clarke, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs and prominent critic of Neoconservatism, proposed the following as the "main characteristics of neoconservatism": "a tendency to see the world in binary good/evil terms", a "low tolerance for diplomacy", a "readiness to use military force", an "emphasis on US unilateral action", a "disdain for multilateral organizations" and a "focus on the Middle East".

[ 91 ] Opinions concerning foreign policy [ edit ] International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Neo-Gramscianism Critical security studies Critical theory English School Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Feminism Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Copenhagen School Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Postmodernism Postcolonialism Intercommunalism Chinese school of international relations Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal v t e In foreign policy, the neoconservatives' main concern is to prevent the development of a new rival.

Defense Planning Guidance , a document prepared during 1992 by Under Secretary for Defense for Policy Paul Wolfowitz, is regarded by Distinguished Professor of the Humanities John McGowan at the University of North Carolina as the "quintessential statement of neoconservative thought". The report says: [ 92 ] Our first objective is to prevent the re-emergence of a new rival, either on the territory of the former Soviet Union or elsewhere, that poses a threat on the order of that posed formerly by the Soviet Union. This is a dominant consideration underlying the new regional defense strategy and requires that we endeavor to prevent any hostile power from dominating a region whose resources would, under consolidated control, be sufficient to generate global power.

According to Lead Editor of e-International Relations Stephen McGlinchey: "Neo-conservatism is something of a chimera in modern politics. For its opponents it is a distinct political ideology that emphasizes the blending of military power with Wilsonian idealism, yet for its supporters it is more of a 'persuasion' that individuals of many types drift into and out of. Regardless of which is more correct, it is now widely accepted that the neo-conservative impulse has been visible in modern American foreign policy and that it has left a distinct impact".

[ 93 ] Neoconservatism first developed during the late 1960s as an effort to oppose the radical cultural changes occurring within the United States. Irving Kristol wrote: "If there is any one thing that neoconservatives are unanimous about, it is their dislike of the counterculture ".

[ 94 ] Norman Podhoretz agreed: "Revulsion against the counterculture accounted for more converts to neoconservatism than any other single factor".

[ 95 ] Neoconservatives began to emphasize foreign issues during the mid-1970s.

[ 96 ] Donald Rumsfeld and Victoria Nuland at the NATO–Ukraine consultations in Vilnius, Lithuania, 24 October 2005 In 1979, an early study by liberal Peter Steinfels concentrated on the ideas of Irving Kristol , Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Daniel Bell . He noted that the stress on foreign affairs "emerged after the New Left and the counterculture had dissolved as convincing foils for neoconservatism ... The essential source of their anxiety is not military or geopolitical or to be found overseas at all; it is domestic and cultural and ideological".

[ 97 ] Neoconservative foreign policy is a descendant of so-called Wilsonian idealism . Neoconservatives endorse democracy promotion by the U.S. and other democracies, based on the conviction that natural rights are both universal and transcendent in nature. They criticized the United Nations and détente with the Soviet Union . On domestic policy , they endorse reductions in the welfare state , like European and Canadian conservatives . According to Norman Podhoretz , "'the neo-conservatives dissociated themselves from the wholesale opposition to the welfare state which had marked American conservatism since the days of the New Deal' and ... while neoconservatives supported 'setting certain limits' to the welfare state, those limits did not involve 'issues of principle, such as the legitimate size and role of the central government in the American constitutional order' but were to be 'determined by practical considerations'".

[ 98 ] In April 2006, Robert Kagan wrote in The Washington Post that Russia and China may be the greatest "challenge liberalism faces today": The main protagonists on the side of autocracy will not be the petty dictatorships of the Middle East theoretically targeted by the Bush doctrine. They will be the two great autocratic powers, China and Russia, which pose an old challenge not envisioned within the new 'war on terror' paradigm. ... Their reactions to the 'color revolutions' in Ukraine, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan were hostile and suspicious, and understandably so. ... Might not the successful liberalization of Ukraine, urged and supported by the Western democracies, be but the prelude to the incorporation of that nation into NATO and the European Union – in short, the expansion of Western liberal hegemony?

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Trying to describe the evolution within the neoconservative school of thought is bedeviled by the fact that a coherent version of Neoconservatism is difficult to distill from the various diverging voices who are nevertheless considered to be neoconservative. On the one hand were individuals such as former Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick who embodied views that were hawkish yet still fundamentally in line with Realpolitik . The more institutionalized neoconservatism that exerted influence through think tanks, the media and government officials, rejected Realpolitik and thus the Kirkpatrick Doctrine . This rejection became an impetus to push for active US support for democratic transitions in various autocratic nations.

[ 101 ] In the 1990s leading thinkers of this modern strand of the neoconservative school of thought, Robert Kagan and Bill Kristol, published an essay in which they lay out the basic tenets of what they call a Neo-Reaganite foreign policy. In it they reject a "return to normalcy" after the end of the Cold War and argue that the United States should instead double down on defending and extending the liberal International order . They trace the origin of their approach to foreign policy back to the foundation of the United States as a revolutionary, liberal capitalist republic. As opposed to advocates of Realpolitik, they argue that domestic politics and foreign policies are inextricably linked making it natural for any nation to be influenced by ideology, ideals and concepts of morality in their respective international conduct. Hence, this archetypical neoconservative position attempts to overcome the dichotomy of pragmatism and idealism emphasizing instead that a values-driven foreign policy is not just consistent with American historical tradition but that it is in the enlightened self-interest of the United States.

[ 102 ] Views on economics [ edit ] While neoconservatism is concerned primarily with foreign policy, there is also some discussion of internal economic policies. Neoconservatism generally endorses free markets and capitalism , favoring supply-side economics , but it has several disagreements with classical liberalism and fiscal conservatism . Irving Kristol states that neocons are more relaxed about budget deficits and tend to reject the Hayekian notion that the growth of government influence on society and public welfare is " the road to serfdom ".

[ 103 ] Indeed, to safeguard democracy, government intervention and budget deficits may sometimes be necessary, Kristol argues. After the so-called "reconciliation with capitalism", self-identified "neoconservatives" frequently favored a reduced welfare state, but not its elimination.

Neoconservative ideology stresses that while free markets do provide material goods in an efficient way, they lack the moral guidance human beings need to fulfill their needs. They say that morality can be found only in tradition and that markets do pose questions that cannot be solved solely by economics, arguing: "So, as the economy only makes up part of our lives, it must not be allowed to take over and entirely dictate to our society".

[ 104 ] Critics consider neoconservatism a bellicose and "heroic" ideology opposed to "mercantile" and "bourgeois" virtues and therefore "a variant of anti-economic thought".

[ 105 ] Political scientist Zeev Sternhell states: "Neoconservatism has succeeded in convincing the great majority of Americans that the main questions that concern a society are not economic, and that social questions are really moral questions".

[ 106 ] Friction with other conservatives [ edit ] Many conservatives oppose neoconservative policies and have critical views on it. Disputes over the non-aggression principle in domestic and foreign policy, especially given the doctrine of preemption , can impede (and facilitate) studies of the impact of libertarian precepts on neo-conservatism, but that of course didn't, and still doesn't, stop pundits from publishing appraisals. For example, Stefan Halper and Jonathan Clarke (a libertarian based at Cato), in their 2004 book on neoconservatism, America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order , [ 107 ] characterized the neoconservatives at that time as uniting around three common themes: A belief deriving from religious conviction that the human condition is defined as a choice between good and evil and that the true measure of political character is to be found in the willingness by the former (themselves) to confront the latter.

An assertion that the fundamental determinant of the relationship between states rests on military power and the willingness to use it.

A primary focus on the Middle East and global Islam as the principal theater for American overseas interests.

In putting these themes into practice, neo-conservatives: Analyze international issues in black-and-white, absolute moral categories. They are fortified by a conviction that they alone hold the moral high ground and argue that disagreement is tantamount to defeatism.

Focus on the "unipolar" power of the United States, seeing the use of military force as the first, not the last, option of foreign policy. They repudiate the "lessons of Vietnam", which they interpret as undermining American will toward the use of force, and embrace the " lessons of Munich ", interpreted as establishing the virtues of preemptive military action.

Disdain conventional diplomatic agencies such as the State Department and conventional country-specific, realist, and pragmatic, analysis (see shoot first and ask questions later ). They are hostile toward nonmilitary multilateral institutions and instinctively antagonistic toward international treaties and agreements. "Global unilateralism" is their watchword. They are fortified by international criticism, believing that it confirms American virtue.

Look to the Reagan administration as the exemplar of all these virtues and seek to establish their version of Reagan's legacy as the Republican and national orthodoxy.

[ 107 ] : 10–11 Responding to a question about neoconservatives in 2004, William F. Buckley Jr.

said: "I think those I know, which is most of them, are bright, informed and idealistic, but that they simply overrate the reach of U.S. power and influence".

[ 108 ] Friction with paleoconservatism [ edit ] Main article: Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism Starting during the 1980s, disputes concerning Israel and public policy contributed to a conflict with paleoconservatives .

Pat Buchanan terms neoconservatism "a globalist , interventionist , open borders ideology ".

[ 109 ] Paul Gottfried has written that the neocons' call for " permanent revolution " exists independently of their beliefs about Israel, [ 110 ] characterizing the neoconservatives as "ranters out of a Dostoyevskian novel, who are out to practice permanent revolution courtesy of the U.S. government" and questioning how anyone could mistake them for conservatives.

[ 111 ] What make neocons most dangerous are not their isolated ghetto hang-ups, like hating Germans and Southern whites and calling everyone and his cousin an anti-Semite, but the leftist revolutionary fury they express.

[ 111 ] He has also argued that domestic equality and the exportability of democracy are points of contention between them.

[ 112 ] Paul Craig Roberts , United States Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy during the Reagan administration and associated with paleoconservatism stated in 2003 that "there is nothing conservative about neoconservatives. Neocons hide behind 'conservative' but they are in fact Jacobins . Jacobins were the 18th century French revolutionaries whose intention to remake Europe in revolutionary France's image launched the Napoleonic Wars ".

[ 113 ] Trotskyism allegation [ edit ] Critics have argued that since the founders of neo-conservatism included ex- Trotskyists , Trotskyist traits continue to characterize neo-conservative ideologies and practices.

[ 114 ] During the Reagan administration, the charge was made that the foreign policy of the Reagan administration was being managed by ex-Trotskyists. This claim was cited by Lipset (1988 , p. 34), who was a neoconservative and former Trotskyist himself.

[ 115 ] This "Trotskyist" charge was repeated and widened by journalist Michael Lind during 2003 to assert a takeover of the foreign policy of the George W. Bush administration by former Trotskyists; [ 116 ] Lind's "amalgamation of the defense intellectuals with the traditions and theories of 'the largely Jewish-American Trotskyist movement' [in Lind's words]" was criticized during 2003 by University of Michigan professor Alan M. Wald, [ 117 ] who had discussed Trotskyism  in his history of " The New York Intellectuals ".

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] The charge that neoconservativism is related to Leninism has also been made by Francis Fukuyama . He argued that both believe in the "existence of a long-term process of social evolution", though neoconservatives seek to establish liberal democracy instead of communism .

[ 121 ] He wrote that neoconservatives "believed that history can be pushed along with the right application of power and will. Leninism was a tragedy in its Bolshevik version, and it has returned as farce when practiced by the United States. Neoconservatism, as both a political symbol and a body of thought, has evolved into something I can no longer support".

[ 121 ] However, these comparisons ignore anti-capitalist and anti-imperialist positions central to Leninism, which run contradictory to core neoconservative beliefs.

[ 122 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics of neoconservatism take issue with neoconservatives' support for interventionistic foreign policy. Critics from the left take issue with what they characterize as unilateralism and lack of concern with international consensus through organizations such as the United Nations .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] Critics from both the left and right have assailed neoconservatives for the role Israel plays in their policies on the Middle East.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Neoconservatives respond by describing their shared opinion as a belief that national security is best attained by actively promoting freedom and democracy abroad as in the democratic peace theory through the endorsement of democracy, foreign aid and in certain cases military intervention . This is different from the traditional conservative tendency to endorse friendly regimes in matters of trade and anti-communism even at the expense of undermining existing democratic systems.

In a column on The New York Times named "Years of Shame" commemorating the tenth anniversary of 9/11, Paul Krugman criticized them for causing a supposedly entirely unrelated war.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Adherence to conservatism [ edit ] Former Republican Congressman Ron Paul (now a Libertarian politician) has been a longtime critic of neoconservativism as an attack on freedom and the Constitution, including an extensive speech on the House floor addressing neoconservative beginnings and how neoconservatism is neither new nor conservative.

[ 130 ] Imperialism and secrecy [ edit ] See also: Criticism of United States foreign policy John McGowan , professor of humanities at the University of North Carolina , states after an extensive review of neoconservative literature and theory that neoconservatives are attempting to build an American Empire , seen as successor to the British Empire , its goal being to perpetuate a " Pax Americana ". As imperialism is largely considered unacceptable by the American media, neoconservatives do not articulate their ideas and goals in a frank manner in public discourse. McGowan states: [ 92 ] Frank neoconservatives like Robert Kaplan and Niall Ferguson recognize that they are proposing imperialism as the alternative to liberal internationalism. Yet both Kaplan and Ferguson also understand that imperialism runs so counter to American's liberal tradition that it must ... remain a foreign policy that dare not speak its name ... While Ferguson, the Brit, laments that Americans cannot just openly shoulder the white man's burden, Kaplan the American, tells us that "only through stealth and anxious foresight" can the United States continue to pursue the "imperial reality [that] already dominates our foreign policy", but must be disavowed in light of "our anti-imperial traditions, and ... the fact that imperialism is delegitimized in public discourse"... The Bush administration, justifying all of its actions by an appeal to "national security", has kept as many of those actions as it can secret and has scorned all limitations to executive power by other branches of government or international law.

Notable people associated with neoconservatism [ edit ] The list includes public people identified as personally neoconservative at an important time or a high official with numerous neoconservative advisers, such as George W. Bush and Dick Cheney.

Marco Rubio – current United States secretary of state , former U.S. Senator from Florida, and 2016 Republican presidential candidate, he had been described as neoconservative during his 2016 campaign, [ 131 ] but then shifted to a more “America First” foreign policy and became the 72nd United States secretary of state in Trump's second term.

[ 132 ] He was promoted for faithfully implementing Trump's MAGA agenda and also served as national security adviser .

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] Politicians [ edit ] George W. Bush announces his $74.7 billion wartime supplemental budget request as Donald Rumsfeld and Paul Wolfowitz look on.

George W. Bush – 43rd U.S. President , 46th U.S.

Governor of Texas [ 135 ] Jeb Bush – 43rd U.S.

Governor of Florida , 2016 Republican presidential candidate [ 136 ] Dick Cheney – 46th U.S. Vice President [ 135 ] Donald Rumsfeld – former U.S. Secretary of Defense [ 135 ] Henry "Scoop" Jackson – former U.S. Senator from Washington [ 137 ] Joe Lieberman – former U.S. Senator from Connecticut, 2000 Democratic vice-presidential nominee [ 138 ] John McCain – former U.S. Representative and U.S. Senator from Arizona, 2000 Republican presidential candidate, 2008 Republican presidential nominee [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] Lindsey Graham – U.S. Senator from South Carolina, 2016 Republican presidential candidate [ 142 ] [ 143 ] Mitch McConnell – U.S. Senator from Kentucky and Chair of the Senate Rules Committee [ 144 ] Michael McCaul – U.S. Representative from Texas [ 145 ] [ 146 ] Mike Gallagher – former U.S. Representative from Wisconsin and Chair of the House Committee on the Chinese Communist Party [ 147 ] Mike Pompeo – former Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and 70th United States secretary of state [ 148 ] Asa Hutchinson – 46th U.S.

Governor of Arkansas , 2024 Republican presidential candidate [ 149 ] [ 150 ] Nikki Haley – 29th U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations , 116th U.S.

Governor of South Carolina , 2024 Republican presidential candidate [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] Mike Turner – U.S. Representative from Ohio [ 154 ] [ 155 ] Tom Cotton – U.S. Senator and former Representative from  Arkansas [ 156 ] Don Bacon – U.S. Representative from Nebraska and former U.S. Air Force General [ 157 ] Government officials [ edit ] Bill Kristol orating at Arizona State University in March 2017 John P. Walters – former U.S. government official, current President and Chief Executive Officer of Hudson Institute [ 158 ] Nadia Schadlow – academic and defense-related government officer [ 159 ] Elliot Abrams – foreign policy advisor [ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Richard Perle – former Assistant Secretary of Defense and lobbyist [ 160 ] [ 164 ] John R. Bolton – former National Security Advisor and 25th U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations [ 165 ] Kenneth Adelman – former Director of Arms Control and Disarmament Agency [ 164 ] William Bennett – former chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, former Director of the National Drug Control Policy and former U.S. Secretary of Education [ 160 ] [ 166 ] Eliot A. Cohen – former State Department Counselor, now Robert E. Osgood Professor of Strategic Studies at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at the Johns Hopkins University [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Eric S. Edelman – former Under Secretary of Defense for Policy [ 169 ] Evelyn Farkas – Executive Director of the McCain Institute, former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Russia, Ukraine and Eurasia [ 170 ] Douglas J. Feith – former Under Secretary of Defense for Policy [ 163 ] Jeane Kirkpatrick – former Ambassador to the United Nations under Ronald Reagan, influenced by traditional realist thinking [ 171 ] David J. Kramer – Executive Director of the George W. Bush Institute, former Assistant Secretary of State for Democracy, Human Rights and Labor [ 172 ] Bill Kristol – former Chief of Staff to the Vice President of the United States , co-founder and former editor of The Weekly Standard , professor of political philosophy and American politics and political adviser [ 173 ] [ 174 ] Scooter Libby – former Chief of Staff to the Vice President of the United States [ 175 ] [ 163 ] Victoria Nuland – former Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs [ 176 ] Condoleezza Rice – former National Security Advisor and 66th United States Secretary of State [ 135 ] Randy Scheunemann – foreign policy advisor and lobbyist [ 177 ] Kurt Volker – former U.S. Permanent Representative to NATO [ 178 ] Paul Wolfowitz – former State and Defense Department official [ 160 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] [ 163 ] R. James Woolsey Jr.

– former Undersecretary of the Navy, former Director of Central Intelligence, green energy lobbyist [ 181 ] [ 163 ] [ 168 ] [ 164 ] [ 182 ] Public figures [ edit ] Robert Kagan David Frum speaking to Policy Exchange in 2013 Fred Barnes – co-founder and former executive editor of The Weekly Standard [ 183 ] Max Boot – author, consultant, editorialist, lecturer, and military historian; [ 68 ] formerly, publicly distanced himself and renounced Neoconservatism [ 184 ] David Brooks – columnist [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] Midge Decter – journalist, author † [ 164 ] Lulu Schwartz Lulu Schwartz - American journalist, author and columnist who held a senior policy analyst role at Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD), a neo-conservative think tank based in Washington, D.C.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] Niall Ferguson [ 190 ] Steve Forbes [ 191 ] David Frum – journalist, Republican speechwriter and columnist [ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] Reuel Marc Gerecht – writer, political analyst and senior fellow at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies [ 195 ] Jonah Goldberg – founding editor of The Dispatch David Horowitz [ 196 ] Bruce P. Jackson – activist, former U.S. military intelligence officer [ 164 ] Donald Kagan – Sterling Professor of Classics and History at Yale University †.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Frederick Kagan – historian, resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute [ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] Robert Kagan – senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, scholar of U.S. foreign policy, founder of the Yale Political Monthly , adviser to Republican political campaigns and one of 25 members of an advisory board to Hillary Clinton at the State Department (Kagan calls himself a "liberal interventionist" rather than "neoconservative") [ 202 ] [ 203 ] Charles Krauthammer – Pulitzer Prize winner, columnist and psychiatrist † [ 204 ] Irving Kristol – publisher, journalist and columnist † [ 205 ] Eli Lake – journalist and columnist [ 206 ] Michael Ledeen – historian, foreign policy analyst, scholar at the American Enterprise Institute [ 164 ] Clifford May – founder and president of the Foundation for Defense of Democracies [ 207 ] Joshua Muravchik - political scholar [ 208 ] Douglas Murray [ 209 ] Michael Pillsbury [ 210 ] Daniel Pipes [ 211 ] Richard Pipes [ 212 ] Danielle Pletka – American Enterprise Institute vice president [ 213 ] John Podhoretz – editor of Commentary [ 214 ] Norman Podhoretz – editor-in-chief of Commentary [ 215 ] [ 216 ] Yuval Levin – founding editor of National Affairs (2009–present) and director of Social, Cultural, and Constitutional Studies at the American Enterprise Institute .

[ 217 ] Michael Rubin – resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute [ 218 ] Gary Schmitt – resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute [ 219 ] [ 220 ] Ben Shapiro speaking at the 2016 Politicon at the Pasadena Convention Center in Pasadena , California Ben Shapiro – political commentator, public speaker, author, lawyer, founder and editor emeritus of The Daily Wire .

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] Bret Stephens – journalist and columnist for The New York Times [ 224 ] Irwin Stelzer – economist and writer [ 225 ] Ruth Wisse [ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] Related publications and institutions [ edit ] Institutions [ edit ] American Enterprise Institute [ 229 ] Committee for the Free World [ 230 ] Foundation for Defense of Democracies [ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] Henry Jackson Society [ 234 ] Hudson Institute [ 235 ] Jewish Institute for National Security of America [ 236 ] Project for the New American Century [ 237 ] The Washington Institute for Near East Policy [ 236 ] United Against Nuclear Iran [ 238 ] Publications [ edit ] Commentary National Review (neoconservative opinion pieces) The Washington Free Beacon The Bulwark Defunct publications [ edit ] The Public Interest (1965–2005) The Weekly Standard (1995–2018) See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Anti-Germans (political current) British neoconservatism Criticism of Islamism Democratic peace theory Factions in the Republican Party (United States) Globalization Intellectual dark web Interventionism (politics) Jewish conservatism [ 239 ] Liberal conservatism [ 240 ] Liberal hawk Liberal internationalism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism Neoconservatism in Japan Neoconservatism in the Czech Republic Neoliberalism Neo-libertarianism New Right in the United States Paleoconservatism Team B Tory socialism Trotskyism United States militarism Views on military action against Iran Notes [ edit ] ^ Dagger, Richard.

"Neoconservatism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2020 . Retrieved 16 May 2016 .

^ "Neoconservative" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Record, Jeffrey (2010).

Wanting War: Why the Bush Administration Invaded Iraq . Potomac Books, Inc. pp.

47– 50.

ISBN 978-1-59797-590-2 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Abrams, Nathan (2010). "Introduction".

Norman Podhoretz and Commentary Magazine: The Rise and Fall of the Neocons . New York: The Continuum International Publishing Group Inc. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-4411-0968-2 .

^ Vaïsse, Justin (2010).

Neoconservatism: The biography of a movement . Harvard University Press. pp.

6– 11.

^ Balint, Benjamin (2010). "Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine that Transformed the Jewish Left Into the Neoconservative Right".

PublicAffairs .

^ Beckerman, Gal (6 January 2006). "The Neoconservatism Persuasion".

The Forward .

^ Friedman, Murray (2005).

The Neoconservative Revolution Jewish Intellectuals and the Shaping of Public Policy . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Harrington, Michael (Fall 1973). "The Welfare State and Its Neoconservative Critics".

Dissent .

20 .

Cited in: Isserman, Maurice (2000).

The Other American: the life of Michael Harrington . New York: PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1-891620-30-0 . Retrieved 17 December 2019 .

Reprinted as chapter 11 in Harrington's 1976 book The Twilight of Capitalism , pp. 165–272.

^ Edward C. Banfield; Nathan Glazer; Michael Harrington; Tom Kahn; Christopher Lasch (May 1973).

"Nixon, the Great Society, and the Future of Social Policy—A Symposium" .

Commentary . p. 39.

^ Goldberg, Jonah (20 May 2003).

"The Neoconservative Invention" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 2 March 2014 .

^ Kristol, Irving (1999).

Neoconservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea . Ivan R. Dee.

ISBN 978-1-56663-228-7 .

^ Gerson, Mark (Fall 1995).

"Norman's Conquest" .

Policy Review . Archived from the original on 20 March 2008 . Retrieved 31 March 2008 .

^ Podhoretz, Norman (2 May 1982).

"The Neoconservative Anguish over Reagan's Foreign Policy" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2008 . Retrieved 30 March 2008 .

^ Kagan, Robert (29 May 2008).

"Neocon Nation: Neoconservatism, c. 1776" .

World Affairs Journal .

170 (4): 13– 35.

doi : 10.3200/WAFS.170.4.13-35 . Retrieved 30 July 2023 .

^ Nuechterlein, James (May 1996).

"The End of Neoconservatism" .

First Things .

63 : 14– 15.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2012 . Retrieved 31 March 2008 .

Neoconservatives differed with traditional conservatives on a number of issues, of which the three most important, in my view, were the New Deal , civil rights , and the nature of the Communist threat ... On civil rights, all neocons were enthusiastic supporters of Martin Luther King, Jr.

and the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965 ." ^ Balint, Benjamin (1 June 2010).

Benjamin Balint, Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine That Transformed the Jewish Left Into the Neoconservative Right (2010), pp. 100–18 . PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1-58648-860-4 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Irving Kristol, "Forty good years", Public Interest , Spring 2005, Issue 159, pp. 5–11 is Kristol's retrospective in the final issue.

^ a b Gottfried, Paul, ed. (15 July 2020).

The Vanishing Tradition .

doi : 10.7591/cornell/9781501749858.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-1-5017-4985-8 .

S2CID 242603258 .

^ Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard University Press, 2010), pp. 214–19 ^ Martin Duberman (2013).

A Saving Remnant: The Radical Lives of Barbara Deming and David McReynolds . The New Press.

ISBN 978-1-59558-697-1 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Maurice Isserman (2001) [8 December 1972].

The Other American: The Life of Michael Harrington . PublicAffairs. p. 300 of 290–304.

ISBN 978-0-7867-5280-5 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Vaïsse, Justin (2010).

Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard University Press, 2010), pp. 71–75 . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-05051-8 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Jack Ross, The Socialist Party of America: A Complete History (University of Nebraska Press, 2015), the entire Chapter 17 entitled " Social Democrats USA and the Rise of Neoconservatism Archived 23 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine " ^ Matthews, Dylan (28 August 2013).

"Dylan Matthews, "Meet Bayard Rustin" Washingtonpost.com, 28 August 2013" .

Washingtonpost.com .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2015 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ " "Table: The three ages of neoconservatism" Neoconservatism: Biography of Movement by Justin Vaisse-official website" . Neoconservatism.vaisse.net. Archived from the original on 20 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Mason, Robert (2004).

Richard Nixon and the Quest for a New Majority .

UNC Press . pp.

81– 88.

ISBN 978-0-8078-2905-9 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Justin Vaïsse, Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (2010) ch 3.

^ Arin, Kubilay Yado: Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy . Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013.

^ Lind, Michael (23 February 2004).

"A Tragedy of Errors" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 March 2008 .

^ "Neoconservatism Unmasked" . 7 March 2011.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Eugene R. Sheppard, Leo Strauss and the politics of exile: the making of a political philosopher (2005), p. 1.

^ Allan Bloom, "Leo Strauss: September 20, 1899 – October 18, 1973", Political Theory , November 1974, Vol. 2 Issue 4, pp. 372–92, an obituary and appreciation by one of his prominent students.

^ John P. East, "Leo Strauss and American Conservatism", Modern Age , Winter 1977, Vol. 21 Issue 1, pp. 2–19 online Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Leo Strauss's Perspective on Modern Politics" Archived 27 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine – American Enterprise Institute ^ West, Thomas G. (1991). "Leo Strauss and the American Founding".

The Review of Politics .

53 (1): 157– 172.

doi : 10.1017/s0034670500050257 .

ISSN 0034-6705 .

S2CID 144097678 .

^ Kenneth L. Deutsch; John Albert Murley (1999).

Leo Strauss, the Straussians, and the American Regime . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0-8476-8692-6 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Thomas G. West, "Leo Strauss and the American Founding", Review of Politics , Winter 1991, Vol. 53 Issue 1, pp. 157–72.

^ a b Catherine H. Zuckert , Michael P. Zuckert , The Truth about Leo Strauss: Political Philosophy and American Democracy , University of Chicago Press, 2008, p. 4ff.

^ Johnathan O'Neill, "Straussian constitutional history and the Straussian political project", Rethinking History , December 2009, Vol. 13 Issue 4, pp. 459–78.

^ Irving Kristol , The Neo-conservative Persuasion: Selected Essays, 1942-2009 , Basic Books, 2011, p. 217.

^ Barry F. Seidman and Neil J. Murphy, eds.

Toward a new political humanism (2004), p. 197.

^ Sheppard, Leo Strauss and the politics of exile: the making of a political philosopher (2005), pp. 1–2.

^ Jeane Kirkpatrick, J (November 1979).

"Dictatorships and Double Standards" Archived 4 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Commentary Magazine 68, No. 5.

^ Noah, T. (8 December 2006).

Jeane Kirkpatrick, Realist Archived 25 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

Slate Magazine . Retrieved 8 July 2012.

^ "Jeane Kirkpatrick and the Cold War (audio)" . NPR. 8 December 2006.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2007 .

^ "Jeane Kirkpatrick" .

The Economist . 19 December 2006.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2007 . Retrieved 16 August 2007 .

^ Jaques, Martin (16 November 2006).

"America faces a future of managing imperial decline" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2020 . Retrieved 31 January 2008 .

^ Schwarz, Jonathan (14 February 2008).

"The Lost Kristol Tapes: What the New York Times Bought" .

Tom Dispatch .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ Tucker, Spencer; Pierpaoli, Paul G., eds. (2009).

U.S. Leadership in Wartime: Clashes, Controversy, and Compromise, Volume 1 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 947.

ISBN 978-1-59884-173-2 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ Hirsh, Michael (November 2004).

"Bernard Lewis Revisited:What if Islam isn't an obstacle to democracy in the Middle East but the secret to achieving it?" .

Washington Monthly . Archived from the original on 8 January 2014 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ Wing, Joel (17 April 2012).

"What Role Did Neoconservatives Play In American Political Thought And The Invasion Of Iraq?" .

Musings on Iraq .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2014 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ Podhoretz, Norman (September 2006).

"Is the Bush Doctrine Dead?" .

Commentary .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ Pope, Charles (29 September 2008).

"Cheney changed his view on Iraq" . Seattle Post Intelligencer.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2021 . Retrieved 25 October 2008 .

^ " A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm Archived January 25, 2014, at the Wayback Machine " text states, "The main substantive ideas in this paper emerge from a discussion in which prominent opinion makers, including Richard Perle, James Colbert, Charles Fairbanks, Jr., Douglas Feith, Robert Loewenberg, David Wurmser, and Meyrav Wurmser participated." ^ Solarz, Stephen , et al. " Open Letter to the President Archived 4 April 2004 at the Wayback Machine ", 19 February 1998, online at IraqWatch.org. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

^ "Bush Begins Nation Building" . WCVB TV. 16 April 2003. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012.

^ Harnden, Toby; Philps, Alan (26 June 2001).

"Bush accused of adopting Clinton policy on Israel" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 30 March 2008 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Bush: Mubarak wanted me to invade Iraq" Archived 22 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Mohammad Sagha. Foreign Policy. 12 November 2010. Retrieved 8 June 2011 ^ " The President's State of the Union Speech Archived 2 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine ". White House press release, 29 January 2002.

^ " Bush Speechwriter's Revealing Memoir Is Nerd's Revenge ".

The New York Observer , 19 January 2003 ^ Douglas Porch , "Writing History in the 'End of History' Era – Reflections on Historians and the GWOT", Journal of Military History , October 2006, Vol. 70 Issue 4, pp. 1065–79.

^ "National Security Strategy of the United States" .

whitehouse.gov . 20 September 2002.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2021 – via National Archives .

^ "International Law and the Bush Doctrine" . 9 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2012 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ " The evolution of the Bush doctrine Archived 22 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine ", in "The war behind closed doors".

Frontline , PBS . 20 February 2003.

^ " The Bush Doctrine " Archived 30 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

Think Tank , PBS . 11 July 2002.

^ " Assessing the Bush Doctrine Archived 17 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine ", in "The war behind closed doors".

Frontline , PBS . 20 February 2003.

^ a b Bumiller, Elisabeth; Larry Rohter (10 April 2008).

"2 Camps Trying to Influence McCain on Foreign Policy" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 16 April 2008 .

^ "Victoria Nuland resigns, Glenn Greenwald eviscerates leading neocon: Interview" .

The Hill . 6 March 2024.

^ Stephen McGlinchey, "Neoconservatism and American Foreign Policy", Politikon: The IAPSS Journal of Political Science , Vol. 16, 1 (October 2010).

^ Homolar-Riechmann, Alexandra (2009). "The moral purpose of US power: neoconservatism in the age of Obama".

Contemporary Politics .

15 (2): 179– 96.

doi : 10.1080/13569770902858111 .

S2CID 154947602 .

^ Robert Singh, "Neoconservatism in the age of Obama", in Inderjeet Parmar and Linda B. Miller, eds., Obama and the World: New Directions in US Foreign Policy (Routledge 2014), pp. 29–40 ^ "Neocons for Hillary: why some conservatives think Trump threatens democracy itself" .

Vox . 4 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "Elliott Abrams, prominent D.C. neocon, named special envoy for Venezuela" .

Politico . 25 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "Are the Neocons Finally with Trump?" .

The National Interest . 17 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "Neocon-led US Venezuela policy, rhetoric trigger deja vu effect" .

Deutsche Welle . 5 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "Trump's decision to withdraw from Syria and build a border wall instead marks a key moment for his 'America first' view" .

Los Angeles Times . 19 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "The North Korea Summit Through the Looking Glass" .

Jacobin . 13 June 2018.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ Elghossain, Anthony (3 April 2019).

"The Enduring Power of Neoconservatism" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ "Bill Kristol Wanders the Wilderness of Trump World" .

The New Yorker . 2 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ "Neoconservative Wolves Dressed in Never-Trumper Clothing" .

The American Conservative . 10 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ "How a leading anti-Trump group ignored a crisis in its ranks" .

AP NEWS . 20 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ Cockburn, Andrew (12 June 2014).

"The Long Shadow of a Neocon: How Big Tech is losing the wars of the future" .

Harper's Magazine – via harpers.org.

^ "Why Dick Cheney, Neocons Endorsed Kamala Harris" .

The Intercept . 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 .

^ John, Nichols.

"Liz Cheney Was an Electoral Fiasco for Kamala Harris" .

The Nation . Retrieved 12 December 2024 .

{{ cite magazine }} : Cite magazine requires |magazine= ( help ) ^ Pompeo, Mike (2022).

Never Give an Inch: Fighting for the America I Love .

^ Sexton, Adam (2023).

"Haley says she would send military to attack drug cartels" .

^ Correa-Cabrera, Guadalupe (2024).

"The Dangerous Narrative of the "War on Cartels" " .

^ "Designation of International Cartels" .

U.S. Department of State .

^ Kristol, Irving. " American conservatism 1945–1995 Archived 16 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine ".

Public Interest , Fall 1995.

^ "Viewpoint: The end of the neocons?" Archived 12 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Jonathan Clarke, British Broadcasting Corporation , 13 January 2009.

^ a b McGowan, J. (2007).

"Neoconservatism" .

American Liberalism: An Interpretation for Our Time . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. pp.

124–33 .

ISBN 978-0-8078-3171-7 .

^ "Neoconservatism and American Foreign Policy" . June 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Kristol, What Is a Neoconservative?

p. 87.

^ Podhoretz, p. 275.

^ Vaisse, Neoconservatism (2010), p. 110.

^ Steinfels, p. 69.

^ Francis, Samuel (7 June 2004) Idol With Clay Feet Archived 28 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative .

^ " League of Dictators?

Archived 12 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine ".

The Washington Post . 30 April 2006.

^ " US: Hawks Looking for New and Bigger Enemies?

Archived 5 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine ".

IPS . 5 May 2006.

^ Pee, Robert; Lucas, Scott (2 September 2022).

"Reevaluating Democracy Promotion: The Reagan Administration, Allied Authoritarian States, and Regime Change" .

Journal of Cold War Studies .

24 (3).

doi : 10.1162/jcws_a_01090 .

S2CID 252014598 . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Kagan, Robert; Kristol, Bill (1 July 1996).

"Toward a Neo-Reaganite Foreign Policy" .

Foreign Affairs .

75 (July/August 1996) . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Irving Kristol (25 August 2003).

"The Neoconservative Persuasion" . Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Murray, p. 40.

^ William Coleman.

"Heroes or Heroics? Neoconservatism, Capitalism, and Bourgeois Ethics" . Social Affairs Unit.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Sternhell, Zeev; Maisel, David (2010).

The anti-enlightenment tradition . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15633-1 .

OCLC 667065029 .

p. 436.

^ a b say that neocons "propose an untenable model for our nation's future" (p. 8) and then outline what they think is the inner logic of the movement: Halper, Stefan; Clarke, Johnathan (2004).

America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83834-4 .

^ Sanger, Deborah, "Questions for William F. Buckley: Conservatively Speaking" Archived 18 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine , interview in The New York Times Magazine , 11 July 2004. Retrieved 6 March 2008 ^ Tolson 2003.

^ " Fatuous and Malicious Archived 24 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine " by Paul Gottfried.

LewRockwell.com , 28 March 2003.

^ a b "Goldberg Is Not the Worst" Archived 10 February 2015 at archive.today by Paul Gottfried.

LewRockwell.com , 20 March 2003.

^ Paul Gottfried's Paleoconservatism article in "American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia" (ISI:2006) ^ "Neo-Jacobins Push For World War IV" .

LewRockwell .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 .

^ Judis, John B. (August 1995).

"Trotskyism to Anachronism: The Neoconservative Revolution" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2020 .

^ "A 1987 article in The New Republic described these developments as a Trotskyist takeover of the Reagan administration", wrote Lipset (1988 , p. 34).

^ Lind, Michael (7 April 2003).

"The weird men behind George W. Bush's war" .

New Statesman . London. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011.

^ Wald, Alan (27 June 2003).

"Are Trotskyites Running the Pentagon?" .

History News Network .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 September 2011 .

^ Wald, Alan M. (1987).

The New York intellectuals: The rise and decline of the anti-Stalinist left from the 1930s to the 1980s' . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-4169-3 .

^ King, William (2004). "Neoconservatives and 'Trotskyism' ".

American Communist History .

3 (2): 247– 66.

doi : 10.1080/1474389042000309817 .

ISSN 1474-3892 .

S2CID 162356558 .

^ King, Bill (22 March 2004).

"Neoconservatives and Trotskyism" .

Enter Stage Right: Politics, Culture, Economics (3): 1– 2.

ISSN 1488-1756 .

Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 29 July 2005 .

The question of 'Shachtmanism' ^ a b Fukuyama, F. (19 February 2006).

After Neoconservatism Archived 1 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine .

The New York Times Magazine.

Retrieved 1 December 2008.

^ "Imperialism", The Penguin Dictionary of International Relations (1998), by Graham Evans and Jeffrey Newnham. p. 244.

^ Kinsley, Michael (17 April 2005).

"The Neocons' Unabashed Reversal" .

The Washington Post . p. B07.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2019 . Retrieved 25 December 2006 .

Kinsley quotes Rich Lowry , whom he describes as "a conservative of the non-neo variety", as criticizing the neoconservatives "messianic vision" and "excessive optimism"; Kinsley contrasts the present-day neoconservative foreign policy to earlier neoconservative Jeane Kirkpatrick's "tough-minded pragmatism".

^ Martin Jacques, " The neocon revolution Archived 16 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine ", The Guardian , 31 March 2005. Retrieved 25 December 2006. (Cited for "unilateralism".) ^ Rodrigue Tremblay, " The Neo-Conservative Agenda: Humanism vs. Imperialism Archived 3 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine ", presented at the Conference at the American Humanist Association annual meeting Las Vegas, 9 May 2004. Retrieved 25 December 2006 on the site of the Mouvement laïque québécois.

^ [1] Archived 26 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine Dual Loyalty?, By Rebecca Phillips, ABC News, 15 March 2003 ^ [2] Archived 23 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine Joe Klein on Neoconservatives and Iran, Jeffrey Goldberg, The Atlantic, 29 July 2008 ^ Krugman, Paul (12 September 2011).

"More About the 9/11 Anniversary" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2021.

^ Sargent, Greg (12 September 2011).

"Paul Krugman's allegation of 9/11 shame — is he right?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021.

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Ron Paul - Neo-CONNED!" .

YouTube . 20 April 2011.

^ Preble, Christopher A. (8 March 2016).

"Marco Rubio: The Neocons' Last Stand?" .

Cato Institute . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ "Marco Rubio, set to be Trump's top diplomat, vows 'America First' " .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

^ Axelrod, Tal (12 June 2025).

"The MAGA assimilation test: Why Rubio passed and Graham failed" .

Axios . Retrieved 21 July 2025 .

^ Crowley, Michael; Barnes, Julian E. (18 July 2025).

"Rubio Restricts U.S. Criticism of Tainted Foreign Elections" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 21 July 2025 .

^ a b c d Krauthammer, Charles (1 July 2005).

"The Neoconservative Convergence" .

Commentary Magazine .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 6 April 2020 .

^ "Jeb Bush, neoconservative" . Fox News. 18 February 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Kirsch, Adam (1 June 2010).

"Muscular Movement" . Tablet . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ Byron, Tau (3 November 2013).

"Lieberman to join conservative group" . Politico . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

^ "John McCain, Neocon" .

HuffPost . 21 January 2008.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "John McCain's Neocon Manifesto" . National Interest. 29 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ "Worse Than Bush" .

Slate . 28 May 2008.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ Jack, Hunter (29 May 2009).

"Neocon Lindsey Graham" .

Charleston City Paper . Retrieved 29 May 2009 .

^ "Rand Paul digs at 'neocon' foreign policy of fellow GOP Sen. Lindsey Graham" .

The Washington Examiner . 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 31 March 2022 .

^ W. James Antle, III (3 April 2024).

"Mitch McConnell's Fight Against Phantom Isolationists" . The American Conservative . Retrieved 3 April 2024 .

^ Mike, Johnson.

"House Republican Floats Bill to Authorize US Military Action in Iran as Fears of Broader War Grow" . Common Dreams . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ "NeoCon Deep State Congressman Michael McCaul Must Be Defeated" . Substack. 31 January 2024 . Retrieved 31 January 2024 .

^ "Top House China hawk to retire, opening seat in battleground Wisconsin" .

CNBC . 10 February 2024.

^ Petti, Matthew (18 November 2019).

"Pompeo Goes Full Neocon" .

The National Interest .

^ Knox, Brady (2 April 2023).

"Who is Republican 2024 candidate Asa Hutchinson?" .

Washington Examiner .

^ Weisman, Jonathan; Klein, Ann Hinga (12 July 2023).

"Asa Hutchinson Is Selling Bush-Era Republicanism. Buyers Are Scarce" .

The New York Times .

^ Devlin, Bradley (5 January 2024).

"Tuberville: Nikki Haley is a 'Neocon' " . The American Conservative . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ Ecarma, Caleb (13 October 2023).

"Nikki Haley's Long Shot Bid Might Be the GOP's Best Shot at Dumping Trump" . Vanity Fair . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ " 'She Certainly Beat All the Boys': Winners and Losers of the Third G.O.P. Debate" .

The New York Times . 9 November 2023. Archived from the original on 15 January 2024 . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ "House Intel's next top Republican prepares a sharp turn from the Trump years" .

POLITICO . 7 January 2022.

^ "War in Ukraine" .

Congressman Michael Turner .

^ "Meet Tom Cotton: Arkansas's next Senator and Rand Paul's worst nightmare" . 5 November 2014.

^ Lotz, Avery (31 March 2025).

"House Republican scolds Trump's "velvet gloves" approach with Putin" .

Axios .

^ "John Walters" .

Militarist Monitor .

^ Larison, Daniel (11 November 2022).

"The battle for who owns 'conservative statecraft' " .

Responsible Statecraft .

^ a b c d Adam Bernstein (18 September 2009).

"Irving Kristol dies at 89; godfather of neoconservatism" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

many neoconservatives, such as Paul Wolfowitz, William Bennett, Richard Perle and Elliott Abrams ^ "Elliott Abrams: Trump's Neocon?" .

The Atlantic . 6 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Elliott Abrams, prominent D.C. neocon, named special envoy for Venezuela" .

Politico . 25 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ a b c d e "How Neoconservatives Conquered Washington – and Launched a War" .

Antiwar.com . 10 April 2003.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g "Chechen Terrorists and the Neocons" .

Consortium News . 19 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ Jentleson, Bruce W.; Whytock, Christopher A. (30 March 2006).

"Who 'Won' Libya? The Force-Diplomacy Debate and Its Implications for Theory and Policy" .

International Security .

30 (3): 47– 86.

doi : 10.1162/isec.2005.30.3.47 .

S2CID 57572461 . Archived from the original on 26 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Edward B. Fiske, Reagan's Man for Education Archived 17 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times (22 December 1985): "Bennett's scholarly production has consisted primarily of articles in neo-conservative journals like Commentary, Policy Review and The Public Interest." ^ "Cohen, Eliot" .

Right Web . Institute for Policy Studies. 30 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2018 . Retrieved 25 March 2016 .

Eliot Cohen, a professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS), has been an important supporter of neoconservative-led foreign policy campaigns. Sometimes touted as 'the most influential neocon in academe,' Cohen had multiple roles in the George W. Bush administration ...

^ a b "Return of the Neocons: Trump's Surprising Cabinet Candidates" .

The Fiscal Times . 17 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ Edelman, Eric (2 June 2017).

"Eric Edelman Oral History" .

Miller Center . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Farkas, Evelyn (11 January 2022).

"The US Must Prepare for War Against Russia Over Ukraine" . Defense One . Retrieved 7 July 2023 .

^ Joe Holley (9 December 2006).

"Jeane J. Kirkpatrick; U.N. Ambassador Upheld Reagan Doctrine" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2019 . Retrieved 6 September 2017 .

Kirkpatrick became a neoconservative in the 1970s and then a Republican Party stalwart.

^ "David Kramer" .

AllGov . Retrieved 7 July 2023 .

^ "Bill Kristol: A Neoconservative, Not a Conservative" .

Townhall . 26 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ Daniel W. Drezner, Who belongs in the anti-Trump coalition?

Archived 28 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post (12 December 2017): "[Kristol] is hardly the only neoconservative to fall into this category; see, for example, Peter Wehner or Jennifer Rubin." ^ Dickerson, John (21 October 2005).

"Who is Scooter Libby?" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

Libby is a neocon's neocon. He studied political science at Yale under former Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz and began working with his former teacher under Cheney at the Defense Department during the George H.W. Bush administration ...

^ Samuel Moyn (7 September 2023).

"The War Party Is Back" .

The Nation . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ Smith, Ben (22 September 2009).

"Scheunemann advising Palin for 'wide-ranging' Hong Kong talk" .

POLITICO .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ Volker, Kurt (20 June 2023).

"Grey Zones are Green Lights – Bring Ukraine Into NATO" .

CEPA . Retrieved 7 July 2023 .

^ David Corn (13 May 2015).

"The Jeb Bush Adviser Who Should Scare You" . Mother Jones.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ "Paul Wolfowitz's Neocon Blueprint for US Strategic Action" .

Asia Sentinel . 21 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Woolsey, James" .

Right Web . Institute for Policy Studies. 5 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

Woolsey blends Democratic Party domestic politics with advocacy for neoconservative foreign policy causes ... Like other neoconservatives, Woolsey is a staunch backer of Middle East policies similar to those of Israel's right-wing Likud Party ^ "As Green as a Neocon" .

Slate . 25 January 2005.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ Paul Starr , The 'Weekly Standard' and the Eclipse of the Center-Right Archived 28 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine , The American Prospect (5 December 2018): "Founded in 1995 by the neoconservatives Bill Kristol and Fred Barnes..." ^ Boot, Max (10 March 2023).

"What the Neocons Got Wrong" .

Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ "Yes, Virginia, David Brooks is a Neo-Con" .

Lobelog .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ "Neoconservatism on the Decline" .

Center for American Progress .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ "When Zombie Neoconservatives Attack" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ Janiskee, Brian P.; Masugi, Ken, eds. (2004).

The California Republic: Institutions, Statesmanship, and Policies . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 368.

ISBN 0-7425-3250-X .

^ Abrams, Nathan (2010). "Introduction".

Norman Podhoretz and Commentary Magazine: The Rise and Fall of the Neocons . New York, NY: The Continuum International Publishing Group Inc. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-4411-0968-2 .

^ Skidelsky, William (20 February 2011).

"Niall Ferguson: 'Westerners don't understand how vulnerable freedom is' " .

The Observer .

^ "The Neocons Have Gone from GOP Thought-Leaders to Outcasts" . 21 August 2016.

^ Mann, James (September 2004).

Rise of the Vulcans (1st paperback ed.). Penguin Books. p.

318 .

ISBN 978-0-14-303489-6 .

^ "The Reinvention of David Frum" .

Antiwar.com . 17 August 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ "Neocon War Criminal Tells CNN Viewers to Trust Media Because It Lies" .

LewRockwell.com . 2 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ "GOP foreign policy elites flock to Clinton" .

Politico . 6 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 7 January 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

^ Campbell, Duncan (30 May 2001).

"Interview: neo-conservative, David Horowitz" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 7 December 2018 .

^ "Up from Brownsville: A Podcast with Donald Kagan" .

National Review . 2 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Italie, Hillel.

"Donald Kagan, leading neo-conservative historian, dead at 89" .

www.timesofisrael.com .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Jeanne Morefield, Empires Without Imperialism: Anglo-American Decline and the Politics of Deflection Archived 23 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Oxford University Press, 2014, p. 73 ^ Michael P. Federici; Mark T. Mitchell; Richard M. Gamble, eds. (2013).

The Culture of Immodesty in American Life and Politics: The Modest Republic . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-09341-7 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2020 .

^ Blumenthal, Sidney (2008).

The Strange Death of Republican America: Chronicles of a Collapsing Party, Sydney Blumenthal, Union Square Press, 2008 . Sterling Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-1-4027-5789-1 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Horowitz, Jason (15 June 2014), "Events in Iraq Open Door for Interventionist Revival, Historian Says" , The New York Times , archived from the original on 4 February 2021 , retrieved 7 February 2017 ^ Beaumont, Peter (26 April 2008).

"A neocon by any other name" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 December 2016 .

^ Charles Krauthammer, Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist and intellectual provocateur, dies at 68 Archived 22 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Washington Post (21 June 2018): "championed the muscular foreign policy of neoconservatism..." ^ "Was Irving Kristol a Neoconservative?" . Foreign Policy. 23 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ "Are the Neocons Finally with Trump?" .

The National Interest . 17 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2019 .

^ "The most influential US conservatives: 81–100" .

The Daily Telegraph . 29 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2009 .

^ Muravchik, Joshua (1 September 2008).

"The Future is Neocon" . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ Taheri, Amir (20 January 2006).

"Neoconservatism: Why We Need It" .

Asharq Al-Awsat . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ "The China hawk who captured Trump's 'very, very large brain' " .

Politico . 30 November 2018.

^ Colvin, Mark (28 March 2006).

"US led coalition no longer responsible for Iraq: Daniel Pipes" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ Press, Eyal (May 2004).

"Neocon man: Daniel Pipes has made his name inveighing against an academy overrun by political extremists but he is nothing if not extreme in his own views" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 13 November 2007 . Retrieved 17 August 2007 .

^ Jacob Heilbrunn, They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons (Anchor Books, 2009), pp. 224-25: "Danielle Pletka ... a leading neocon" ^ "John Podhoretz – Commentary Magazine" . Retrieved 2 March 2024 .

^ Nathan Abrams, Norman Podhoretz and Commentary Magazine: The Rise and Fall of the Neocons (Bloomsbury, 2011).

^ Norman Podhoretz Still Picks Fights and Drops Names Archived 5 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine , New York Times (17 March 2017): "became a shaper of the neoconservative movement".

^ "Yuval Levin" .

American Enterprise Institute - AEI .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Michael Rubin, Why Neoconservatism Was and Is Right Archived 8 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine (Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 2010).

^ John Davis, Presidential Policies and the Road to the Second Iraq War: From Forty One to Forty Three (Ashgate, 2006), p. 1: "neoconservative Gary Schmitt" ^ Sidelined by reality Archived 18 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The Economist (19 April 2007): " Gary Schmitt, a fellow neocon, complained of Mr Feith..." ^ Hyzen, Aaron; Bulck, Hilde Van den (13 September 2021).

"Conspiracies, Ideological Entrepreneurs, and Digital Popular Culture" .

Media and Communication .

9 (3): 179– 188.

doi : 10.17645/mac.v9i3.4092 .

hdl : 10067/1809590151162165141 .

ISSN 2183-2439 .

^ Cathey, Boyd D. (7 September 2020).

"9. The Unwanted Southern Conservatives" .

The Vanishing Tradition . Cornell University Press. pp.

122– 133.

doi : 10.1515/9781501749872-011 .

ISBN 978-1-5017-4987-2 .

S2CID 242919831 – via www.degruyter.com.

^ Gottfried, Paul (11 February 2021).

"9. The European Union Elections, 2014" .

Revisions and Dissents . Cornell University Press. pp.

95– 100.

doi : 10.1515/9781501757495-011 .

ISBN 978-1-5017-5749-5 – via www.degruyter.com.

^ "Who's Afraid of Bret Stephens?" .

Politico . 30 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ C. Bradley Thompson with Yaron Brook, Neoconservatism, An Obituary for an Idea (Taylor & Francis, 2010: Routledge 2016 ed.): "neoconservative economist Irwin Stelzer" ^ Lerner, Michael (3 January 1993).

"THE CONSCIENCE OF A NEOCONSERVATIVE" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 1 November 2019 – via www.washingtonpost.com.

^ Schreier, Benjamin (n.d.).

"New York Intellectual/Neocon/Jewish; or, How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Ignore Ruth Wisse" .

Studies in American Jewish Literature .

31 (1): 97– 108.

doi : 10.5325/studamerjewilite.31.1.0097 .

ISSN 0271-9274 .

JSTOR 10.5325/studamerjewilite.31.1.0097 .

^ Welton, Rabbi Levi (24 June 2019).

"The Road From Yiddish To Politics" . Retrieved 1 November 2019 .

^ Matthew Christopher Rhoades (2008).

Neoconservatism: Beliefs, the Bush Administration, and the Future . p. 110.

ISBN 978-0-549-62046-4 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ John Ehrman, The Rise of Neoconservatism: Intellectuals and Foreign Affairs, 1945-1994 , Yale University Press , 1996, pp. 139-141 [3] ^ John Feffer (2003).

Power Trip: Unilateralism and Global Strategy After September 11 . Seven Stories Press. p. 231.

ISBN 978-1-60980-025-3 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ Foster, Peter (24 February 2013).

"Obama's new head boy" .

The Telegraph (UK) .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ Jonsson, Patrik (11 June 2009).

"Shooting of two soldiers in Little Rock puts focus on 'lone wolf' Islamic extremists" .

Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ K. Dodds, K. and S. Elden, "Thinking Ahead: David Cameron, the Henry Jackson Society and BritishNeoConservatism", British Journal of Politics and International Relations (2008), 10(3): 347–63.

^ Danny Cooper (2011).

Neoconservatism and American Foreign Policy: A Critical Analysis . Taylor & Francis. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-203-84052-8 .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

^ a b Halper, Stefan; Clarke, Johnathan (2004).

America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83834-4 .

^ Matthew Christopher Rhoades (2008).

Neoconservatism: Beliefs, the Bush Administration, and the Future . p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-549-62046-4 . Retrieved 12 June 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "United Against Iran" .

PBS .

^ Noah, Timothy (13 January 2008).

"Fathers and Sons" .

The New York Times .

^ Oleksii Stus; Dmytro Finberg; Leonid Sinchenko, eds. (2021).

Ukrainian Dissidents: An Anthology of Texts . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 346.

ISBN 978-3-8382-1551-8 .

The tendency of neoconservatism (liberal conservatism) is most clearly represented by the literary ...

References [ edit ] Albanese, Matteo.

The Concept of War in Neoconservative Thinking , IPOC, Milan, 2012. Translated by Nicolas Lewkowicz.

ISBN 978-88-6772-000-2 Becker, Ted; Polkinghorn, Brian (2017).

A New Pathway to World Peace: From American Empire to First Global Nation .

Wipf and Stock .

ISBN 978-1-532-61819-2 .

Buchanan, Patrick J.

" Whose War ", The American Conservative , 24 March 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Bush, George W., Gerhard Schroeder, et al., " Transcript: Bush, Schroeder Roundtable With German Professionals ", The Washington Post , 23 February 2005. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Critchlow, Donald T.

The conservative ascendancy: how the GOP right made political history (2nd ed., 2011) Dean, John .

Worse Than Watergate: The Secret Presidency of George W. Bush , Little, Brown, 2004.

ISBN 0-316-00023-X (hardback). Critical account of neo-conservatism in the administration of George W. Bush.

Frum, David . " Unpatriotic Conservatives ", National Review , 7 April 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Gerson, Mark, ed.

The Essential Neo-Conservative Reader , Perseus, 1997.

ISBN 0-201-15488-9 (paperback), ISBN 0-201-47968-0 (hardback).

Gerson, Mark. " Norman's Conquest: A Commentary on the Podhoretz Legacy ", Policy Review , Fall 1995, Number 74. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Gray, John .

Black Mass , Allen Lane, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9915-0 .

Hanson, Jim The Decline of the American Empire , Praeger, 1993.

ISBN 0-275-94480-8 .

Halper, Stefan and Jonathan Clarke.

America Alone: The Neo-Conservatives and the Global Order , Cambridge University Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-521-83834-7 .

Kagan, Robert , et al., Present Dangers: Crisis and Opportunity in American Foreign and Defense Policy . Encounter Books, 2000.

ISBN 1-893554-16-3 .

Kristol, Irving .

Neo-Conservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea: Selected Essays 1949-1995 , New York: The Free Press, 1995.

ISBN 0-02-874021-1 (10).

ISBN 978-0-02-874021-8 (13). (Hardcover ed.) Reprinted as Neoconservatism: The Autobiography of an Idea , New York: Ivan R. Dee, 1999.

ISBN 1-56663-228-5 (10). (Paperback ed.) Kristol, Irving . "What Is a Neoconservative?", Newsweek , 19 January 1976.

Lara Amat y León, Joan y Antón Mellón, Joan, "Las persuasiones neoconservadoras: F. Fukuyama, S. P. Huntington, W. Kristol y R. Kagan", en Máiz, Ramón (comp.), Teorías políticas contemporáneas , (2ªed.rev. y ampl.) Tirant lo Blanch, Valencia, 2009.

ISBN 978-84-9876-463-5 .

Ficha del libro Lara Amat y León, Joan , "Cosmopolitismo y anticosmoplitismo en el neoconservadurismo: Fukuyama y Huntington", en Nuñez, Paloma y Espinosa, Javier (eds.), Filosofía y política en el siglo XXI. Europa y el nuevo orden cosmopolita , Akal, Madrid, 2009.

ISBN 978-84-460-2875-8 .

Ficha del libro Lasn, Kalle. " Why won't anyone say they are Jewish?

", Adbusters , March/April 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Lewkowicz, Nicolas. " Neoconservatism and the Propagation of Democracy Archived 8 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine ", Democracy Chronicles , 11 February 2013.

Lipset, Seymour (4 July 1988).

"Neoconservatism: Myth and reality" .

Society .

25 (5): 29– 37.

doi : 10.1007/BF02695739 .

ISSN 0147-2011 .

S2CID 144110677 .

Mann, James.

Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet , Viking, 2004.

ISBN 0-670-03299-9 (cloth).

Massing, Michael (1987). "Trotsky's orphans: From Bolshevism to Reaganism".

The New Republic . pp.

18– 22.

Mascolo, Georg.

"A Leaderless, Directionless Superpower: interview with Ex-Powell aide Wilkerson" [ permanent dead link ] , Spiegel Online, 6 December 2005. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Muravchik, Joshua. "Renegades", Commentary , 1 October 2002.

Bibliographical information is available online, the article itself is not.

Muravchik, Joshua. "The Neoconservative Cabal", Commentary , September 2003.

Bibliographical information is available online, the article itself is not.

Prueher, Joseph.

U.S. apology to China over spy plane incident , 11 April 2001. Reproduced on sinomania.com. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Podoretz, Norman .

The Norman Podhoretz Reader . New York: Free Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-7432-3661-0 .

Roucaute Yves .

Le Neoconservatisme est un humanisme . Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2005.

ISBN 2-13-055016-9 .

Roucaute Yves .

La Puissance de la Liberté . Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2004.

ISBN 2-13-054293-X .

Ruppert, Michael C..

Crossing the Rubicon: The Decline of the American Empire at the End of the Age of Oil , New Society, 2004.

ISBN 0-86571-540-8 .

Ryn, Claes G.

, America the Virtuous: The Crisis of Democracy and the Quest for Empire , Transaction, 2003.

ISBN 0-7658-0219-8 (cloth).

Stelzer, Irwin , ed.

Neoconservatism , Atlantic Books, 2004.

Smith, Grant F.

Deadly Dogma: How Neoconservatives Broke the Law to Deceive America .

ISBN 0-9764437-4-0 .

Solarz, Stephen , et al. " Open Letter to the President ", 19 February 1998, online at IraqWatch.org. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Steinfels, Peter (1979).

The neoconservatives: The men who are changing America's politics . New York: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-22665-7 .

Strauss, Leo .

Natural Right and History , University of Chicago Press, 1999.

ISBN 0-226-77694-8 .

Strauss, Leo.

The Rebirth of Classical Political Rationalism , University of Chicago Press, 1989.

ISBN 0-226-77715-4 .

Tolson, Jay. " The New American Empire?

", U.S. News & World Report , 13 January 2003. Retrieved 16 September 2006.

Wilson, Joseph .

The Politics of Truth . Carroll & Graf, 2004.

ISBN 0-7867-1378-X .

Woodward, Bob .

Plan of Attack , Simon and Schuster, 2004.

ISBN 0-7432-5547-X .

Further reading [ edit ] Arin, Kubilay Yado: Think Tanks: The Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy . Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013.

Balint, Benjamin V.

Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine that Transformed the Jewish Left into the Neoconservative Right (2010).

Dorrien, Gary.

The Neoconservative Mind .

ISBN 1-56639-019-2 , n attack from the Left.

Ehrman, John.

The Rise of Neoconservatism: Intellectual and Foreign Affairs 1945 – 1994 , Yale University Press, 2005, ISBN 0-300-06870-0 .

Eisendrath, Craig R. and Melvin A. Goodman.

Bush League Diplomacy: How the Neoconservatives are Putting The World at Risk (Prometheus Books, 2004), ISBN 1-59102-176-6 .

Franczak, Michael. 2019. " Losing the Battle, Winning the War: Neoconservatives versus the New International Economic Order, 1974–82 ." Diplomatic History Friedman, Murray.

The Neoconservative Revolution: Jewish Intellectuals and the Shaping of Public Policy . Cambridge University Press, 2006.

ISBN 0-521-54501-3 .

Grandin, Greg ."Empire's Workshop: Latin America, the United States, and the Rise of the New Imperialism." Metropolitan Books Henry Holt & Company, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-8050-8323-1 .

Heilbrunn, Jacob.

They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons , Doubleday (2008) ISBN 0-385-51181-7 .

Heilbrunn, Jacob.

"5 Myths About Those Nefarious Neocons" , The Washington Post , 10 February 2008.

Kristol, Irving.

"The Neoconservative Persuasion" .

Lind, Michael .

"How Neoconservatives Conquered Washington" , Salon , 9 April 2003.

MacDonald, Kevin.

"The Neoconservative Mind" , review of They Knew They Were Right: The Rise of the Neocons by Jacob Heilbrunn.

Vaïsse, Justin.

Neoconservatism: The Biography of a Movement (Harvard U.P. 2010), translated from the French.

McClelland, Mark, The unbridling of virtue: neoconservatism between the Cold War and the Iraq War.

Shavit, Ari, "White Man's Burden" , Haaretz, 3 April 2003.

Singh, Robert. "Neoconservatism in the age of Obama." in Inderjeet Parmar, ed., Obama and the World (Routledge, 2014). 51–62.

online Archived 20 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine Identity [ edit ] "Neocon 101: What do neoconservatives believe?" , Christian Science Monitor , 2003 Rose, David, "Neo Culpa" , Vanity Fair , 2006 Steigerwald, Bill.

"So, what is a 'Neocon'?" .

Lind, Michael, "A Tragedy of Errors" .

Critiques [ edit ] Fukuyama, Francis.

"After Neoconservatism" , The New York Times , 2006.

Thompson, Bradley C. (with Yaron Brook).

Neoconservatism. An Obituary for an Idea . Boulder/London: Paradigm Publishers, 2010.

ISBN 978-1-59451-831-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Neoconservatism .

Media related to Neoconservatism at Wikimedia Commons Neoconservatism at the Encyclopædia Britannica Adam Curtis , The Power of Nightmares , BBC .

Archive .

"Why Neoconservatism Still Matters" by Justin Vaïsse "Neoconservativism in a Nutshell" by Jim Lobe The Rise and Demise of American Unipolarism: Neoconservatism and U.S. Foreign Policy 1989–2009 by Maria Ryan Interview with Jim Lobe on Neoconservatism v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto v t e New York Intellectuals Associated people Daniel Bell Elliot E. Cohen Midge Decter Paul Goodman Irving Howe Alfred Kazin Irving Kristol Mary McCarthy Dwight Macdonald William Phillips Philip Rahv Harold Rosenberg Isaac Rosenfeld Delmore Schwartz Diana Trilling Lionel Trilling Robert Warshow Major publications Partisan Review (1934–2003) Commentary (1945–) The Oasis (1949) The Liberal Imagination (1950) Encounter (1953–1991) Dissent (1954–) The Public Interest (1965–2005) Works about The New York Intellectuals (1987 book) Related Anti-Stalinist left Neoconservatism v t e Congress for Cultural Freedom Key people Pierre Emmanuel Michael Josselson Shepard Stone Magazines funded Black Orpheus China Quarterly Cuadernos Encounter FORVM Hiwar Minerva Der Monat Mundo Nuevo Paris Review Partisan Review Preuves Quadrant Quest Tempo Presente Tilanne Transition Magazine Miscellaneous Abstract expressionism American Committee for Cultural Freedom Anti-Stalinist left Neoconservatism Who Paid the Piper?

(1999) v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐7f67d69dcb‐4vm54
Cached time: 20250816143447
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.308 seconds
Real time usage: 3.755 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16310/1000000
Revision size: 159356/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 627029/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19159/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 827796/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.033/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18933826/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2982.172      1 -total
 54.44% 1623.458      1 Template:Reflist
 21.27%  634.381     76 Template:Cite_web
 11.50%  342.989     45 Template:Cite_news
  7.92%  236.253     34 Template:Cite_book
  6.54%  194.913      1 Template:Conservatism_footer
  6.17%  183.921      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  5.78%  172.417      5 Template:Navbox
  5.30%  158.112      8 Template:Lang
  5.15%  153.509     19 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:216531:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816143447 and revision id 1306210271. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neoconservatism&oldid=1306210271 " Categories : Neoconservatism Anti-communism in the United States Foreign relations of the United States History of United States expansionism Liberal conservatism New Right (United States) Political history of the United States Political ideologies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2021 CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from April 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2025 Articles with dead external links from May 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 14:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neoconservatism 47 languages Add topic

