Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the United States 2 Enforcement Toggle Enforcement subsection 2.1 United States 2.2 Tanzania 2.3 India 2.4 Australia 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Legal ethics 9 languages العربية Български Deutsch Español 日本語 Polski Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professional ethics in the legal practice The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Professional responsibility Duties to the client Confidentiality Avoiding conflict of interest Due diligence and Competence (law) Avoid commingling Avoid self-dealing Effective assistance Avoid fee splitting Withdrawal from representation Duties to the court Disclosure of perjury Disclosure of adverse authority Duties to the profession Limitations on legal advertising Report misconduct Sources of law ABA Model Rules Penalties for misconduct Disbarment Judicial misconduct v t e Legal ethics are principles of conduct that members of the legal profession are expected to observe in their practice. They are an outgrowth of the development of the legal profession itself.

[ 1 ] In the United States [ edit ] In the U.S., each state or territory has a code of professional conduct dictating rules of ethics. These may be adopted by the respective state legislatures and/or judicial systems. The American Bar Association has promulgated the Model Rules of Professional Conduct which, while formally only a recommendation by a private body, have been influential in many jurisdictions.  The Model Rules address many topics which are found in state ethics rules, including the client-lawyer relationship , duties of a lawyer as advocate in adversary proceedings, dealings with persons other than clients , law firms and associations , public service , advertising , and maintaining the integrity of the profession .  Respect of client confidence, candor toward the tribunal, truthfulness in statements to others, and professional independence are some of the defining features of legal ethics.

The Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination (MPRE) is used to measure examinees' knowledge and understanding of established standards related to the professional conduct of lawyers. The MPRE is a prerequisite or corequisite to the bar examination for admission as an attorney at law in 48 of the 50 states of the United States , as well as the District of Columbia , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , the U.S. Virgin Islands , and the Republic of Palau . Of the 56 jurisdictions within the United States, only Puerto Rico , and Wisconsin do not use the MPRE; however, these jurisdictions still incorporate local ethics rules in their respective bar examinations.

[ 2 ] Maynard Pirsig , published one of the first course books on legal ethics, Cases and Materials on Legal Ethics , 1949.

Maynard Pirsig also published the definition of Legal Ethics, in Encyclopedia Britannica , 1974.

Some U.S. states, including New York , require applicants seeking to become attorneys to have taken a course in professional responsibility during law school.

[ 3 ] Enforcement [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Every state in the United States has a regulatory body (usually called a state bar association ) that polices lawyer conduct. When lawyers are licensed to practice in a state, those lawyers subject themselves to this authority.  Overall responsibility often lies with the highest court in a state (such as state supreme court ).  The state bar associations, often in consultation with the court, adopt a set of rules that set forth the applicable ethical duties.  As of 2013, 48 states have adopted a version of the American Bar Association's model rules .

California is the only state that has not adopted either—instead these states have written their own rules from scratch.

[ 4 ] There was once some debate over whether state ethical rules apply to federal prosecutors. The Department of Justice has held differing opinions through different administrations, with the Thornburgh Memo suggesting these rules do not apply, and the Reno Rules asserting that they do apply. Now,  28 U.S.C. § 530B provides that government attorneys are subject to the state ethics laws in the state in which they practice.

Lawyers who fail to comply with local rules of ethics may be subjected to discipline ranging from private (non-public) reprimand to disbarment .

Tanzania [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Tanzania, professional ethics for the members of private bar (advocates) are regulated by the Advocates Act, Cap. 341 which is principal legislation and the Advocates (Professional conducts and Etiquette) Regulations, 2018 (Government Notice No. 118 of 2018) which is subsidiary legislation enacted by the National Advocates Committee (formerly known as the Advocates Committee).

The National Advocate is disciplinary authority of advocates in Tanzania. The said Committee in its capacity as disciplinary authority enjoys power to remove advocates from the Roll of Advocates, suspend advocate and issue warning against advocate.

India [ edit ] In India, under the Advocates Act of 1961, the Bar Council of India is responsible for creating rules for registering advocates, regulation of legal ethics, and for administering disciplinary action.
In India a legal law firm named Legalethics ( https://www.legalethics.in ) provides legal awareness for people who need it because of innocence.

[ 5 ] Australia [ edit ] In New South Wales, reforms commencing from July 1, 2015, brought a uniform regulatory system to the legal profession regarding billing arrangements, discipline procedures and complaints handling processing.

[ 6 ] An inter jurisdictional Legal Services Council was established in order to regulate the legal profession and its delivery of legal services.

[ 7 ] This resulted in the creation of the Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015 [ 8 ] and the Legal Profession Uniform Conduct Barristers' Rules 2015 .

[ 9 ] The States and Territories of Australia are regulated through co-regulation, self-regulation and independent regulation.

New South Wales is co-regulated by the Law Society of NSW , the NSW Bar Association and the Legal Services Commissioner .

Queensland is co-regulated by the Law Society of Queensland , Bar Association of Queensland and the Legal Services Commissioner .

Tasmania is self-regulated through the Law Society of Tasmania .

Victoria is co-regulated in collaboration with the Victorian Legal Services Board and Commissioner , the Law Institute of Victoria and the Victorian Bar South Australia is independently regulated by the Legal Practitioners Conduct Board .

Western Australia is independently regulated through the Legal Practice Board and the Legal Profession Complaints Committee .

The Northern Territory is self-regulated by the Law Society of the Northern Territory .

The Australian Capital Territory is self-regulated by the Law Society of the ACT , the ACT Bar Association and the Complaints Investigating Committee.

See also [ edit ] Admission to practice law Judicial activism Judicial misconduct Sentencing disparity Selective prosecution References [ edit ] ^ "Legal Ethics, Encyclopedia Britannica" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 8 June 2023.

^ "Multistate Professional Responsibility Examination" .

NCBE . Retrieved 2017-11-12 .

^ "Bar Exam Eligibility" . New York Board of Law Examiners . Retrieved 2013-05-15 .

^ "The State Bar of California" .

www.calbar.ca.gov . Retrieved 2021-07-14 .

^ "THE ADVOCATES ACT, 1961" (PDF) . Bar Council of India . Retrieved 2014-06-30 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2016-11-27 . Retrieved 2015-08-09 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ http://www.legislation.nsw.gov.au/sessionalview/sessional/sr/2015-243.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015" .

Austlii . Retrieved 2016-07-29 .

^ "Legal Profession Uniform Conduct Barristers' Rules 2015" .

Austlii . Retrieved 2016-07-29 .

No Contest: Corporate Lawyers and the Perversion of Justice in America , by Ralph Nader and Wesley J. Smith.

ISBN 0-375-75258-7 California Rules of Professional Conduct , published by the Office of Professional Competence, Planning & Development of the State Bar of California.

[1] Gabriel Chin & Scott Wells, Can a Reasonable Doubt have an Unreasonable Price? Limitations on Attorney's Fees in Criminal Cases, 41 Boston College Law Review 1 (1999) [ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] State Bar of California Professional Responsibility (Legal Ethics) The California State Bar Discipline System - How It Works New York Rules of Professional Conduct Archived 2012-11-02 at the Wayback Machine LII Law about... Professional Responsibility (Legal Ethics) The Association of Professional Responsibility Lawyers (APRL) The Legal Information Institute at Cornell University (U.S.) Canadian Bar Association Code of Conduct 2013 Legal Ethics Year in Review Archived 2014-02-01 at the Wayback Machine - Article series covering ways to improve the ethical and operational health of law firms.

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐zjlsx
Cached time: 20250812034409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.419 seconds
Real time usage: 0.528 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2052/1000000
Revision size: 11337/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95489/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3618/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59191/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6543066/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  418.251      1 -total
 32.62%  136.450      1 Template:Reflist
 26.00%  108.735      8 Template:Cite_web
 19.55%   81.786      1 Template:Professional_responsibility
 19.15%   80.114      1 Template:Sidebar
 15.93%   66.624      2 Template:Navbox
 13.59%   56.824      1 Template:Short_description
 12.72%   53.208      1 Template:Ethics
  9.53%   39.851      1 Template:Globalize
  9.10%   38.078      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:368946:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812034409 and revision id 1287613991. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legal_ethics&oldid=1287613991 " Category : Legal ethics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from December 2010 Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 27 April 2025, at 10:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legal ethics 9 languages Add topic

