Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United Kingdom 2 United States 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Pheasant shooting 1 language Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hunting sport Pheasant Shooting , a painting by Henry Thomas Alken (1785–1881) Pheasant shooting is the activity of shooting the common pheasant . It takes place primarily in the United Kingdom, but is also practised in other parts of the world. The shooting of game birds is carried out using a shotgun , often 12 and 20 bore or a .410, sometimes on land managed by a gamekeeper .

United Kingdom [ edit ] The common pheasant was first introduced to Great Britain many centuries ago, but was rediscovered as a game bird in the 1830s.

[ citation needed ] It is reared extensively in captivity, and around 47 million pheasants are released each year on shooting estates, [ 1 ] mainly in England, although most released birds survive less than a year in the wild.

The numbers of captive-reared pheasants released have risen sharply since the 1980s.

Natural England has concluded that the released birds threaten native wildlife by increasing predator numbers and creating competition for food.  In October 2020 the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) announced that a licensing regime would be introduced in 2021 for releases of pheasants within 500m of protected sites.

[ 2 ] Pheasants are shot on the traditional formal "driven shoot" principles, whereby guest or paying guns have birds driven over them by beaters, and on smaller "rough shoots" by other methods. The open season in the UK is from 1 October to 1 February, under the Game Act 1831 ( 1 & 2 Will. 4 . c. 32).

[ 3 ] Generally they are shot by “guns” employing gun dogs to help find, flush, and retrieve shot birds.

Retrievers , spaniels , and pointing breeds are used to flush pheasants.

The doggerel "Up gets a guinea , bang goes a penny-halfpenny, and down comes a half a crown " reflects the expensive pastime of 19th century driven shoots in Britain, [ 4 ] when pheasants were often shot for pleasure. It was a popular royal pastime in Britain to shoot common pheasants.

King George V shot over a thousand pheasants out of a total bag of 3,937 over a six-day period in December 1913 during a competition with a friend, however did not do enough to beat him.

[ 5 ] United States [ edit ] A pheasant hunter in Kansas in 2020 Common pheasants were introduced in North America in 1773 [ 6 ] and have become well established throughout much of the Rocky Mountain states ( Colorado , Montana , Wyoming , etc.), the Midwest , the Plains states, as well as Canada and Mexico.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In the southwest, they can even be seen south of the Rockies in Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge 161 km (100 mi) south of Albuquerque, New Mexico. It is now most common on the Great Plains .

In some states, e.g.

Ohio , captive-reared and released birds make up much of the population.

[ 4 ] The first planted pheasants in the United States were put in the Willamette Valley in Oregon.

Pheasant hunting is popular in much of the U.S., especially in the Great Plains states, where a mix of farmland and native grasslands provides ideal habitat. South Dakota alone has an annual harvest of over a million birds by over 200,000 hunters.

[ 9 ] Much of the American hunting is done by groups of hunters, who walk through fields and shoot the birds as they are flushed by dogs such as Labrador Retrievers and Springer Spaniels . There are also many hunters who use Pointers such as English Setters or German Shorthairs to find and hold pheasants for hunters to flush and shoot.

References [ edit ] ^ "Pheasants and partridges" (PDF) .

www.rspb.org.uk . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ Dalton, Jane (31 October 2020).

"Game-bird shooting will need licences, ministers announce – days before legal battle" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 2022-05-26 . Retrieved 28 November 2020 .

^ "Pheasant Shooting Season" .

Pheasant Shooting Club . Retrieved 10 January 2015 .

^ a b Robertson, Peter (1997).

Pheasants . Voyageur Press, Inc. pp.

124– 125.

ISBN 0-89658-361-9 .

^ hg (17 August 2007).

"Common Pheasant and Relatives" . Retrieved 21 February 2008 .

^ Farm, MacFarlane Pheasants - Pheasant Chicks, Mature Birds, America's Largest Pheasant.

"Pheasant History and Facts" .

www.pheasant.com . Retrieved 2017-03-10 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Terry, John (20 August 2011).

"Oregon pioneer Owen Nickerson Denny was about more than his birds" .

OregonLive.com . Retrieved 11 March 2012 .

^ "Pheasant History, Ecology & Biology" .

Pheasantsforever.org . Archived from the original on 1 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 March 2012 .

^ "Pheasant" (PDF) .

gfp.sd.gov . South Dakota Game, Fish and Parks . Retrieved 10 March 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Pheasant shooting at Wikimedia Commons v t e Game animals and shooting in the United Kingdom Game birds Common pheasant Grey partridge Red-legged partridge Red grouse Rock ptarmigan Black grouse 1 Eurasian woodcock Common snipe Quarry species Mallard Teal Wood pigeon Golden plover Canada goose Greylag goose Pink-footed goose Eurasian wigeon Tufted duck Northern shoveler Northern pintail Gadwall Common pochard Common goldeneye Common moorhen Eurasian coot Deer Red deer Roe deer European fallow deer Sika deer Reeves's muntjac Water deer Other quarry European hare Red fox European rabbit Opponents League Against Cruel Sports Animal Aid Law Game Act 1831 Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Act 2002 Hunting Act 2004 See also British Association for Shooting and Conservation Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Game & Wildlife Conservation Trust Countryside Alliance Driven grouse shooting Glorious Twelfth Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Deer stalking Deer forest 1 Rarely shot because of declining numbers.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pheasant_shooting&oldid=1272407787 " Categories : Fowling Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Pheasants Hunting in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 January 2025, at 13:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pheasant shooting 1 language Add topic

