Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Significance 2 Background and context 3 Content Toggle Content subsection 3.1 Table of contents 4 Use in discussions about possible cover-ups 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Brookings Report 1 language Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1961 report significant for consideration of public reaction to extraterrestrial life Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities For Human Affairs Authors Michael, Donald N.; Baranson, Jack; Bauer, Raymond A.; Meier, Richard L.; Nadel, Aaron B.; Shepard, Herbert A.; Striner, Herbert E.; Wright, Christopher Language English Subject Meteorology and Climatology , Communications and Radar , Aircraft design , Testing and Performance, Aeronautics Publication date 1 December 1960 Publication place United States Pages 250 Text Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities For Human Affairs at Google Books Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities for Human Affairs , often referred to as " the Brookings Report ", was a 1960 report commissioned by NASA and created by the Brookings Institution in collaboration with NASA's Committee on Long-Range Studies.  It was submitted to the House Committee on Science and Astronautics of the United States House of Representatives in the 87th United States Congress [ 1 ] on April 18, 1961.

[ 2 ] Significance [ edit ] The report has become noted for one short section entitled "The implications of a discovery of extraterrestrial life", which examines the potential implications of such a discovery on public attitudes and values. The section briefly considers possible public reactions to some possible scenarios for the discovery of extraterrestrial life, stressing a need for further research in this area. It recommended continuing studies to determine the likely social impact of such a discovery and its effects on public attitudes, including study of the question of how leadership should handle information about such a discovery and under what circumstances leaders might or might not find it advisable to withhold such information from the public. The significance of this section of the report is a matter of controversy. Persons who believe that extraterrestrial life has already been confirmed and that this information is being withheld by government from the public sometimes turn to this section of the report as support for their view. Frequently cited passages from this section of the report are drawn both from its main body [ 3 ] and from its footnotes.

[ 4 ] The report has been mentioned in newspapers such as The New York Times , [ 5 ] The Baltimore Sun , [ 6 ] The Washington Times , [ 7 ] and the Huffington Post .

[ 8 ] Background and context [ edit ] The report was entered into the Congressional Record , which is currently archived at over 1110 libraries as part of the Federal Depository Library Program .

[ 9 ] The main author Donald N. Michael was a "social psychologist with a background in the natural sciences." "He was a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science , the American Psychological Association , the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues and the World Academy of Art and Science ." [ 10 ] Over 50 years after the report was initially released the Brookings Institution again focused on space policy [ 11 ] by hosting "several panels of experts to discuss topics such as the economic benefits of private industry’s involvement, the scientific discoveries resulting from NASA’s continued space efforts and the potential for future exploration, and the government’s policies and decision making process." [ 12 ] Content [ edit ] Although the report discusses the need for research on many policy issues related to space exploration , it is most often cited for passages from its brief section on the implications of a discovery of extraterrestrial life . (See Section #Use in discussions about possible cover-ups ) Table of contents [ edit ] The report contains the following chapters: [ 3 ] : 5 Introduction: Goals and Methods Comments on the Organization and Functions of a NASA Social Science Research Capability Implications of Satellite-Based Communications Systems Implications of a Space-Derived Weather Predicting System The Implications of Technological By-products Implications for Government Operations and Personnel Use Implications for Space Industries General Implications for International Affairs and Foreign Policy Attitudes and Values Positivity and Unity Use in discussions about possible cover-ups [ edit ] The report is sometimes mentioned in discussions about possible government cover-ups of evidence of extraterrestrial life, such as discussions under blog entries of skeptic astronomer Phil Plait .

[ 13 ] Sometimes these mentions point out the existence of the report, sometimes they argue that the report is evidence of extraterrestrial life. For example, Richard C. Hoagland , a proponent of conspiracy theories , argues that the report, by outlining plausible motives for government suppression of a discovery of extraterrestrial intelligence, furnishes evidence of an ongoing cover-up of intelligent extraterrestrial life already discovered.

[ 14 ] The National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena thinks the "report gives weight to previous thinking by scholars who have suggested that the earth already may be under close scrutiny by advanced space races." [ 15 ] In an email published by The Virtually Strange Network, entitled "Brookings Report Re-examined", Keith Woodard writes that the Brookings Report: ...did raise the possibility of withholding information, but took no position on its advisability. 'Questions one might wish to answer by such studies,' intoned the report, 'would include: how might such information, under what circumstances, be presented to or withheld from the public for what ends?  What might be the role of the discovering scientists and other decision makers regarding release of the fact of discovery?' Those two sentences comprise the report's entire commentary on the subject of covering up the truth.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Post-detection policy Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact References [ edit ] ^ Michael, Donald N. (1961-03-24).

Proposed studies on the implications of peaceful space activities for human affairs .

HathiTrust digital library: U.S. Government Printing Office. p. 5.

^ "Congressional Record (Bound Edition) - House of Representatives: April 18, 1961, Volume 107, Part 5" . p. 6199 . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ a b Michael, Donald N.; Baranson, Jack; Bauer, Raymond A.; Meier, Richard L.; Nadel, Aaron B.; Shepard, Herbert A.; Striner, Herbert E.; Wright, Christopher (December 1960).

Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities For Human Affairs (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution . NASA Document ID: 19640053196; NASA Report/Patent Number: NASA-CR-55643.

Archived from the original on 2019-03-09 . Retrieved 2019-03-06 .

^ Michael, Donald N.; Baranson, Jack; Bauer, Raymond A.; Meier, Richard L.; Nadel, Aaron B.; Shepard, Herbert A.; Striner, Herbert E.; Wright, Christopher (December 1960).

Footnotes for Proposed Studies on the Implications of Peaceful Space Activities For Human Affairs (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution . NASA Document ID: 19640053194; NASA Report/Patent Number: NASA-CR-55640.

Archived from the original on 2019-03-09 . Retrieved 2019-03-06 .

^ "Mankind is Warned to Prepare For Discovery of Life in Space" .

The New York Times (abstract) . UPI. 15 December 1960 . Retrieved 2012-11-16 .

Transcription [ usurped ] of article courtesy of The Enterprise Mission website.

^ "The World Of Future".

The Baltimore Sun . 26 February 1961. p. A26.

^ Coia, David Alan (25 August 1993).

"Mars watchers see extraterrestrial cover-up" .

The Washington Times . p. A1.

^ Speigel, Lee (2014-01-27).

"Google Images Reveal Triangular Moon Mystery: Could It Be An ET Colony?" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 2019-03-10 .

^ "U.S. Senate: How to find the Congressional Record" .

www.senate.gov . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ Crowfoot, James (2000-11-20).

"Obituaries" .

Record of the University of Michigan .

Archived from the original on 2011-06-11 . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ Dews, Fred (2014-05-12).

"Communications, Technology, and Extraterrestrial Life: The Advice Brookings Gave NASA about the Space Program in 1960" .

Brookings . Retrieved 2019-03-09 .

^ "The Future of the U.S. Space Program" .

Brookings . 2014-05-14 . Retrieved 2019-03-10 .

^ Plait, Phil (September 1, 2010).

"Why astronomers don't report UFOs" .

Discover magazine .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2022 . Retrieved February 12, 2023 .

^ Hoagland, Richard C.

"The 'Brookings Report' " . The Enterprise Mission. Archived from the original on 2019-10-28 . Retrieved 2012-11-16 .

^ "Space-life Report Could Be Shock" (PDF) .

The U.F.O. Investigator .

1 (11).

National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena (NICAP): 5. December 1960 – January 1961. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-11-25 . Retrieved 2012-11-16 .

^ Woodard, Keith (30 November 1997).

"Brookings Report Re-examined" . virtuallystrange.net. Archived from the original on 2002-10-28 . Retrieved 2012-11-16 .

External links [ edit ] Main report via the Internet Archive copy of the NASA technical reports server.

v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brookings_Report&oldid=1300309187 " Categories : Astrobiology Spaceflight United States government responses to UFOs 1960 documents Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brookings Report 1 language Add topic

