Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Characteristics 3 Notable artists Toggle Notable artists subsection 3.1 Painters 3.2 Sculptors 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Quito school 3 languages Català Español فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin American artistic tradition La Virgen alada del Apocalípsis ("Winged Virgin of the Apocalypse") by Miguel de Santiago , 17th century.

Retrato de una señora principal con su negra esclava ("Portrait of a Quito Matron Lady with Her Black Slave") by Vicente Albán , 1783. Oil on canvas, 80 x 109 cm.

Madrid , Museum of the Americas .

The Quito School ( Escuela Quiteña ) is a Latin American colonial artistic tradition that constitutes essentially the whole of the professional artistic output developed in the territory of the Royal Audience of Quito – from Pasto and Popayán in the north to Piura and Cajamarca in the south – during the Spanish colonial period (1542–1824) .

[ 1 ] It is especially associated with the 17th and 18th centuries and was almost exclusively focused on the religious art of the Catholic Church in the country.

[ 2 ] Characterized by a mastery of the realistic and by the degree to which indigenous beliefs and artistic traditions are evident, these productions were among of the most important activities in the economy of the Royal Audience of Quito.

[ 3 ] Such was the prestige of the movement even in Europe that it was said that King Carlos III of Spain (1716–1788), referring to one of its sculptors in particular, opined: "I am not concerned that Italy has Michelangelo ; in my colonies of America I have the master Caspicara ".

[ 4 ] Origins [ edit ] The Quito School originated in the school of Artes y Oficios, founded in 1552 by the Franciscan priest Jodoco Ricke , who together with Friar Pedro Bedón transformed the San Andrés seminary, where the first indigenous artists were trained. As a cultural expression, it is the result of a long process of acculturation between indigenous peoples and Europeans, and it is one of the richest expressions of miscegenation ( mestizaje ) and of syncretism , in which the participation of the vanquished Indian is seemingly of minor importance as compared to the dominant European contribution.

[ 5 ] Characteristics [ edit ] As a product of cultural syncretism and miscegenation , the works of the Quito School are characterized by the combination and adaptation of European and Indigenous features. In its development, it reflected the styles prevailing in each period of Spain and thus contains renaissance and mannerist elements. During its height, it was eminently baroque , concluding with a short rococo period leading to an incipient neoclassicism until the transition to the republican period . The Quito School also incorporated Flemish , Italian , and Moorish influences.

One of the common characteristics of the school is the technique of encarnado ("flesh-colored") — the simulation of the color of the flesh of the (European) human body — that makes the skin of sculptures appear more natural. Once the piece was perfectly cut and sanded, an artisan covered the wood with several layers of gesso with glue. Each layer was highly polished to achieve a perfectly smooth finish. Next, color was applied in various transparent layers, allowing an optical mix of overlapping colors. This began with the colors of shadows (blue, green, ocher), then light colors were applied (white, pink, yellow). and finally highlight colors were added (orange and red to cheeks, knees, and elbows of children; and dark blue, green, and violet for wounds and bruises of Christ or for stubble on a beardless figure).

Other typical characteristics include: Serpentine representation of the movement of bodies, especially in sculpture Application of aguada (watercolor) on top of gold leaf or silver paint, giving a special metallic sheen The features indicating its indigenous roots include: "Quiteñization" of characters, with mixed traits and local costumes Frequent appearance of ancestral indigenous customs Location of the scenes within the Andean countryside or cities Presence of local flora and fauna, and the substitution of local plants for traditional European iconography Notable artists [ edit ] Painters [ edit ] Vicente Albán Friar Pedro Bedón Nicolás Javier Goríbar Hernando de la Cruz Miguel de Santiago ( ca.

1620s-1706) Manuel de Samaniego Isabel de Santiago Friar Pedro Gosseal Sculptors [ edit ] Bernardo de Legarda ( ca.

1700—1 June 1773) Manuel Chili (Caspicara) Miguel Angel Tejada Zambrano María Estefanía Dávalos y Maldonado “Winged Virgin of the Apocalypse” by Miguel de Santiago .

Virgin of Quito ” by Bernardo de Legarda . The wooden sculpture follows the theme of the Woman of the Apocalypse .

Close-up view of “St. Joseph's Workshop” by Manuel de Samaniego. Oil on canvas, 51 x 69.4 cm, 18th century.

Quito , Ecuador.

MUNA .

[ 6 ] “Procession during the time of drought” from the painting series “The Virgin of Guápulo's miracles” (1699-1706) by Miguel de Santiago . Oil on canvas, 137 x 137 cm. Santiago de Guápulo , Quito , Ecuador.

Close-up view of “Virgin of El Carmen” by Isabel de Santiago.

Replica of “Hell” by Hernando de la Cruz, 17th century.

Iglesia de la Compañía , Quito , Ecuador.

See also [ edit ] Virgin of Quito Baroque References [ edit ] ^ Ximena Escudero-Albornoz and Ximena Escudero de Terán.

América y España en la escultura colonial quiteña: historia de un sincretismo . Ediciones del Banco de los Andes (1992).

ISBN 9978-82-293-3 , ISBN 978-9978-82-293-7 ^ Handelsman, Michael (2000), Culture and Customs of Ecuador (Series: Culture and Customs of Latin America and the Caribbean; Series editor: Peter Standish); Westport, Connecticut/London: Greenwood Press, pg 125.

^ Christiana Renate Borchart de Moreno.

La Audiencia de Quito: aspectos económicos y sociales (siglos XVI-XVIII) . Editorial Abya Yala (1998).

ISBN 9978-72-084-7 , ISBN 978-9978-72-084-4 ^ Rivas, Julio (2012), Un sitio llamado San Francisco ; Revista Clave!

, Nov-Dec issue. [ No me preocupa que Italia tenga a Miguel Ángel , en mis colonias de América yo tengo al maestro Caspicara.

] ^ Ximena Escudero Albornoz and José María Vargas Arévalo.

Historia y crítica del Arte Hispanoamericano, Real Audiencia de Quito: (siglos XVI, XVII y XVIII) . Editorial Abya Yala (2000).

ISBN 9978-04-562-7 , ISBN 978-9978-04-562-6 ^ Kennedy, Alexandra (2002).

Arte de la Real Audiencia de Quito, siglos XVII-XIX . Nerea.

ISBN 84-89569-83-5 .

External links [ edit ] The colonial Andes: tapestries and silverwork, 1530-1830 , an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on the Quito School v t e Spanish Empire Timeline–immersed Catholic Monarchs Conquest of the Americas , Asia and the Pacific Treaty of Tordesillas Italian Wars Habsburgs Golden Age War of the League of Cognac Encomiendas New Laws in favour of the indigenous Expulsion of the Moriscos Ottoman–Habsburg wars French Wars of Religion Bruneian–Spanish conflict Anglo-Spanish War (1585–1604) Piracy in the Caribbean Eighty Years' War Spanish–Moro conflict Thirty Years' War Franco-Spanish War (1635–1659) Portuguese Restoration War War of the Spanish Succession Queen Anne's War Bourbons Bourbon Reforms War of Jenkins' Ear Treaty of Madrid (1750) Seven Years' War Nootka Convention Napoleonic invasion Third Treaty of San Ildefonso Independence of Spanish continental Americas Adams–Onís Treaty Liberal constitution Carlist Wars Spanish–American War German–Spanish Treaty (1899) Spanish Civil War Independence of Morocco Independence of Equatorial Guinea Western Sahara conflict Territories Europe Spain Crown of Castille Crown of Aragon Union with Portugal Gibraltar Southern Italy (Kingdoms of Naples , Sicily and Sardinia ) Milan Union with Holy Roman Empire Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, northernmost France Franche-Comté Pyrénées-Orientales Americas ( Spanish America ) North America New Spain ( Coastal Alaska , Central United States ( Spanish Louisiana ), Western United States ( Spanish Texas ), Florida , Mexico , Central America ( Captaincy General of Yucatan ), Spanish Caribbean ) Central America Captaincy General of Guatemala Spanish West Indies ( Cuba , Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico ) Trinidad Jamaica Haiti Aruba Curazao Bonaire Belize South America New Granada ( Colombia , Ecuador , Panama , Venezuela, part of Guyana , a northernmost portion of Brazilian Amazon) Peru (Peru, Acre , Chile ) Río de la Plata ( Argentina , Paraguay , Charcas (Bolivia), Banda Oriental (Uruguay), Misiones Orientales , Malvinas ) Asia and Oceania ( Spanish East Indies ) Philippines Micronesia ( Caroline , Guam , Mariana , Micronesia , Palau ) Northern Taiwan Tidore Africa Equatorial Guinea Northern Africa ( Western Sahara , Spanish Morocco , Tripoli , Tunis , Peñón of Algiers , Oran , Béjaïa , Ifni and Cape Juby ) Antarctica Terra Australis Administration Organization Ayuntamiento Cabildo Council of the Indies Germania Santa Hermandad Law Exequatur Laws of the Indies Papal bull Royal Decree of Graces School of Salamanca Trial of residence Titles and positions Alcalde Corregidor Municipal president Regidor Syndic Vecino Administrative subdivisions Viceroyalties Columbian New Spain New Granada Perú Río de la Plata Captaincies General Chile Cuba Guatemala Philippines Provincias Internas Puerto Rico Santo Domingo Venezuela Yucatán Governorates Castilla de Oro Cuba La Florida Louisiana New Andalusia (1501–1513) New Andalusia New Castile New Navarre New Spain Tierra Firme New Toledo New León Paraguay Río de la Plata Terra Australis Audiencias Bogotá Buenos Aires Caracas Charcas Concepción Cusco Guadalajara Guatemala Lima Manila Mexico Panamá Quito Santiago Santo Domingo Economy Currencies Dollar (Peso) Real Maravedí Escudo Columnario Doubloon Trade Manila galleon Spanish treasure fleet Casa de Contratación Spanish Road Guipuzcoan Company of Caracas Barcelona Trading Company Consulate of the Sea Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Commerce Consulate of Buenos Aires Military Armies Tercio Army of Flanders Free Company of Volunteers of Catalonia Indian auxiliaries Spanish Armada Ships of the line Royalists Legión Army of Africa Strategists Duke of Alba Antonio de Leyva Martín de Goiti Alfonso d'Avalos García de Toledo Osorio Duke of Savoy Álvaro de Bazán the Elder John of Austria Charles Bonaventure de Longueval Pedro de Zubiaur Ambrosio Spinola Blas de Lezo Bernardo de Gálvez Mariners Christopher Columbus Pinzón brothers Ferdinand Magellan Juan Sebastián Elcano Juan de la Cosa Juan Ponce de León Miguel López de Legazpi Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Sebastián de Ocampo Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca Alonso de Ojeda Vasco Núñez de Balboa Alonso de Salazar Andrés de Urdaneta Antonio de Ulloa Ruy López de Villalobos Diego Columbus Alonso de Ercilla Nicolás de Ovando Juan de Ayala Sebastián Vizcaíno Juan Fernández Luis Fajardo Felipe González de Ahedo Francisco de Camargo Alonso de Camargo Conquistadors Hernán Cortés Francisco Pizarro Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada Hernán Pérez de Quesada Francisco Vázquez de Coronado Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar Pedro de Valdivia Gaspar de Portolà Pere Fages i Beleta Joan Orpí Pedro de Alvarado Martín de Ursúa Diego de Almagro Pánfilo de Narváez Diego de Mazariegos Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera Pere d'Alberní i Teixidor García López de Cárdenas Notable battles Old World Won Comuneros Bicocca Rome (1527) Landriano Pavia Tunis Mühlberg St. Quentin Gravelines Malta Lepanto Antwerp Azores Mons Gembloux Ostend English Armada Cape Celidonia White Mountain Breda Nördlingen Valenciennes Ceuta Bitonto Bailén Vitoria Tetouan Alhucemas Lost Capo d'Orso Vienna (1529) Preveza Siege of Castelnuovo Algiers Ceresole Balearic Islands (1558) Djerba Tunis Spanish Armada Leiden Rocroi Downs Montes Claros Passaro Manila Bay Trafalgar Somosierra Annual Mactan New World Won Tenochtitlan Cajamarca Cusco Bogotá savanna Penco Mataquito Guadalupe Island Recife San Juan (1595) Bahia Colonia del Sacramento Comuneros (Paraguay) Cartagena de Indias Cuerno Verde Túpac Amaru II Túpac Katari Pensacola Newfoundland San Juan (1797) Lost La Noche Triste Iguape Tucapel Guiana Curalaba Comuneros (New Granada) Trinidad (1797) Chacabuco Boyacá Carabobo Pichincha Ayacucho Guam Santiago de Cuba Asomante Spanish conquests Canary Islands The Americas Aztec Maya Chiapas Yucatán Guatemala Petén El Salvador Honduras Nicaragua Chibchan Nations Colombia Chile Inca Philippines Other civil topics Spanish missions in the Americas Architecture Mesoamerican Codices Cusco painting tradition Indochristian painting in New Spain Quito painting tradition Africanist Tapada limeña Academia Antártica Colonial universities in Hispanic America Colonial universities in the Philippines General Archive of the Indies Colonial Spanish Horse Mustang Castas Criollos in the colonial society Old inquisition Slavery in Spanish Empire Asiento Law of coartación (which allowed slaves to buy their freedom, and that of others) Great Potosí Mint Fraud of 1649 Cartography Cartographers Juan de la Cruz Cano y Olmedilla Agustín Ibáñez y Bojons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quito_school&oldid=1244376964 " Categories : Ecuadorian art Baroque painting Rococo art Spanish art Spanish Baroque Viceroyalty of Peru Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 September 2024, at 18:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quito school 3 languages Add topic

