Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Antiochus Kantemir 26 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano Кыргызча Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moldavian diplomat (1708–1744) Not to be confused with his uncle of the same name but better known as Antioh Cantemir .

Litograph by Pyotr Borel , 1864-1869 Antiochus [ 1 ] or Antioch [ 2 ] Kantemir or Cantemir ( Russian : Антиох Дмитриевич Кантемир , romanized : Antiokh Dmitrievich Kantemir ; Romanian : Antioh Cantemir ; Turkish : Antioh Kantemiroğlu ; French : Antioche Cantemir ; 8 September 1708 – 31 March 1744) was a Moldavian who served as a man of letters , diplomat , and prince during the Russian Enlightenment . He has been called "the father of Russian poetry ".

Life [ edit ] Kantemir was born into a noble Moldavian family at Iași on 8 September 1708.

[ 3 ] His illiterate grandfather Constantin had been made voivode of Moldavia by the Ottomans in 1685 and was succeeded by his well-educated sons Antioch and Demetrius . Kantemir was the son of Demetrius by his wife, Princess Kassandra Cantacuzene , who claimed descent from the Byzantine dynasty of the same name.

[ 3 ] He spent much of his youth in Constantinople as a hostage to the Turks .

[ citation needed ] He was then educated by his father and at the St Petersburg Academy [ 1 ] before moving to the family estate near Dmitrovsk .

[ citation needed ] He served as the Russian ambassador at London from 1731 to 1736, when he was relocated to Paris to serve as Russia's minister plenipotentiary to the Kingdom of France .

[ 2 ] There, he became a noted intellectual [ 1 ] and a close friend of Montesquieu and Voltaire . Kantemir died a bachelor in Paris amid litigation concerning his illegitimate children.

[ citation needed ] Work [ edit ] Considered "the father of Russian poetry ", [ 1 ] Kantemir used his classical education to assist Peter the Great 's programme of modernizing and westernizing Russian culture . His most noticeable effort in this regard is his Petrida , an unfinished epic glorifying the emperor. He produced a tract on old Russian versification in 1744 [ citation needed ] and numerous odes and fables .

[ 1 ] His use of gallic rhyme schemes can make his work seem antiquated and awkward to modern readers.

[ citation needed ] He edited his father's History of the Growth and Decay of the Ottoman Empire in England and wrote a biography and bibliography of his father which later accompanied its 1756 edition.

[ 4 ] [ 2 ] His 1742 Letters on Nature and Man ( O Prirode i Cheloveke ) was a philosophical work.

[ citation needed ] He is best remembered for his satires in the manner of Juvenal , including To My Mind: On Those Who Blame Education and On the Envy and Pride of Evil-Minded Courtiers , which were among the first such works in the Russian language.

[ 2 ] Kantemir translated Horace and Anacreon into Russian, as well as Algarotti 's Dialogues on Light and Colors .

[ 1 ] He also translated De Fontenelle 's Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds , in 1730. When Kantemir's teacher, Christopher Gross, asked the academy to publish the translation, the responsible manager of the chancellery, Johann Daniel Schumacher , wanted to first get permission from the government and the Holy Synod.
Correspondence regarding the matter dragged on until 1738, when permission to publish was finally given, but the book was not published until 1740.

[ 5 ] Kantemir's own works were translated into French by the Abbé Guasco , who also penned his biography.

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g EB (1878) .

^ a b c d EB (1911) .

^ a b Gusterin (2008) .

^ London: N. Tindal.

^ Веселитский В. В., Антиох Кантемир и развитие русского литературного языка (1974), p. 20.

References [ edit ] Baynes, T. S., ed. (1878), "Antiochus Cantemir" , Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 5 (9th ed.), New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, p. 28 Gaster, Moses (1911), "Cantemir s.v. Antioch Cantemir" , in Chisholm, Hugh (ed.), Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 5 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, p. 209 Gusterin, Pavel (2008), Первый российский востоковед Дмитрий Кантемир [ The First Russian Orientalist, Dmitri Kantemir ] , Moscow: Восточная книга, ISBN 978-5-7873-0436-7 .

(in Russian) External links [ edit ] Romanian Wikisource has original text related to this article: Antioh Cantemir (original works translated into Romanian) (in Russian) A collection of Kantemir's poetry (in Russian) The ancestors Prince Antiokh Dmitrievich Kantemir v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Greece 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antiochus_Kantemir&oldid=1305572953 " Categories : 1708 births 1744 deaths Saint Petersburg State University alumni Cantemirești family Enlightenment philosophers Writers from Iași Diplomats of the Russian Empire Essayists from the Russian Empire Male essayists Russian literary critics 18th-century philosophers from the Russian Empire Male poets from the Russian Empire Male writers from the Russian Empire Russian male poets 18th-century Moldavian people Russian people of Romanian descent Russian people of Crimean Tatar descent Russian people of Greek descent Ambassadors of the Russian Empire to France Ambassadors of the Russian Empire to the United Kingdom 18th-century translators from the Russian Empire Sons of princes regnant Russian satirists Russian satirical poets Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2007 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antiochus Kantemir 26 languages Add topic

