Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Classification 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tidal range 11 languages Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Kreyòl ayisyen Bahasa Melayu Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vertical difference between the high tide and the succeeding low tide Tidal range is the difference in height between high tide and low tide .

Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels caused by gravitational forces exerted by the Moon and Sun , by Earth's rotation and by centrifugal force caused by Earth's progression around the Earth-Moon barycenter . Tidal range depends on time and location.

Larger tidal range occur during spring tides ( spring range ), when the gravitational forces of both the Moon and Sun are aligned (at syzygy ), reinforcing each other in the same direction ( new moon ) or in opposite directions ( full moon ). The largest annual tidal range can be expected around the time of the equinox if it coincides with a spring tide. Spring tides occur at the second and fourth (last) quarters of the lunar phases .

By contrast, during neap tides , when the Moon and Sun's gravitational force vectors act in quadrature (making a right angle to the Earth's orbit ), the difference between high and low tides ( neap range ) is smallest. Neap tides occur at the first and third quarters of the lunar phases.

Tidal data for coastal areas is published by national hydrographic offices .

[ 1 ] The data is based on astronomical phenomena and is predictable. Sustained storm-force winds blowing from one direction combined with low barometric pressure can increase the tidal range, particularly in narrow bays . Such weather-related effects on the tide can cause ranges in excess of predicted values and can cause localized flooding . These weather-related effects are not calculable in advance.

Mean tidal range is calculated as the difference between mean high water (i.e., the average high tide level) and mean low water (the average low tide level).

[ 2 ] Geography [ edit ] The M 2 tidal constituent , peak amplitude indicated by color. White lines are cotidal lines spaced at phase intervals of 30° (a bit over 1 hr).

[ 3 ] Amphidromic points are the dark blue areas where the lines come together. These are amphidromic points, NOT tidal ranges. Tidal ranges can vary from 4 to 10 times what's marked on this map.

The typical tidal range in the open ocean is about 1 metre (3 feet) – mapped in blue and green at right. Mean ranges near coasts vary from near zero to 11.7 metres (38.4 feet), [ 4 ] with the range depending on the volume of water adjacent to the coast, and the geography of the basin the water sits in. Larger bodies of water have higher ranges, and the geography can act as a funnel amplifying or dispersing the tide.

[ 5 ] The world's largest mean tidal range of 11.7 metres (38.4 feet) occurs in the Bay of Fundy , Canada (more specifically, at Burntcoat Head, Nova Scotia ).

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] The next highest, of 9.75 metres (32.0 feet), is at Ungava Bay , also in Canada, [ 4 ] [ 7 ] and the next, of 9.60 metres (31.5 feet), in the Bristol Channel , between England and Wales.

[ 4 ] The highest predicted extreme (not mean) range is 17.0 metres (55.8 feet), in the Bay of Fundy.

[ 7 ] The maximum range in the Bristol Channel is 15 metres (49 feet).

[ 8 ] The fifty coastal locations with the largest ranges worldwide are listed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States.

[ 4 ] Some of the smallest tidal ranges occur in the Mediterranean , Baltic , and Caribbean Seas . A point within a tidal system where the tidal range is almost zero is called an amphidromic point .

Classification [ edit ] The tidal range has been classified [ 9 ] as: Micro-tidal – when the tidal range is lower than 2 metres (6'6¾").

Meso-tidal – when the tidal range is between 2 metres and 4 metres (6'6¾" and 13'1½").

Macro-tidal – when the tidal range is higher than 4 metres (13'1½").

See also [ edit ] King tide , an informal term for an especially high spring tide References [ edit ] ^ "Hydrographic and Oceanographic Agencies" . Archived from the original on 2010-03-25 . Retrieved 2010-01-17 .

^ NOAA.

"Tidal Datums" . Retrieved 26 Mar 2019 .

^ Picture credit: R. Ray, TOPEX/Poseidon: Revealing Hidden Tidal Energy GSFC , NASA . Redistribute with credit to R. Ray, as well as NASA- GSFC , NASA- JPL , Scientific Visualization Studio, and Television Production NASA-TV/GSFC ^ a b c d e NOAA.

"FAQ Where are the highest tides?" . Retrieved 20 Aug 2021 .

^ NOAA.

"It appears that the range of the tides gets larger the further the location from the equator. What causes this??" . Retrieved 23 Oct 2020 .

^ NOAA.

"The highest tide in the world is in Canada" . Retrieved 23 Oct 2020 .

^ a b Charles T. O'Reilly, Ron Solvason, and Christian Solomon.

"Resolving the world's largest tides" , in J.A. Percy, A.J. Evans, P.G. Wells, and S.J. Rolston (Editors) 2005: The Changing Bay of Fundy: Beyond 400 years. Proceedings of the 6th Bay of Fundy Workshop, Cornwallis, Nova Scotia.

Sackville, NB.

^ "Tidal range" .

SurgeWatch . University of Southampton / National Oceanography Centre / British Oceanography Data Centre.

^ Masselink, G.; Short, A. D. (1993). "The effect of tidal range on beach morphodynamics and morphology: a conceptual beach model".

Journal of Coastal Research .

9 (3): 785– 800.

ISSN 0749-0208 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tidal_range&oldid=1278950952 " Categories : Tides Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 16:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tidal range 11 languages Add topic

