Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Background 2.1.1 Theoretical foundation and inspirations 2.1.2 Legacy of the Prague Spring 2.2 Early developments 2.2.1 Developments in Western European communist parties 2.3 Further development 2.3.1 Soviet dissolution 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eurocommunism 45 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Western European political ideology This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Eurocommunism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Altiero Spinelli , a prominent figure of the Eurocommunism movement and one of the founding fathers of the European Union Eurocommunism was a trend in the 1970s and 1980s within various Western European communist parties , which said they had developed a theory and practice of social transformation more relevant for Western Europe. During the Cold War , they sought to reject the influence of the Soviet Union and its Communist Party . The trend was especially prominent in Italy, Spain, and France.

[ 1 ] It is commonly considered to have been prompted by the Prague Spring . Although the various parties converged against the Soviet factor, their own doctrines remained as different at the dissolution of the movement as they originally were before 1968.

[ 2 ] Terminology [ edit ] The origin of the term Eurocommunism was subject to great debate in the mid-1970s, being attributed to Zbigniew Brzezinski and Arrigo Levi , among others.

Jean-François Revel once wrote that "one of the favourite amusements of 'political scientists' is to search for the author of the term Eurocommunism". In April 1977, Deutschland Archiv decided that the word was first used in the summer of 1975 by Yugoslav journalist Frane Barbieri, former editor of Belgrade 's NIN news magazine.

[ 3 ] Outside Western Europe, it is sometimes referred to as neocommunism . This theory stresses greater independence from the Soviet Union .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Theoretical foundation and inspirations [ edit ] According to Perry Anderson , the main theoretical foundation of Eurocommunism was Antonio Gramsci 's writing about Marxist theory [ 5 ] which questioned the sectarianism of the left and encouraged communist parties to develop social alliances to win hegemonic support for social reforms. Early inspirations can also be found in Austro-Marxism and the democratic road to socialism .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Eurocommunist parties expressed their fidelity to democratic institutions more clearly than before and attempted to widen their appeal by embracing public sector middle-class workers, new social movements such as feminism and gay liberation and more publicly questioning the Soviet Union. However, Eurocommunism did not go as far as the Anglosphere-centred New Left movement which had originally borrowed from the French nouvelle gauche , but in the course of the events went past their academic theorists, largely abandoning Marxist historical materialism , class struggle and its traditional institutions such as communist parties .

Legacy of the Prague Spring [ edit ] A demonstration in Helsinki against the 1968 Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia The Prague Spring and particularly its crushing by the Soviet Union in 1968 became a turning point for the communist world. Romania's leader Nicolae Ceaușescu staunchly criticized the Soviet invasion in a speech , explicitly declaring his support for the Czechoslovakian leadership under Alexander Dubček . While the Portuguese Communist Party , the South African Communist Party and the Communist Party USA supported the Soviet position, [ 9 ] the Italian Communist Party (PCI) and the Communist Party of Spain (PCE) firmly denounced the occupation.

[ 9 ] The leadership of the Communist Party of Finland (SKP), [ 10 ] the Swedish Left Communist Party (VPK) and the French Communist Party (PCF) which had pleaded for conciliation expressed their disapproval about the Soviet intervention, [ 11 ] with the PCF thereby publicly criticizing a Soviet action for the first time in its history.

[ citation needed ] The Communist Party of Greece (KKE) suffered a major split over the internal disputes regarding the Prague Spring, [ 9 ] with the pro-Dubček faction breaking ties with the Soviet leadership and founding the KKE Interior . KKE's legal branch United Democratic Left (EDA) adopted a more moderate and democratic line over the years and was also described as eurocommunist.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The emergence of eurocommunism is often linked to the events in 1968. However this fails to explain the realignment between european communist parties and the Soviet Union from 1968 up to the early 1970s.

[ 2 ] Early developments [ edit ] Developments in Western European communist parties [ edit ] Giorgio Napolitano , prominent figure of the Italian Communist Party (until 1991) and President of Italy from 2006 to 2015 At least one mass party, the French PCF, as well as many smaller parties opposed Eurocommunism and stayed aligned to the positions of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union until the end of the Soviet Union, although the PCF did make a brief turn toward Eurocommunism in the mid-to-late 1970s. Some communist parties with strong popular support, notably the PCI and the PCE, adopted Eurocommunism most enthusiastically. The SKP was dominated by Eurocommunists.

[ citation needed ] The Finnish SKP changed its leadership in 1965 with leadership post changing from the Stalinist Aimo Aaltonen , who had even a picture of Lavrentiy Beria in his office, to a revisionist , quite popular trade unionist Aarne Saarinen . The same happened even more drastically when the Finnish People's Democratic League also changed its leadership with the reformist Ele Alenius leading it. In 1968, these were the only parties to directly oppose the actions of the Soviet militarship in Prague in 1968, therefore the two organizations split de facto into two different parties, with one reformist and one hard-line Soviet. The latter movement was also called Taistoism after its leader Taisto Sinisalo . What was peculiar was that the youth wing was nearly completely Taistoist.

[ dubious – discuss ] Progress was hard to make as the party accorded that the Taistoist movement had equal rights of power in the party, although it was a minority and the vast majority of the party was Eurocommunist. In 1984, with a strong Eurocommunist majority the hard-line organizations were massively expelled from the already weakened party. The Taistoist faction broke away, calling the main party revisionist and founded the Communist Party of Finland (Unity) (SKPy). Pro-Soviet hard-liners from SKPy formed their own cover-organization called Democratic Alternative . In 1990, the new Left Alliance integrated the parties, but Alenius chose not to be member of it because they also took hard-line Taistoists.

[ 14 ] The Spanish PCE and its Catalan referent, the United Socialist Party of Catalonia , had already been committed to the liberal possibilist politics of the Popular Front during the Spanish Civil War . The PCE's leader Santiago Carrillo wrote Eurocommunism's defining book Eurocomunismo y estado ( Eurocommunism and the State [1977]) and participated in the development of the liberal democratic constitution as Spain emerged from the dictatorship of Francisco Franco . The People's Alliance in Iceland, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] the Sammarinese Communist Party , [ 15 ] the Communist Party of Austria , the Communist Party of Belgium , the Communist Party of Great Britain , [ 15 ] the Socialist Party of Ireland [ 17 ] and the Communist Party of the Netherlands also turned Eurocommunist to varying degrees.

[ 18 ] [ better source needed ] The Danish Socialist People's Party , which already broke away from the Communist Party of Denmark after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 , was also sometimes described as Eurocommunist.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The eurocommunist wing of NKP leader Reidar T. Larsen joined the Socialist Left Party .

[ 21 ] The Communist Party of Belgium flirted with Eurocommunism in the 1970s, but did not want to explicitly reject the Soviet model and engaged in a polemic with Carrillo for this reason. It also remained more critical towards the idea of a Western European power bloc.

[ 22 ] The main radical-left force in Belgium that rejected the Soviet model at the time was AMADA [ nl ] (the forerunner of the PVDA-PTB ), but it did this from a Maoist viewpoint about Soviet " social imperialism ", while also denouncing Eurocommunism.

[ 23 ] The Italian PCI in particular had been developing an independent line from Moscow for many years prior which had already been exhibited in 1968, when the party refused to support the Soviet invasion of Prague . In 1975, the PCI and the PCE had made a declaration regarding the "march toward socialism" to be done in "peace and freedom". In 1976, the PCI's leader Enrico Berlinguer had spoken of a "pluralistic system" ( sistema pluralistico translated by the interpreter as "multiform system") in Moscow and in front of 5,000 communist delegates described the PCI's intentions to build "a socialism that we believe necessary and possible only in Italy".

[ 24 ] The Historic Compromise ( compromesso storico ) with the Christian Democracy , stopped by the kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro in 1978, was a consequence of this new policy.

[ 25 ] Western European communists came to Eurocommunism via a variety of routes. For some, it was their direct experience of feminist and similar action, while for others it was a reaction to the political events of the Soviet Union at the apogee of what Mikhail Gorbachev later called the Era of Stagnation . This process was accelerated after the events of 1968, particularly the crushing of the Prague Spring . The politics of détente also played a part. With war less likely, Western communists were under less pressure to follow Soviet orthodoxy, yet also wanted to engage with a rise in Western proletarian militancy such as Italy's Hot Autumn and Britain's Shop Stewards Movement .

[ citation needed ] Further development [ edit ] Eurocommunism was in many ways only a staging ground for changes in the political structure of the European left. Some, like the Italians, became social democrats while others, like the Dutch, moved into green politics and the French party during the 1980s reverted to a more pro-Soviet stance. Eurocommunism became a force across Europe in 1977, when the PCI's Enrico Berlinguer , the PCE's Santiago Carrillo and the PCF's Georges Marchais met in Madrid and laid out the fundamental lines of the "new way".

Eurocommunist ideas won at least partial acceptance outside of Western Europe. Prominent parties influenced by it outside of Europe were the Israeli Communist Party , [ 26 ] the Communist Party of Australia , the Japanese Communist Party , the Mexican Communist Party , their successor the Unified Socialist Party of Mexico , [ 27 ] and the Venezuelan Movement for Socialism .

[ 18 ] Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev also referred to Eurocommunism as a key influence on the ideas of glasnost and perestroika in his memoirs.

Soviet dissolution [ edit ] The breakup of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War put practically all leftist parties in Europe on the defensive and made neoliberal reforms the order of the day. Many Eurocommunist parties split, with the right factions (such as the Democrats of the Left or the Initiative for Catalonia Greens ) adopting social democracy more whole-heartedly while the left strove to preserve some identifiably communist positions (the Communist Refoundation Party or the PCE and the Living Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia ). The successors of KKE Interior, Renewing Communist Ecological Left (AKOA) and Greek Left (EAR), alongside other left-wing groups and politicians including EDA's last leader Manolis Glezos would go on and form Synaspismos .

In 2017, the Communist Party of Spain nominally returned to Marxism–Leninism .

[ 28 ] Criticism [ edit ] Several criticisms have been advanced against Eurocommunism. First, it is alleged by critics that Eurocommunists showed a lack of courage in sufficiently and definitively breaking off from the Soviet Union (for example, the Italian Communist Party took this step in 1981 after the repression of Solidarność in Poland). This has been explained as the fear of losing old members and supporters, many of whom admired the Soviet Union, or with a pragmatic desire to keep the support of a strong and powerful country.

[ 1 ] Other critics point out the difficulties the Eurocommunist parties had in developing a clear and recognisable strategy.

[ 29 ] They observe that Eurocommunists have always claimed to be different—not only from Soviet communism , but also from social democracy —while in practice they were always very similar to at least one of these two tendencies. As a result, critics argue that Eurocommunism does not have a well-defined identity and cannot be regarded as a separate movement in its own right.

[ citation needed ] From a Trotskyist point of view in From Stalinism to Eurocommunism: The Bitter Fruits of 'Socialism in One Country ' , Ernest Mandel views Eurocommunism as a subsequent development of the decision taken by the Soviet Union in 1924 to abandon the goal of world revolution and concentrate on social and economic development of the Soviet Union, the doctrine of socialism in one country . According to this vision, the Eurocommunists of the Italian and French communist parties are considered to be nationalist movements, who together with the Soviet Union abandoned internationalism .

From an anti-revisionist point of view, Enver Hoxha argued in Eurocommunism is Anti-Communism [ 30 ] that Eurocommunism is the result of Nikita Khrushchev 's policy of peaceful coexistence . Khrushchev was accused of being a revisionist who encouraged conciliation with the bourgeoisie rather than adequately calling for its overthrow by the dictatorship of the proletariat . He also stated that the Soviet Union's refusal to reject Palmiro Togliatti 's theory of polycentrism encouraged the various pro-Soviet communist parties to moderate their views in order to join cabinets which in turn forced them to abandon Marxism–Leninism as their leading ideology.

Henry Kissinger opposed the idea that communist parties in power in western Europe could be acceptable for the United States if they are independent from Moscow stating how " Tito is not under Moscow's control, yet his influence is felt all over the world" warning how a West European, communist ruled country, may potentially lead to "total redefinition" of the post-World War II order.

[ 31 ] See also [ edit ] Austromarxism – Worldview reconciling nationalism and social democracy with Marxism Communist party – Political party that promotes communist philosophy and values Democratic capitalism – Political and economic system Democratic socialism – Socialism emphasising democracy Enrico Berlinguer – Italian politician (1922–1984) Libertarian socialism – Political philosophy Popular socialism (Nordic countries) – Type of socialist ideology Social democracy – Political ideology within the socialist movement Western Marxism – Current of Marxist theory References [ edit ] ^ a b Kindersley, Richard, ed. (1981).

In Search of Eurocommunism .

Macmillan Press .

ISBN 978-1-349-16581-0 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Bracke, Maud (2007). "Chapter 8. Internationalism and Eurocommunism in the 1970s".

Which Socialism, Whose Détente? : West European Communism and the Czechoslovak Crisis of 1968 .

Central European University Press . pp.

323– 359.

ISBN 978-615-5211-26-3 .

^ Revel, Jean-François (1978).

"The Myths of Eurocommunism" .

Foreign Affairs .

56 (2): 295– 305.

doi : 10.2307/20039854 .

ISSN 0015-7120 .

JSTOR 20039854 .

^ "Definition of Eurocommunism" .

Webster's Dictionary .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ Anderson, Perry (1976).

"The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci" .

New Left Review . pp.

6– 7. Archived from the original on 2 February 2025.

^ Emadian, Baraneh (2 January 2019).

"The Quandary of Multiple States as an Internal and External Limit to Marxist Thought: From Poulantzas to Karatani" (PDF) .

Rethinking Marxism .

31 (1): 72– 91.

doi : 10.1080/08935696.2019.1577618 .

ISSN 0893-5696 .

^ Bernstein, Sarah; Lawrence, Stewart (1 May 1980).

"Eurocommunism as Current Events and Contemporary History: A Critical Bibliography" .

Radical History Review .

1980 (23): 165– 191.

doi : 10.1215/01636545-1980-23-165 .

ISSN 0163-6545 .

^ Barrow, Clyde W. (24 January 2023).

"Nicos Poulantzas Was a Vital Theorist of Democratic Socialism" .

Jacobin . Archived from the original on 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 1 February 2024 .

^ a b c Hitchens, Christopher (25 August 2008).

"The Verbal Revolution. How the Prague Spring broke world communism's main spring" .

Slate . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ Tuomioja, Erkki (2008).

"The Effects of the Prague Spring in Europe" . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ Devlin, Kevin.

"Western CPs Condemn Invasion, Hail Prague Spring" .

Blinken Open Society Archives . Archived from the original on 9 November 2014 . Retrieved 10 November 2014 .

^ Heinz Gstrein (14 July 1978).

"Profiliert, aber kaum populär" .

Die Furche (in German).

^ Panourgiá, Neni (2009).

Dangerous Citizens: The Greek Left and the Terror of the State .

Fordham University Press . p. 199.

ISBN 9780823229697 .

^ "Kai Hirvasnoro - Juttuarkisto: Ele Aleniuksen haastattelu" . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ a b c Devlin, Kevin (1979).

"Eurocommunism: Between East and West" .

International Security .

3 (4): 89.

doi : 10.2307/2626764 .

JSTOR 2626764 .

^ March, Luke (2012).

Radical Left Parties in Europe .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781136578977 .

^ "Political and Pressure Groups" . Magill. 2 October 1977.

^ a b Bukharin, Nikolai (1982). Day, Richard B. (ed.).

Selected Writings on the State and the Transition to Socialism . Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe . pp. xxi.

ISBN 0-87332-190-1 .

^ Eley, George (2002).

Forging Democracy: The History of the Left in Europe, 1850-2000 .

Oxford University Press . p. 485.

ISBN 9780195044799 .

^ Thing, Morten (1989). "13. Crisis and religion-an attempt at a conclusion".

The Russian Revolution and the Danish Labour Movement (PDF) .

^ Einhorn, Eric S.; Logue, John (2023).

"Continuity and Change in the Scandinavian Party Systems" .

Parties and Party Systems in Liberal Democracies .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9781000928549 .

^ De Coninck, Susan (2002).

"Jef Turf. Een politieke identiteit van een communist. Hoofdstuk 3: De activiteiten van Turf 1970-1980" .

Ethesis . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Pamphlet by AMADA leader Ludo Martens , Het eurokommunisme: een weg naar het socialisme?

( Eurocommunism: A Road to Socialism?

), c. 1977.

^ Amendola, Giorgio (November–December 1977).

"The Italian road to Socialism" (PDF) .

New Left Review . No. 106 . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ Fasanaro, Laura (2011). "The Eurocommunism Years: Italy's Political Puzzle and the Limits of the Atlantic Alliance". In Scott-Smith, Giles (ed.).

Atlantic, Euratlantic or Europe-America?: The Atlantic Community and the European Idea from Kennedy to Nixon . Soleb. pp.

548– 572.

ISBN 9782918157007 .

^ Shindler, Colin (2013).

A History of Modern Israel .

Cambridge University Press . p. xv.

ISBN 9781107311213 .

^ Carr, Berry (1986).

The Mexican Left, the Popular Movements, and the Politics of Austerity (PDF) . p. 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 April 2024.

^ "El PCE recupera el leninismo al cumplirse el centenario de la Revolución de Octubre" .

cuartopoder (in Spanish). 3 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

^ Deutscher, Tamara (January–February 1983).

"E. H. Carr — A Personal Memoir" .

New Left Review .

I (137): 78– 86.

^ Hoxha, Enver (1980).

"Eurocommunism is Anti-Communism" – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Pons, Silvio (2010). "The rise and fall of Eurocommunism". In Leffler, Melvyn P.; Westad, Odd Arne (eds.).

The Cambridge History of the Cold War . Vol. III.

Cambridge University Press . pp.

45– 65.

ISBN 978-0-521-83721-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] McInnes, Neil (1972).

The Western Marxists . Library Press.

ISBN 0-912050-32-2 .

McInnes, Neil (1975).

The Communist Parties of Western Europe .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780192183118 .

della Torre, Paolo Filo; Mortimer, Edward ; Story, Jonathan, eds. (1979).

Euro-Communism, Myth or Reality . Pelican Books.

ISBN 978-0140220773 .

Gramsci, Antonio (1973).

Prison Notebooks: Selections .

Lawrence & Wishart .

ISBN 0-85315-280-2 .

Carrillo, Santiago (1977).

Eurocommunism and the State .

Lawrence and Wishart .

ISBN 0-85315-408-2 .

Simon, Roger ; Hall, Stuart (1977).

Gramsci's Political Thought: An Introduction .

Lawrence & Wishart .

ISBN 0-85315-738-3 .

Krätke, Michael R.

(1997).

"Otto Bauer (1881-1938) – Die Mühen des Dritten Wegs" [Otto Bauer (1881–1938) – The Problems of the Third Way].

spw – Zeitschrift für sozialistische Politik und Wirtschaft [ de ] (in German) (98). Archived from the original on 7 February 2005.

Mandel, Ernest (1978).

From Stalinism to Eurocommunism: The Bitter Fruits of 'Socialism in One Country' . NLB.

ISBN 0-86091-005-9 .

Albers, Detlev, ed. (1979).

Otto Bauer und der "dritte" Weg. Die Wiederentdeckung des Austromarxismus durch Linkssozialisten und Eurokommunisten [ Otto Bauer and the Third Way: The Rediscovery of Austromarxism by Left Socialists and Eurocommunists ] (in German). Frankfurt/M.

ISBN 9783593326177 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Berlinguer, Enrico ; Bronda, Antonio ; Bodington, Stephen (1982).

After Poland . Spokesman.

ISBN 0-85124-344-4 .

Boggs, Carl; Plotke, David (1999).

The Politics of Eurocommunism: Socialism in Transition . Boston: South End Press .

ISBN 0-89608-051-X .

Laclau, Ernesto ; Mouffe, Chantal (2001).

Hegemony and Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics .

Verso Books .

ISBN 1-85984-330-1 .

Harvey, Robert (2004).

A Short History of Communism . New York: St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 0-312-32909-1 .

Heurtebize, Frédéric (2014).

Le péril rouge. Washington face à l'eurocommunisme [ The Red Peril. Washington facing Eurocommunism ] (in French).

Presses Universitaires de France .

ISBN 978213061995-6 .

External links [ edit ] Archive of Eurocommunism at marxists.org Eurocommunism is Anti-Communism by Enver Hoxha v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline Portals : Communism Europe Politics Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eurocommunism&oldid=1305571577 " Categories : Communism Communism in Europe Marxist schools of thought Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2015 Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2016 Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2024 Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eurocommunism 45 languages Add topic

