Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 World War II 2.2 Post-War 2.3 21st Century 3 Technology Toggle Technology subsection 3.1 Chemical warfare agents 3.1.1 Persistency 3.1.2 Classes 3.1.3 Designations 3.2 Delivery 3.2.1 Dispersion 3.2.2 Thermal dissemination 3.2.3 Aerodynamic dissemination 3.3 Protection against chemical warfare 3.3.1 Decontamination 4 Sociopolitical climate Toggle Sociopolitical climate subsection 4.1 Efforts to eradicate chemical weapons 4.2 Chemical weapon proliferation 5 Chemical weapons destruction Toggle Chemical weapons destruction subsection 5.1 India 5.2 Iraq 5.3 Japan 5.4 Russia 5.5 United States 6 Anti-agriculture Toggle Anti-agriculture subsection 6.1 Herbicidal warfare 6.2 Anti-livestock 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chemical warfare 34 languages العربية Asturianu Català Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu मराठी Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Using poison gas or other toxins in war For other uses, see Chemical warfare (disambiguation) .

From top, left to right Sarin bomblets for use on the Honest John rocket White phosphorus explosion during training at Edgewood Arsenal Iranian soldier wearing gas mask during the Iran-Iraq War Postwar disposal of mustard gas produced by Japan on Ōkunoshima during World War II French gas attack in Flanders, World War I Tear gas used in Incheon during the June Democratic Struggle Part of a series on Chemical agents Lethal agents Blood Cyanogen chloride (CK) Hydrogen cyanide (AC) Arsine (SA) Blister Ethyldichloroarsine (ED) Methyldichloroarsine (MD) Phenyldichloroarsine (PD) Lewisite (L) Mustard gas (HD H HT HL HQ) Nitrogen mustard HN1 HN2 HN3 Phosgene oxime (CX) C01-A035 C01-A039 Nerve G-agents Tabun (GA) Sarin (GB) Chlorosarin (GC) Soman (GD) Ethylsarin (GE) Cyclosarin (GF) GV V-agents EA-3148 V-sub x/GD-7 VE VG VM VP VR VS VX Novichok agents A-230 A-232 A-234 A-242 A-262 C01-A035 C01-A039 C01-A042 Pulmonary/choking Chlorine Chloropicrin (PS) Phosgene (CG) Diphosgene (DP) Disulfur decafluoride Vomiting Adamsite Chloropicrin Diphenylchlorarsine Diphenylcyanoarsine Incapacitating agents Agent 15 (BZ) Dimethylheptylpyran (DMHP) EA-3167 Kolokol-1 PAVA spray Sleeping gas Riot-control (RCAs) Xylyl bromide Pepper spray (OC) CS CN (mace) CR List of chemical warfare agents v t e Weapons of mass destruction By type Biological Chemical Nuclear Radiological By country Albania Algeria Argentina Australia Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Canada China Egypt France Germany India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Libya Mexico Myanmar Netherlands North Korea Pakistan Philippines Poland Rhodesia Romania Russia ( Soviet Union ) Saudi Arabia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States Yugoslavia Proliferation Chemical Nuclear Missiles Treaties List of treaties ( treaty parties ) Category v t e Chemical warfare ( CW ) involves using the toxic properties of chemical substances as weapons .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This type of warfare is distinct from nuclear warfare , biological warfare and radiological warfare , which together make up CBRN , the military acronym for chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (warfare or weapons), all of which are considered " weapons of mass destruction " (WMDs), a term that contrasts with conventional weapons .

[ 3 ] The use of chemical weapons in international armed conflicts is prohibited under international humanitarian law by the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention prohibits signatories from acquiring, stockpiling, developing, and using chemical weapons in all circumstances except for very limited purposes (research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Definition [ edit ] Chemical warfare is different from the use of conventional weapons or nuclear weapons because the destructive effects of chemical weapons are not primarily due to any explosive force . The offensive use of living organisms (such as anthrax ) is considered biological warfare rather than chemical warfare; [ 8 ] however, the use of nonliving toxic products produced by living organisms (e.g.

toxins such as botulinum toxin , ricin , and saxitoxin ) is considered chemical warfare under the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Under this convention, any toxic chemical, regardless of its origin, is considered a chemical weapon unless it is used for purposes that are not prohibited (an important legal definition known as the General Purpose Criterion ).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] About 70 different chemicals have been used or were stockpiled as chemical warfare agents during the 20th century. The entire class, known as Lethal Unitary Chemical Agents and Munitions , has been scheduled for elimination by the CWC.

[ 11 ] Under the convention, chemicals that are toxic enough to be used as chemical weapons, or that may be used to manufacture such chemicals, are divided into three groups according to their purpose and treatment: Schedule 1 – Have few, if any, legitimate uses. These may only be produced or used for research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective purposes (i.e. testing of chemical weapons sensors and protective clothing). Examples include nerve agents , ricin , lewisite and mustard gas . Any production over 100 grams (3.5 oz) must be reported to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and a country can have a stockpile of no more than one tonne of these chemicals.

[ citation needed ] Schedule 2 – Have no large-scale industrial uses, but may have legitimate small-scale uses. Examples include dimethyl methylphosphonate , a precursor to sarin also used as a flame retardant , and thiodiglycol , a precursor chemical used in the manufacture of mustard gas but also widely used as a solvent in inks .

Schedule 3 – Have legitimate large-scale industrial uses. Examples include phosgene and chloropicrin . Both have been used as chemical weapons but phosgene is an important precursor in the manufacture of plastics, and chloropicrin is used as a fumigant. The OPCW must be notified of, and may inspect, any plant producing more than 30 tons per year.

Chemical weapons are divided into three categories: [ 12 ] Category 1 – based on Schedule 1 substances Category 2 – based on non-Schedule 1 substances Category 3 – devices and equipment designed to use chemical weapons, without the substances themselves History [ edit ] Main article: History of chemical warfare Simple chemical weapons were used sporadically throughout antiquity and into the Industrial Age .

[ 13 ] It was not until the 19th century that the modern conception of chemical warfare emerged, as various scientists and nations proposed the use of asphyxiating or poisonous gasses.

John Singer Sargent 's iconic World War I painting: Gassed , showing blind casualties on a battlefield after a mustard gas attack Fritz Haber is considered the "father of chemical warfare" for his years of pioneering work developing and weaponizing chlorine and other poisonous gases during World War I.

Multiple international treaties were passed banning chemical weapons based upon the alarm of nations and scientists. This however did not prevent the extensive use of chemical weapons in World War I .

Chlorine gas , among other chemicals, was used by both the Allied and Central powers to try to break the stalemate of trench warfare . In most cases the gasses used did not kill, but instead incapacitated or caused permanent or temporary injuries. Historians have reached a wide range of estimates on gas casualties, ranging from 500k to 1.3 million casualties directly caused by chemical warfare agents during the course of the war, of which 2-4% died. A minimum of around 1300 civilians were injured due to the use of the weapons, and at least around 4000 were injured during weapon production. Gas casualties were a small fraction of the overall human impact of the war, but the horrifying effects of such weapons gave them a strong psychological impact.

[ 14 ] The interwar years saw the occasional use of chemical weapons during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War by the Italians, [ 15 ] while the Japanese made use of chloroacetophenone to suppress a native rebellion in Formosa in 1930, and later made use of mustard gas , lewisite , and irritant agents during the Second Sino-Japanese War . The Chinese, often lacking protective gear such as gas masks, were usually forced to retreat against CW attacks.

[ 16 ] World War II [ edit ] Although significant effort went into the development and stockpiling of chemical weapons in World War II , they saw no battlefield use in the European Theatre . Nazi Germany dedicated much research to the development of nerve agents , [ 17 ] but never used them even during the final defense of the fatherland. It has been suggested that Adolf Hitler 's own experience with poison gas during WWI and fears that the Allies would retaliate with their own chemical weapons were the main reasons. According to military historian Ian V. Hogg , the Germans were reluctant to use nerve agents since they couldn't find any defense or antidote for them. They also feared that the ban on scientific journals about organophosphates in Britain meant that the Allies also discovered nerve agents. In reality, they were unaware of the G-series until an ammunition dump captured in April 1945 was examined, while the ban on scientific publications was meant to prevent Axis nations from learning about advances on the development of insecticides and herbicides to boost food production; [ 18 ] nonetheless, the Allies made comprehensive plans for defensive and retaliatory use of chemical weapons, and stockpiled large quantities.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Japanese Special Naval Landing Forces with gas masks and rubber gloves during a chemical attack near Zhabei in the Battle of Shanghai The Imperial Japanese Army , as part of the Axis, used chemical weapons in China and Burma until 1943. After President Roosevelt threatened the Japanese with retaliation in kind in 1942, they were forced to limit their usage in the Pacific Theatre .

[ 16 ] Chemical weapons were frequently used against both the Kuomintang and People's Liberation Army troops in China, while Unit 731 carried experiments with CW agents on prisoners of war in 1940 and 1943.

[ 21 ] By 1944, the Japanese gradually ceased production of chemical munitions in favor of conventional high-explosive and incendiary shells, while keeping a large enough stockpile for retaliatory use.

[ 22 ] However, Nazi Germany extensively used poison gas against civilians, particularly Jews, in the Holocaust . Vast quantities of Zyklon B and carbon monoxide gas were used in the systematic extermination of some three million victims. This remains the deadliest use of poison gas in history.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Post-War [ edit ] Small amounts of chemical agents were employed by Egyptian forces during the North Yemen civil war between 1963 and 1967, resulting hundreds of casualties. In one of the largest chemical attacks, the United States dropped over 90,000 tons of chemical agents, mostly Rainbow Herbicides but tear gas as well during the Vietnam War .

[ 27 ] During the Iran–Iraq War , some 100,000 Iranian troops were casualties of Iraqi chemical weapons.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Iraq also used mustard gas and nerve agents against the Kurdish population killing more than 5,000 people and injuring many in the 1988 Halabja chemical attack .

[ 31 ] The Cuban intervention in Angola saw limited use of organophosphates.

[ 32 ] Terrorist groups have also used chemical weapons , notably in the Tokyo subway sarin attack and the Matsumoto incident .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] 21st Century [ edit ] The Ba'athist regime in Syria has used sarin , chlorine, and mustard gas in numerous deadly chemical attacks against civilian populations in the Syrian civil war .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] During the Russian invasion of Ukraine , Russia has been reported to deploy CS gas through K-51 grenades dropped by unmanned drones .

[ 38 ] On 13 December 2024, the Ukrainian military stated that over 4,800 incidents involving chemical weapons against Ukrainian forces have been record since the war began, which resulted in over 2,000 Ukrainian soldiers having been hospitalized, and 3 deaths. The use of gas was often hidden by heavy Russian "intense artillery, rocket, and bomb attacks”, forcing Ukrainian soldiers out of their positions. They saw less use of chemical gas in cold weather, as it reduced the effectiveness of the K-51 gas grenades.

[ 39 ] A recent US aid package to Ukraine included "nuclear, chemical and radiological protective equipment".

[ 40 ] Technology [ edit ] See also: Chemical weapon Chemical warfare technology timeline Year Agents Dissemination Protection Detection 1914 Chlorine Chloropicrin Phosgene Sulfur mustard Wind dispersal Gas masks, urine-soaked gauze Smell 1918 Lewisite Chemical shells Gas mask Rosin oil clothing Smell of geraniums 1920s Projectiles with central bursters CC-2 clothing 1930s G-series nerve agents Aircraft bombs Blister agent detectors Color change paper 1940s Missile warheads Spray tanks Protective ointment (mustard) Collective protection Gas mask w/ whetlerite 1950s 1960s V-series nerve agents Aerodynamic Gas mask w/ water supply Nerve gas alarm 1970s 1980s Binary munitions Improved gas masks (protection, fit, comfort) Laser detection 1990s Novichok nerve agents A Swedish Army soldier wearing a chemical agent protective suit ( C-vätskeskydd ) and protection mask ( skyddsmask 90 ) Although crude chemical warfare has been employed in many parts of the world for thousands of years, [ 41 ] "modern" chemical warfare began during World War I – see Chemical weapons in World War I .

Initially, only well-known commercially available chemicals and their variants were used. These included chlorine and phosgene gas. The methods used to disperse these agents during battle were relatively unrefined and inefficient. Even so, casualties could be heavy, due to the mainly static troop positions which were characteristic features of trench warfare .

Germany, the first side to employ chemical warfare on the battlefield, [ 42 ] simply opened canisters of chlorine upwind of the opposing side and let the prevailing winds do the dissemination. Soon after, the French modified artillery munitions to contain phosgene – a much more effective method that became the principal means of delivery.

[ 43 ] Since the development of modern chemical warfare in World War I, nations have pursued research and development on chemical weapons that falls into four major categories: new and more deadly agents; more efficient methods of delivering agents to the target (dissemination); more reliable means of defense against chemical weapons; and more sensitive and accurate means of detecting chemical agents.

Chemical warfare agents [ edit ] See also: List of chemical warfare agents The chemical used in warfare is called a chemical warfare agent ( CWA ). About 70 different chemicals have been used or stockpiled as chemical warfare agents during the 20th and 21st centuries. These agents may be in liquid, gas or solid form. Liquid agents that evaporate quickly are said to be volatile or have a high vapor pressure . Many chemical agents are volatile organic compounds so they can be dispersed over a large region quickly.

[ citation needed ] [ 44 ] The earliest target of chemical warfare agent research was not toxicity, but development of agents that can affect a target through the skin and clothing, rendering protective gas masks useless. In July 1917, the Germans employed sulfur mustard . Mustard agents easily penetrate leather and fabric to inflict painful burns on the skin.

Chemical warfare agents are divided into lethal and incapacitating categories. A substance is classified as incapacitating if less than 1/100 of the lethal dose causes incapacitation, e.g., through nausea or visual problems. The distinction between lethal and incapacitating substances is not fixed, but relies on a statistical average called the LD 50 .

Persistency [ edit ] Chemical warfare agents can be classified according to their persistency , a measure of the length of time that a chemical agent remains effective after dissemination. Chemical agents are classified as persistent or nonpersistent .

Agents classified as nonpersistent lose effectiveness after only a few minutes or hours or even only a few seconds. Purely gaseous agents such as chlorine are nonpersistent, as are highly volatile agents such as sarin. Tactically, nonpersistent agents are very useful against targets that are to be taken over and controlled very quickly.

Apart from the agent used, the delivery mode is very important. To achieve a nonpersistent deployment, the agent is dispersed into very small droplets comparable with the mist produced by an aerosol can. In this form not only the gaseous part of the agent (around 50%) but also the fine aerosol can be inhaled or absorbed through pores in the skin.

Modern doctrine requires very high concentrations almost instantly in order to be effective (one breath should contain a lethal dose of the agent). To achieve this, the primary weapons used would be rocket artillery or bombs and large ballistic missiles with cluster warheads. The contamination in the target area is only low or not existent and after four hours sarin or similar agents are not detectable anymore.

By contrast, persistent agents tend to remain in the environment for as long as several weeks, complicating decontamination. Defense against persistent agents requires shielding for extended periods of time. Nonvolatile liquid agents, such as blister agents and the oily VX nerve agent, do not easily evaporate into a gas, and therefore present primarily a contact hazard.

The droplet size used for persistent delivery goes up to 1 mm increasing the falling speed and therefore about 80% of the deployed agent reaches the ground, resulting in heavy contamination. Deployment of persistent agents is intended to constrain enemy operations by denying access to contaminated areas.

Possible targets include enemy flank positions (averting possible counterattacks), artillery regiments, command posts or supply lines. Because it is not necessary to deliver large quantities of the agent in a short period of time, a wide variety of weapons systems can be used.

A special form of persistent agents are thickened agents. These comprise a common agent mixed with thickeners to provide gelatinous, sticky agents. Primary targets for this kind of use include airfields, due to the increased persistency and difficulty of decontaminating affected areas.

Classes [ edit ] Chemical weapons are agents that come in four categories: choking , blister , blood and nerve .

[ 45 ] The agents are organized into several categories according to the manner in which they affect the human body. The names and number of categories varies slightly from source to source, but in general, types of chemical warfare agents are as follows: Classes of chemical weapon agents Class of agent Agent Names Mode of Action Signs and Symptoms Rate of action Persistency Nerve Cyclosarin (GF) Sarin (GB) Soman (GD) Tabun (GA) VX VR Some insecticides Novichok agents Inactivates enzyme acetylcholinesterase , preventing the breakdown of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in the victim's synapses and causing both muscarinic and nicotinic effects Miosis (pinpoint pupils ) Blurred/dim vision Headache Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea Copious secretions/sweating Muscle twitching/fasciculations Dyspnea Seizures Loss of consciousness Vapors: seconds to minutes; Skin: 2 to 18 hours VX is persistent and a contact hazard; other agents are non-persistent and present mostly inhalation hazards.

Asphyxiant/Blood Most Arsines Cyanogen chloride Hydrogen cyanide Arsine : Causes intravascular hemolysis that may lead to renal failure .

Cyanogen chloride/hydrogen cyanide : Cyanide directly prevents cells from using oxygen . The cells then use anaerobic respiration , creating excess lactic acid and metabolic acidosis .

Possible cherry-red skin Possible cyanosis Confusion Nausea Patients may gasp for air Seizures prior to death Metabolic acidosis Immediate onset Non-persistent and an inhalation hazard.

Vesicant/Blister Sulfur mustard (HD, H) Nitrogen mustard (HN-1, HN-2, HN-3) Lewisite (L) Phosgene oxime (CX) Agents are acid -forming compounds that damages skin and respiratory system , resulting burns and respiratory problems.

Severe skin, eye and mucosal pain and irritation Skin erythema with large fluid blisters that heal slowly and may become infected Tearing , conjunctivitis , corneal damage Mild respiratory distress to marked airway damage Mustards : Vapors: 4 to 6 hours, eyes and lungs affected more rapidly; Skin: 2 to 48 hours Lewisite : Immediate Persistent and a contact hazard.

Choking/Pulmonary Chlorine Hydrogen chloride Nitrogen oxides Phosgene Similar mechanism to blister agents in that the compounds are acids or acid-forming, but action is more pronounced in respiratory system , flooding it and resulting in suffocation ; survivors often suffer chronic breathing problems.

Airway irritation Eye and skin irritation Dyspnea , cough Sore throat Chest tightness Wheezing Bronchospasm Immediate to 3 hours Non-persistent and an inhalation hazard.

Lachrymatory agent Tear gas Pepper spray Causes severe stinging of the eyes and temporary blindness.

Powerful eye irritation Immediate Non-persistent and an inhalation hazard.

Incapacitating Agent 15 (BZ) Causes atropine -like inhibition of acetylcholine in subject. Causes peripheral nervous system effects that are the opposite of those seen in nerve agent poisoning.

May appear as mass drug intoxication with erratic behaviors, shared realistic and distinct hallucinations , disrobing and confusion Hyperthermia Ataxia (lack of coordination) Mydriasis (dilated pupils) Dry mouth and skin Inhaled: 30 minutes to 20 hours; Skin: Up to 36 hours after skin exposure to BZ. Duration is typically 72 to 96 hours.

Extremely persistent in soil and water and on most surfaces; contact hazard.

Cytotoxic proteins Non-living biological proteins, such as: Ricin Abrin Inhibit protein synthesis Latent period of 4-8 hours, followed by flu -like signs and symptoms Progress within 18-24 hours to: Inhalation: nausea , cough , dyspnea , pulmonary edema Ingestion: Gastrointestinal hemorrhage with emesis and bloody diarrhea; eventual liver and kidney failure .

4–24 hours; see symptoms . Exposure by inhalation or injection causes more pronounced signs and symptoms than exposure by ingestion Slight; agents degrade quickly in environment There are other chemicals used militarily that are not scheduled by the CWC, and thus are not controlled under the CWC treaties. These include: Defoliants and herbicides that destroy vegetation, but are not immediately toxic or poisonous to human beings. Their use is classified as herbicidal warfare . Some batches of Agent Orange , for instance, used by the British during the Malayan Emergency and the United States during the Vietnam War , contained dioxins as manufacturing impurities.

Dioxins , rather than Agent Orange itself, have long-term cancer effects and for causing genetic damage leading to serious birth defects .

Incendiary or explosive chemicals (such as napalm , extensively used by the United States during the Korean War and the Vietnam War, or dynamite ) because their destructive effects are primarily due to fire or explosive force, and not direct chemical action. Their use is classified as conventional warfare .

Viruses , bacteria , or other organisms. Their use is classified as biological warfare .

Toxins produced by living organisms are considered chemical weapons, although the boundary is blurry. Toxins are covered by the Biological Weapons Convention .

Designations [ edit ] Further information: chemical weapon designation Most chemical weapons are assigned a one- to three-letter " NATO weapon designation" in addition to, or in place of, a common name.

Binary munitions , in which precursors for chemical warfare agents are automatically mixed in shell to produce the agent just prior to its use, are indicated by a "-2" following the agent's designation (for example, GB-2 and VX-2).

Some examples are given below: Blood agents: Vesicants: Cyanogen chloride : CK Hydrogen cyanide : AC Lewisite : L Sulfur mustard : H, HD, HS, HT Pulmonary agents: Incapacitating agents: Phosgene : CG Quinuclidinyl benzilate : BZ Lachrymatory agents: Nerve agents: Pepper spray : OC Tear gas : CN, CS, CR Sarin : GB VE , VG , VM , VX Delivery [ edit ] The most important factor in the effectiveness of chemical weapons is the efficiency of its delivery, or dissemination, to a target. The most common techniques include munitions (such as bombs, projectiles, warheads) that allow dissemination at a distance and spray tanks which disseminate from low-flying aircraft. Developments in the techniques of filling and storage of munitions have also been important.

Although there have been many advances in chemical weapon delivery since World War I, it is still difficult to achieve effective dispersion. The dissemination is highly dependent on atmospheric conditions because many chemical agents act in gaseous form. Thus, weather observations and forecasting are essential to optimize weapon delivery and reduce the risk of injuring friendly forces.

[ 46 ] Dispersion [ edit ] Dispersion of chlorine in World War I Dispersion is placing the chemical agent upon or adjacent to a target immediately before dissemination, so that the material is most efficiently used.  Dispersion is the simplest technique of delivering an agent to its target. The most common techniques are munitions, bombs, projectiles, spray tanks and warheads.

World War I saw the earliest implementation of this technique. The actual first chemical ammunition was the French 26 mm cartouche suffocante rifle grenade , fired from a flare carbine . It contained 35 g (1.2 oz) of the tear-producer ethyl bromoacetate , and was used in autumn 1914 – with little effect on the Germans.

The German military contrarily tried to increase the effect of 10.5 cm (4.1 in) shrapnel shells by adding an irritant – dianisidine chlorosulfonate . Its use against the British at Neuve Chapelle in October 1914 went unnoticed by them. Hans Tappen, a chemist in the Heavy Artillery Department of the War Ministry, suggested to his brother, the Chief of the Operations Branch at German General Headquarters, the use of the tear-gases benzyl bromide or xylyl bromide .

Shells were tested successfully at the Wahn artillery range near Cologne on January 9, 1915, and an order was placed for 15 cm (5.9 in) howitzer shells, designated 'T-shells' after Tappen. A shortage of shells limited the first use against the Russians at the Battle of Bolimów on January 31, 1915; the liquid failed to vaporize in the cold weather, and again the experiment went unnoticed by the Allies.

The first effective use were when the German forces at the Second Battle of Ypres simply opened cylinders of chlorine and allowed the wind to carry the gas across enemy lines. While simple, this technique had numerous disadvantages. Moving large numbers of heavy gas cylinders to the front-line positions from where the gas would be released was a lengthy and difficult logistical task.

Aerial photograph of a German gas attack on Russian forces c.

1916 Stockpiles of cylinders had to be stored at the front line, posing a great risk if hit by artillery shells. Gas delivery depended greatly on wind speed and direction. If the wind was fickle, as at the Battle of Loos , the gas could blow back, causing friendly casualties .

Gas clouds gave plenty of warning, allowing the enemy time to protect themselves, though many soldiers found the sight of a creeping gas cloud unnerving. This made the gas doubly effective, as, in addition to damaging the enemy physically, it also had a psychological effect on the intended victims.

Another disadvantage was that gas clouds had limited penetration, capable only of affecting the front-line trenches before dissipating. Although it produced limited results in World War I, this technique shows how simple chemical weapon dissemination can be.

Shortly after this "open canister" dissemination, French forces developed a technique for delivery of phosgene in a non-explosive artillery shell. This technique overcame many of the risks of dealing with gas in cylinders. First, gas shells were independent of the wind and increased the effective range of gas, making any target within reach of guns vulnerable. Second, gas shells could be delivered without warning, especially the clear, nearly odorless phosgene—there are numerous accounts of gas shells, landing with a "plop" rather than exploding, being initially dismissed as dud high explosive or shrapnel shells, giving the gas time to work before the soldiers were alerted and took precautions.

The major drawback of artillery delivery was the difficulty of achieving a killing concentration. Each shell had a small gas payload and an area would have to be subjected to saturation bombardment to produce a cloud to match cylinder delivery. A British solution to the problem was the Livens Projector . This was effectively a large-bore mortar, dug into the ground that used the gas cylinders themselves as projectiles – firing a 14 kg (31 lb) cylinder up to 1,500 m (5,000 ft). This combined the gas volume of cylinders with the range of artillery.

Over the years, there were some refinements in this technique. In the 1950s and early 1960s, chemical artillery rockets and cluster bombs contained a multitude of submunitions, so that a large number of small clouds of the chemical agent would form directly on the target.

Thermal dissemination [ edit ] An American-made MC-1 gas bomb Thermal dissemination is the use of explosives or pyrotechnics to deliver chemical agents. This technique, developed in the 1920s, was a major improvement over earlier dispersal techniques, in that it allowed significant quantities of an agent to be disseminated over a considerable distance. Thermal dissemination remains the principal method of disseminating chemical agents today.

Most thermal dissemination devices consist of a bomb or projectile shell that contains a chemical agent and a central "burster" charge; when the burster detonates, the agent is expelled laterally.

Thermal dissemination devices, though common, are not particularly efficient. First, a percentage of the agent is lost by incineration in the initial blast and by being forced onto the ground. Second, the sizes of the particles vary greatly because explosive dissemination produces a mixture of liquid droplets of variable and difficult to control sizes.

The efficacy of thermal detonation is greatly limited by the flammability of some agents. For flammable aerosols, the cloud is sometimes totally or partially ignited by the disseminating explosion in a phenomenon called flashing . Explosively disseminated VX will ignite roughly one third of the time. Despite a great deal of study, flashing is still not fully understood, and a solution to the problem would be a major technological advance.

Despite the limitations of central bursters, most nations use this method in the early stages of chemical weapon development, in part because standard munitions can be adapted to carry the agents.

Soviet chemical weapons canisters from a stockpile in Albania Aerodynamic dissemination [ edit ] Aerodynamic dissemination is the non-explosive delivery of a chemical agent from an aircraft, allowing aerodynamic stress to disseminate the agent. This technique is the most recent major development in chemical agent dissemination, originating in the mid-1960s.

This technique eliminates many of the limitations of thermal dissemination by eliminating the flashing effect and theoretically allowing precise control of particle size. In actuality, the altitude of dissemination, wind direction and velocity, and the direction and velocity of the aircraft greatly influence particle size. There are other drawbacks as well; ideal deployment requires precise knowledge of aerodynamics and fluid dynamics , and because the agent must usually be dispersed within the boundary layer (less than 60–90 m or 200–300 ft above the ground), it puts pilots at risk.

Significant research is still being applied toward this technique. For example, by modifying the properties of the liquid, its breakup when subjected to aerodynamic stress can be controlled and an idealized particle distribution achieved, even at supersonic speed . Additionally, advances in fluid dynamics , computer modeling , and weather forecasting allow an ideal direction, speed, and altitude to be calculated, such that warfare agent of a predetermined particle size can predictably and reliably hit a target.

Protection against chemical warfare [ edit ] Israel Defense Forces "Yanshuf" battalion soldiers at chemical warfare defense exercise Ideal protection begins with nonproliferation treaties such as the CWC, and detecting, very early, the signatures of someone building a chemical weapons capability. These include a wide range of intelligence disciplines, such as economic analysis of exports of dual-use chemicals and equipment, human intelligence ( HUMINT ) such as diplomatic, refugee, and agent reports; photography from satellites, aircraft and drones ( IMINT ); examination of captured equipment ( TECHINT ); communications intercepts ( COMINT ); and detection of chemical manufacturing and chemical agents themselves ( MASINT ).

If all the preventive measures fail and there is a clear and present danger, then there is a need for detection of chemical attacks, [ 47 ] collective protection, [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] and decontamination. Since industrial accidents can cause dangerous chemical releases (e.g., the Bhopal disaster ), these activities are things that civilian, as well as military, organizations must be prepared to carry out. In civilian situations in developed countries , these are duties of HAZMAT organizations, which most commonly are part of fire departments.

Detection has been referred to above, as a technical MASINT discipline; specific military procedures, which are usually the model for civilian procedures, depend on the equipment, expertise, and personnel available. When chemical agents are detected, an alarm needs to sound, with specific warnings over emergency broadcasts and the like. There may be a warning to expect an attack.

If, for example, the captain of a US Navy ship believes there is a serious threat of chemical, biological, or radiological attack, the crew may be ordered to set Circle William, which means closing all openings to outside air, running breathing air through filters, and possibly starting a system that continually washes down the exterior surfaces. Civilian authorities dealing with an attack or a toxic chemical accident will invoke the Incident Command System , or local equivalent, to coordinate defensive measures.

[ 50 ] Individual protection starts with a gas mask and, depending on the nature of the threat, through various levels of protective clothing up to a complete chemical-resistant suit with a self-contained air supply. The US military defines various levels of MOPP (mission-oriented protective posture) from mask to full chemical resistant suits; Hazmat suits are the civilian equivalent, but go farther to include a fully independent air supply, rather than the filters of a gas mask.

Collective protection allows continued functioning of groups of people in buildings or shelters, the latter which may be fixed, mobile, or improvised. With ordinary buildings, this may be as basic as plastic sheeting and tape, although if the protection needs to be continued for any appreciable length of time, there will need to be an air supply, typically an enhanced gas mask.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Members of the Ukrainian Army's 19th Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Battalion practice decontamination drill, at Camp Arifjan , Kuwait Decontamination [ edit ] Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Decontamination varies with the particular chemical agent used. Some nonpersistent agents, including most pulmonary agents (chlorine, phosgene, and so on), blood gases , and nonpersistent nerve gases (e.g., GB ), will dissipate from open areas, although powerful exhaust fans may be needed to clear out buildings where they have accumulated.

In some cases, it might be necessary to neutralize them chemically, as with ammonia as a neutralizer for hydrogen cyanide or chlorine. Riot control agents such as CS will dissipate in an open area, but things contaminated with CS powder need to be aired out, washed by people wearing protective gear, or safely discarded.

Mass decontamination is a less common requirement for people than equipment, since people may be immediately affected and treatment is the action required. It is a requirement when people have been contaminated with persistent agents. Treatment and decontamination may need to be simultaneous, with the medical personnel protecting themselves so they can function.

[ 51 ] There may need to be immediate intervention to prevent death, such as injection of atropine for nerve agents. Decontamination is especially important for people contaminated with persistent agents; many of the fatalities after the explosion of a WWII US ammunition ship carrying sulfur mustard , in the harbor of Bari, Italy, after a German bombing on December 2, 1943, came when rescue workers, not knowing of the contamination, bundled cold, wet seamen in tight-fitting blankets.

For decontaminating equipment and buildings exposed to persistent agents, such as blister agents, VX or other agents made persistent by mixing with a thickener, special equipment and materials might be needed. Some type of neutralizing agent will be needed; e.g. in the form of a spraying device with neutralizing agents such as Chlorine, Fichlor, strong alkaline solutions or enzymes. In other cases, a specific chemical decontaminant will be required.

[ 50 ] Sociopolitical climate [ edit ] There are many instances of the use of chemical weapons in battles documented in Greek and Roman historical texts; the earliest example was the deliberate poisoning of Kirrha's water supply with hellebore in the First Sacred War , Greece, about 590 BC.

[ 52 ] One of the earliest reactions to the use of chemical agents was from Rome . Struggling to defend themselves from the Roman legions , Germanic tribes poisoned the wells of their enemies, with Roman jurists having been recorded as declaring "armis bella non venenis geri", meaning "war is fought with weapons , not with poisons ." Yet the Romans themselves resorted to poisoning wells of besieged cities in Anatolia in the 2nd century BC.

[ 53 ] Before 1915 the use of poisonous chemicals in battle was typically the result of local initiative, and not the result of an active government chemical weapons program. There are many reports of the isolated use of chemical agents in individual battles or sieges , but there was no true tradition of their use outside of incendiaries and smoke. Despite this tendency, there have been several attempts to initiate large-scale implementation of poison gas in several wars, but with the notable exception of World War I, the responsible authorities generally rejected the proposals for ethical reasons or fears of retaliation.

For example, in 1854 Lyon Playfair (later 1st Baron Playfair, GCB, PC, FRS (1818–1898), a British chemist, proposed using a cacodyl cyanide -filled artillery shell against enemy ships during the Crimean War . The British Ordnance Department rejected the proposal as "as bad a mode of warfare as poisoning the wells of the enemy." Efforts to eradicate chemical weapons [ edit ] See also: List of chemical arms control agreements Countries with known or possible chemical weapons, as of 2021 Nation CW Possession [ citation needed ] Signed CWC Ratified CWC Albania Eliminated, 2007 January 14, 1993 [ 54 ] May 11, 1994 [ 54 ] China Probable January 13, 1993 April 4, 1997 Egypt Probable No No India Eliminated, 2009 January 14, 1993 September 3, 1996 Iran Possible January 13, 1993 November 3, 1997 Iraq Eliminated, 2018 January 13, 2009 February 12, 2009 Israel Probable January 13, 1993 [ 55 ] No Japan Probable January 13, 1993 September 15, 1995 Libya Eliminated, 2014 No January 6, 2004 (acceded) Myanmar (Burma) Possible January 14, 1993 [ 55 ] July 8, 2015 [ 56 ] North Korea Known No No Pakistan Probable January 13, 1993 November 27, 1997 Russia Eliminated, 2017 January 13, 1993 November 5, 1997 Serbia and Montenegro Probable No April 20, 2000 (acceded) Sudan Possible No May 24, 1999 (acceded) Syria Known No September 14, 2013 (acceded) Taiwan Possible n/a n/a United States Eliminated, 2023 [ 57 ] January 13, 1993 April 25, 1997 Vietnam Possible January 13, 1993 September 30, 1998 August 27, 1874: The Brussels Declaration Concerning the Laws and Customs of War is signed, specifically forbidding the "employment of poison or poisoned weapons", although the treaty was not adopted by any nation whatsoever and it never went into effect.

September 4, 1900: The First Hague Convention , which includes a declaration banning the "use of projectiles the object of which is the diffusion of asphyxiating or deleterious gases," enters into force.

January 26, 1910: The Second Hague Convention enters into force, prohibiting the use of "poison or poisoned weapons" in warfare.

February 6, 1922: After World War I, the Washington Arms Conference Treaty prohibited the use of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases. It was signed by the United States, Britain, Japan, France, and Italy, but France objected to other provisions in the treaty and it never went into effect.

February 8, 1928: The Geneva Protocol enters into force, prohibiting the use of "asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or devices" and "bacteriological methods of warfare".

Chemical weapon proliferation [ edit ] Main article: Chemical weapon proliferation Despite numerous efforts to reduce or eliminate them, some nations continue to research and/or stockpile chemical warfare agents.

In 1997, future US Vice President Dick Cheney opposed the signing ratification of a treaty banning the use of chemical weapons, a recently unearthed letter shows. In a letter dated April 8, 1997, then Halliburton -CEO Cheney told Sen.

Jesse Helms , the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , that it would be a mistake for America to join the convention. "Those nations most likely to comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention are not likely to ever constitute a military threat to the United States. The governments we should be concerned about are likely to cheat on the CWC, even if they do participate," reads the letter, [ 58 ] published by the Federation of American Scientists .

The CWC was ratified by the Senate that same month. In the following years, Albania, Libya, Russia, the United States, and India declared over 71,000 metric tons of chemical weapon stockpiles, and destroyed a third of them. Under the terms of the agreement, the United States and Russia agreed to eliminate the rest of their supplies of chemical weapons by 2012, but ended up taking far longer to do so as shown in the previous and following section of this article.

Chemical weapons destruction [ edit ] India [ edit ] In June 1997, India declared that it had a stockpile of 1044 tons of sulphur mustard in its possession. India's declaration of its stockpile came after its entry into the Chemical Weapons Convention , that created the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons , and on January 14, 1993, India became one of the original signatories to the Chemical Weapons Convention . By 2005, from among six nations that had declared their possession of chemical weapons, India was the only country to meet its deadline for chemical weapons destruction and for inspection of its facilities by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] By 2006, India had destroyed more than 75 percent of its chemical weapons and material stockpile and was granted an extension to complete a 100 percent destruction of its stocks by April 2009. On May 14, 2009, India informed the United Nations that it has completely destroyed its stockpile of chemical weapons.

[ 61 ] Iraq [ edit ] See also: Iraqi chemical warfare The Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons , Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, welcomed Iraq's decision to join the OPCW as a significant step to strengthening global and regional efforts to prevent the spread and use of chemical weapons. The OPCW announced "The government of Iraq has deposited its instrument of accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention with the Secretary General of the United Nations and within 30 days, on 12 February 2009, will become the 186th State Party to the Convention". Iraq has also declared stockpiles of chemical weapons, and because of their recent accession is the only State Party exempted from the destruction time-line.

[ 62 ] Japan [ edit ] During the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) Japan stored chemical weapons on the territory of mainland China . The weapon stock mostly containing sulfur mustard-lewisite mixture.

[ 63 ] The weapons are classified as abandoned chemical weapons under the Chemical Weapons Convention , and from September 2010 Japan has started their destruction in Nanjing using mobile destruction facilities in order to do so.

[ 64 ] Russia [ edit ] Russia signed into the Chemical Weapons Convention on January 13, 1993, and ratified it on November 5, 1995. Declaring an arsenal of 39,967 tons of chemical weapons in 1997, by far the largest arsenal, consisting of blister agents: Lewisite , Sulfur mustard , Lewisite-mustard mix, and nerve agents: Sarin , Soman , and VX . Russia met its treaty obligations by destroying 1 percent of its chemical agents by the 2002 deadline set out by the Chemical Weapons Convention, but requested an extension on the deadlines of 2004 and 2007 due to technical, financial, and environmental challenges of chemical disposal. Since, Russia has received help from other countries such as Canada which donated C$100,000, plus a further C$100,000 already donated, to the Russian Chemical Weapons Destruction Program. This money will be used to complete work at Shchuch'ye and support the construction of a chemical weapons destruction facility at Kizner (Russia), where the destruction of nearly 5,700 tons of nerve agent, stored in approximately 2 million artillery shells and munitions, will be undertaken. Canadian funds are also being used for the operation of a Green Cross Public Outreach Office, to keep the civilian population informed on the progress made in chemical weapons destruction activities.

[ 65 ] As of July 2011, Russia has destroyed 48 percent (18,241 tons) of its stockpile at destruction facilities located in Gorny (Saratov Oblast) and Kambarka (Udmurt Republic) – where operations have finished – and Schuch'ye (Kurgan Oblast), Maradykovsky (Kirov Oblast), Leonidovka (Penza Oblast) whilst installations are under construction in Pochep (Bryansk Oblast) and Kizner (Udmurt Republic).

[ 66 ] As August 2013, 76 percent  (30,500 tons) were destroyed, [ 67 ] and Russia leaves the Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Program, which partially funded chemical weapons destruction.

[ 68 ] In September 2017, OPCW announced that Russia had destroyed its entire chemical weapons stockpile.

[ 69 ] United States [ edit ] See also: United States and weapons of mass destruction § Chemical weapons On November 25, 1969, President Richard Nixon unilaterally renounced the offensive use of biological and toxic weapons , but the U.S. continued to maintain an offensive chemical weapons program.

[ 70 ] From May 1964 to the early 1970s the U.S. participated in Operation CHASE , a United States Department of Defense program that aimed to dispose of chemical weapons by sinking ships laden with the weapons in the deep Atlantic. After the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 , Operation Chase was scrapped and safer disposal methods for chemical weapons were researched, with the U.S. destroying several thousand tons of sulfur mustard by incineration at the Rocky Mountain Arsenal , and nearly 4,200 tons of nerve agent by chemical neutralisation at Tooele Army Depot .

[ 71 ] The U.S. began stockpile reductions in the 1980s with the removal of outdated munitions and destroying its entire stock of 3-Quinuclidinyl benzilate (BZ or Agent 15) at the beginning of 1988. In June 1990 the Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System began destruction of chemical agents stored on the Johnston Atoll in the Pacific, seven years before the Chemical Weapons Treaty came into effect. In 1986 President Ronald Reagan made an agreement with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to remove the U.S. stockpile of chemical weapons from Germany. In 1990, as part of Operation Steel Box , two ships were loaded with over 100,000 shells containing Sarin and VX were taken from the U.S. Army weapons storage depots such as Miesau and then-classified FSTS (Forward Storage / Transportation Sites) and transported from Bremerhaven, Germany to Johnston Atoll in the Pacific, a 46-day nonstop journey.

[ 72 ] In the 1980s, Congress, at the urging of the Reagan administration , provided funding for the manufacture of binary chemical weapons (sarin artillery shells) from 1987 until 1990, but this was halted after the U.S. and the Soviet Union entered into a bilateral agreement in June 1990 .

[ 70 ] In the 1990 agreement, the U.S. and Soviet Union agreed to begin destroying their chemical weapons stockpiles before 1993 and to reduce them to no more than 5,000 agent tons each by the end of 2002. The agreement also provided for exchanges of data and inspections of sites to verify destruction.

[ 73 ] Following the collapse of the Soviet Union , the U.S.'s Nunn–Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program helped eliminate some of the chemical, biological and nuclear stockpiles of the former Soviet Union .

[ 73 ] The United Nations Conference on Disarmament in Geneva in 1980 led to the development of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), a multilateral treaty that prohibited the development, production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons, and required the elimination of existing stockpiles.

[ 74 ] The treaty expressly prohibited state parties from making reservations (unilateral caveats).

[ 74 ] During the Reagan administration and the George H. W. Bush administration, the U.S. participated in the negotiations toward the CWC.

[ 74 ] The CWC was concluded on September 3, 1992, and opened for signature on January 13, 1993. The U.S. became one of 87 original state parties to the CWC.

[ 74 ] President Bill Clinton submitted it to the U.S. Senate for ratification on November 23, 1993. Ratification was blocked in the Senate for years, largely as a result of opposition from Senator Jesse Helms , the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee .

[ 74 ] On April 24, 1997, the Senate gave its consent to ratification of the CWC by a 74–26 vote (satisfying the required two-thirds majority). The U.S. deposited its instrument of ratification at the United Nations on April 25, 1997, a few days before the CWC entered into force. The U.S. ratification allowed the U.S. to participate in the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons , the organization based in The Hague that oversees implementation of the CWC.

[ 74 ] Upon U.S. ratification of the CWC, the U.S. declared a total of 29,918 tons of chemical weapons, and committed to destroying all of the U.S.'s chemical weapons and bulk agent.

[ 75 ] The U.S. was one of eight states to declare a stockpile of chemical weapons and to commit to their safe elimination.

[ 76 ] The U.S. committed in the CWC to destroy its entire chemical arsenal within 10 years of the entry into force ( i.e.

, by April 29, 2007), [ 75 ] However, at a 2012 conference, [ 77 ] the parties to the CWC parties agreed to extend the U.S. deadline to 2023.

[ 75 ] [ 77 ] By 2012, stockpiles had been eliminated at seven of the U.S.'s nine chemical weapons depots and 89.75% of the 1997 stockpile was destroyed.

[ 78 ] The depots were the Aberdeen Chemical Agent Disposal Facility , Anniston Chemical Disposal Facility , Johnston Atoll , Newport Chemical Agent Disposal Facility , Pine Bluff Chemical Disposal Facility , Tooele Chemical Disposal Facility , Umatilla Chemical Disposal Facility , [ 77 ] and Deseret Chemical Depot .

[ 78 ] The U.S. closed each site after the completion of stockpile destruction.

[ 77 ] In 2019, the U.S. began to eliminate its chemical-weapon stockpile at the last of the nine U.S. chemical weapons storage facilities: the Blue Grass Army Depot in Kentucky.

[ 75 ] By May 2021, the U.S. destroyed all of its Category 2 and Category 3 chemical weapons and 96.52% of its Category 1 chemical weapons.

[ 76 ] The U.S. is scheduled to complete the elimination of all its chemical weapons by the September 2023 deadline.

[ 75 ] In July 2023 OPCW confirmed the last chemical munition of the U.S., and that the last chemical weapon from the stockpiles declared by all States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was verified as destroyed.

[ 79 ] The U.S. has maintained a " calculated ambiguity " policy that warns potential adversaries that a chemical or biological attack against the U.S. or its allies will prompt a "overwhelming and devastating" response. The policy deliberately leaves open the question of whether the U.S. would respond to a chemical attempt with nuclear retaliation .

[ 80 ] Commentators have noted that this policy gives policymakers more flexibility, at the possible cost of decreased strategic unpreparedness.

[ 80 ] Anti-agriculture [ edit ] Herbicidal warfare [ edit ] See also: Herbicidal warfare Disabled children in Vietnam , most of them impacted by Agent Orange , 2004 Although herbicidal warfare use chemical substances , its main purpose is to disrupt agricultural food production and/or to destroy plants which provide cover or concealment to the enemy.

The use of herbicides by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War has left tangible, long-term impacts upon the Vietnamese people and U.S. veterans of the war.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] The government of Vietnam says that around 24% of the forests of Southern Vietnam were defoliated and up to four million people in Vietnam were exposed to Agent Orange. They state that as many as three million people have developed illness because of Agent Orange while the Red Cross of Vietnam estimates that up to one million people were disabled or have health problems associated with Agent Orange. The United States government has described these figures as unreliable.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] During the war, the U.S. fought the North Vietnamese and their allies in Laos and Cambodia , dropping large quantities of Agent Orange in each of those countries. According on one estimate, the U.S. dropped 475,500 US gallons (1,800,000 L) of Agent Orange in Laos and 40,900 US gallons (155,000 L) in Cambodia.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Because Laos and Cambodia were officially neutral during the Vietnam War, the U.S. attempted to keep secret its military involvement in these countries. The U.S. has stated that Agent Orange was not widely used and therefore hasn't offered assistance to affected Cambodians or Laotians, and limits benefits American veterans and CIA personnel who were stationed there.

[ 87 ] [ 89 ] Anti-livestock [ edit ] During the Mau Mau Uprising in 1952, the poisonous latex of the African milk bush was used to kill cattle.

[ 90 ] See also [ edit ] 1990 Chemical Weapons Accord Ali Hassan al-Majid Area denial weapon Chemical weapon designation Chemical weapons and the United Kingdom Gas chamber List of CBRN warfare forces List of chemical warfare agents List of highly toxic gases List of psychoactive drugs used by militaries Ronald Maddison Psychochemical weapon Saint Julien Memorial Sardasht, West Azerbaijan , a town attacked with chemical weapons during the Iran–Iraq War Stink bomb United States Army Medical Research Institute of Chemical Defense Notes [ edit ] ^ étrangères, Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires.

"Fighting Chemical Weapons" .

France Diplomacy - Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ P. Lee, Steven. "Weapons of Mass Destruction: Are They Morally Special?".

Published Online by Cambridge University Press .

^ "Weapons of mass destruction" .

FPS Foreign Affairs - Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation . January 18, 2022 . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ Anne Lorenzat (2017–2018).

"The Current State of Customary International Law with regard to the Use of Chemical Weapons in Non-International Armed Conflicts" .

The Military Law and the Law of War Review .

^ Jillian Blake & Aqsa Mahmud (October 15, 2013).

"A Legal "Red Line"? Syria and the Use of Chemical Weapons in Civil Conflict" .

UCLA Law Review .

^ "Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction" . United Nations Treaty Collection. January 3, 2018 . Retrieved January 3, 2018 .

^ "Chemical weapon - WMD, Toxins, Agents | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved February 13, 2025 .

^ Greaves, Ian (2010).

"Biological Agents" .

University of Teesside and Consultant in Emergency Medicine James Cook University Hospital : 133– 231.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-045043-8.00004-0 .

ISBN 978-0-08-045043-8 .

^ "Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction (CWC): Annexes and Original Signatories" .

U.S. Department of State . Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance . Retrieved January 19, 2012 .

^ J. DaSilva, Edgar. "Biological warfare, bioterrorism, biodefence and the biological and toxin weapons convention".

Division of Life Sciences UNESCO, France .

^ Disarmament lessons from the Chemical Weapons Convention Archived June 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ The Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) at a Glance ^ Samir S. Patel, "Early Chemical Warfare – Dura-Europos, Syria," Archaeology, Vol. 63, No. 1, January/February 2010, http://www.archaeology.org/1001/topten/syria.html (accessed October 3, 2014) ^ Haber, L. F. (2002).

The Poisonous Cloud: Chemical warfare in the First World War . Oxford University Press. pp.

239– 253.

ISBN 9780191512315 .

^ Shinn, David H; Ofcansky, Thomas P, eds. (2013).

"Chemical Weapons" .

Historical Dictionary of Ethiopia (2nd ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. pp.

94– 95.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7194-6 .

^ a b Furmanski, Martin (2004).

"Sino-Japanese War" . In Croddy, Eric A; Wirtz, James J; Larsen, Jeffrey A (eds.).

Weapons of Mass Destruction: An Encyclopedia of Worldwide Policy, Technology, and History . Vol. 1. Bloomsbury Publishing USA. pp.

259– 260.

ISBN 978-1-85109-495-0 .

^ Corum, James S., The Roots of Blitzkrieg , University Press of Kansas, 1992, pp. 106–107.

^ Hogg, Ian V.

(2015) [1999].

German Secret Weapons of the Second World War: The Missiles, Rockets, Weapons & New Technology of the Third Reich . Barnsley, South Yorkshire: Frontline Books. pp. 163−164.

ISBN 978-1-84832-781-8 .

^ "Paxman and Harris" , Pakistan pp. 132–135.

^ Callum Borchers, Sean Spicer takes his questionable claims to a new level in Hitler-Assad comparison , The Washington Post (April 11, 2017).

^ Tanaka, Yuki (October 1988). Ackland, Len; Myers, Nancy J; Rothstein, Linda; Grodzins, Ruth M (eds.).

"Poison Gas: the story Japan would like to forget" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

5 (8). Chicago, Illinois: Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc.: 10– 19.

Bibcode : 1988BuAtS..44h..10T .

doi : 10.1080/00963402.1988.11456210 .

ISSN 0096-3402 . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

^ Kurata, H. (2021) [1980].

"Lessons learned from the destruction of the chemical weapons of the Japanese Imperial Forces" . In Goldblat, Jozef; Lohs, Karlheinz; Robinson, Julian Perry; Kjellstrand, Arne; Kumar, Rajesh; Lundin, Johan; Nemec, Theodor (eds.).

Chemical Weapons: Destruction and Conversion [SIPRI: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute] . Taylor & Francis. pp.

81– 82.

ISBN 978-0-85066-199-6 .

^ "Nazi Camps" .

Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved April 19, 2020 .

^ Schwartz, Terese Pencak.

"The Holocaust: Non-Jewish Victims" . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved April 19, 2020 .

^ Patrick Coffey, American Arsenal: A Century of Weapon Technology and Strategy (Oxford University Press, 2014), pp. 152–154.

^ James J. Wirtz, "Weapons of Mass Destruction" in Contemporary Security Studies (4th ed.), ed. Alan Collins, Contemporary Security Studies (Oxford University Press, 2016), p. 302.

^ Miettinen, J. K. (September 1974). Rabinowitch, Eugene; Jr, Samuel H. Day; Cullen, Susan (eds.).

"The Chemical Arsenal" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

30 (7). Chicago, Illinois: Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science, Inc.: 37– 43.

Bibcode : 1974BuAtS..30g..37M .

doi : 10.1080/00963402.1974.11458140 .

ISSN 0096-3402 . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

^ Fassihi, Farnaz (October 27, 2002), "In Iran, grim reminders of Saddam's arsenal" , New Jersey Star Ledger , archived from the original on December 13, 2007 , retrieved January 28, 2005 ^ Paul Hughes (January 21, 2003), "It's like a knife stabbing into me" , The Star (South Africa) ^ Sciolino, Elaine (February 13, 2003), "Iraq Chemical Arms Condemned, but West Once Looked the Other Way" , The New York Times , archived from the original on May 27, 2013 ^ On this day: 1988: Thousands die in Halabja gas attack , BBC News (March 16, 1988).

^ Tokarev, Andrei; Shubin, Gennady, eds. (2011).

Bush War: The Road to Cuito Cuanavale: Soviet Soldiers' Accounts of the Angolan War . Auckland Park: Jacana Media (Pty) Ltd. pp.

128– 130.

ISBN 978-1-4314-0185-7 .

^ "Japan executes sarin gas attack cult leader Shoko Asahara and six members" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2019 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ Seto, Yasuo. " The Sarin Gas Attack in Japan and the Related Forensic Investigation.

" The Sarin Gas Attack in Japan and the Related Forensic Investigation. Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, June 1, 2001. Web. February 24, 2017.

^ "CDC | Facts About Sarin" .

www.bt.cdc.gov . Archived from the original on April 14, 2003 . Retrieved October 7, 2015 .

^ Syria Used Chlorine in Bombs Against Civilians, Report Says , The New York Times , Rick Gladstone, August 24, 2016 retrieved August 25, 2016.

^ Detels, Abdool Karim, Baum, Li, H. Leyland, Roger, Quarraisha, Fran, Liming, Alastair; S. Levy, Barry (2022). "Collective violence: war".

Oxford Textbook of Global Public Health, Volume 3 (7th ed.). Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. p. 396.

ISBN 978-0-19-887168-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Military: 465 documented cases of Russia using chemical weapons in Ukraine since Feb. 24, 2022" .

The Kyiv Independent . December 27, 2023 . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ Martina Sapio (December 14, 2024).

"Over 2,000 Ukrainian military personnel hospitalized for chemical poisoning since start of full-scale war, Ukrainian colonel says" .

The Kyiv Independent . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ "U.S. boosts Ukraine's defense needs with new arms package" .

The New Voice of Ukraine . December 13, 2024 . Retrieved December 15, 2024 .

^ Syed, Tanya (January 19, 2009), Ancient Persians 'gassed Romans' , BBC , retrieved February 21, 2009 ^ Irwin, Will (April 22, 1915), "The Use of Poison Gas" , New York Tribune ^ Johnson, Jeffrey Allan (1990), The Kaiser's Chemists: Science and Modernization in Imperial Germany , University of North Carolina Press ^ "9.4 Effusion and Diffusion of Gases" .

Gas Info . OpenStax. 2016. Archived from the original on December 4, 2021 . Retrieved March 12, 2021 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Gray, Colin. (2007).

Another Bloody Century: Future Warfare . p. 269. Phoenix.

ISBN 0-304-36734-6 .

^ "Chemical Attack Fact Sheet | Homeland Security" .

www.dhs.gov . Retrieved June 23, 2025 .

^ Griffin Davis (May 24, 2006), "CBRNE – Chemical Detection Equipment" , EMedicine , retrieved October 22, 2007 ^ US Department of Defense (June 2, 2003), Multiservice Tactics, Techniques, and Procedure for NBC Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical (NBC) Protection (FM 3-11.4 / MCWP 3-37.2 / NTTP 3-11.27 / AFTTP(I) 3-2.46) (PDF) , Federation of American Scientists, FM 3-11.4 , retrieved October 22, 2007 ^ a b Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (September 12, 2002), Protecting Building Environments from Airborne Chemical, Biologic, or Radiologic Attacks , retrieved October 22, 2007 ^ a b c d US Department of Defense (September 29, 2000), Multiservice Tactics, Techniques, and Procedure for NBC Defense of Theater Fixed Sites, Ports, and Airfields (FM 3-11.34/MCRP 3-37.5/NWP 3-11.23/AFTTP(I) 3-2.33) (PDF) , Berlin Information-center for Transatlantic Security , retrieved October 22, 2007 ^ Ciottone, Gregory R; Arnold, Jeffrey L (January 4, 2007), "CBRNE – Chemical Warfare Agents" , EMedicine , retrieved October 22, 2007 ^ Adrienne Mayor, "Greek Fire, Poison Arrows & Scorpion Bombs: Biological and Chemical Warfare in the Ancient World" Overlook-Duckworth, 2003, rev ed with new Introduction 2008 ^ Mayor 2003 ^ a b "Status of Participation in the Chemical Weapons Convention as at 14 October 2013" .

Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons . October 14, 2013.

^ a b "SIGNATORY STATES" .

Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons . September 2, 2013.

^ "Myanmar Joins Chemical Weapons Convention" .

Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons . July 9, 2015.

^ https://www.peoacwa.army.mil/destruction-progress/ ^ In Surprise Testimony Cheney Renews Opposition to CWC (PDF) , United States Senate, April 8, 1997, archived from the original (PDF) on December 17, 2008 , retrieved January 4, 2009 .

^ "India declares its stock of chemical weapons" . Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved February 26, 2016 .

^ "India to destroy chemical weapons stockpile by 2009" . DominicanToday.com. Archived from the original on September 7, 2013 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "India destroys its chemical weapons stockpile" .

Indo-Asian News Service . May 14, 2009.

^ "Iraq Joins the Chemical Weapons Convention" . Opcw.org . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "Abandoned Chemical Weapons (ACW) in China" . Nti.org. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "Ceremony Marks Start of Destruction of Chemical Weapons Abandoned by Japan in China" . Opcw.org . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "Canada Contributes to Russia's Chemical Weapons Destruction Programme" . Opcw.org. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "Research Library: Country Profiles: China Chemical" . NTI. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ "Russia destroys over 76 percent of its chemical weapons stockpile" . August 23, 2013. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013 . Retrieved August 29, 2013 .

^ Guarino, Douglas P. (June 18, 2013).

"New U.S.-Russian Security Deal Greatly Scales Back Scope, Experts Say" .

Global Security Newswire . Nuclear Threat Initiative.

^ "OPCW Director-General Commends Major Milestone as Russia Completes Destruction of Chemical Weapons Stockpile under OPCW Verification" (Press release). Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.

^ a b Jonathan B. Tucker & Erin R. Mahan, Case Study 1: President Nixon's Decision to Renounce the U.S. Offensive Biological Weapons Program , Case Studies Series, Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defense University (October 2009).

^ "Rocky Mountain Arsenal | Region 8 | US EPA" . Epa.gov. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

^ The Oceans and Environmental Security: Shared U.S. and Russian Perspectives.

^ a b Andrew Glass, Deal reached curbing chemical weapons, June 1, 1990 , Politico (June 1, 2017).

^ a b c d e f Jonathan B. Tucker, Case Study 4, U.S. Ratification of the Chemical Weapons Convention , Case Studies Series , Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, National Defense University (December 2011).

^ a b c d e Owen LeGrone, U.S. Begins Final CW Destruction , Arms Controls Today , Arms Control Association (July/August 2019).

^ a b US Chemical Weapons Stockpile Elimination: Progress Update , Arms Control Association (September 23, 2021).

^ a b c d History of U.S. Chemical Weapons Elimination , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (January 6, 2014).

^ a b Army Agency Completes Mission to Destroy Chemical Weapons Archived September 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , USCMA, January 21, 2012 ^ "OPCW confirms: All declared chemical weapons stockpiles verified as irreversibly destroyed" . OPCW . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ a b Harry W. Conley (Spring 2003).

"Not with Impunity: Assessing US Policy for Retaliating to a Chemical or Biological Attack" .

Air & Space Power Journal .

17 (1). Air University Press. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013.

^ "The legacy of Agent Orange" .

BBC News . April 29, 2005.

^ Haberman, Clyde (May 11, 2014).

"Agent Orange's Long Legacy, for Vietnam and Veterans" .

The New York Times .

^ Stocking, Ben (June 14, 2007).

"Agent Orange Still Haunts Vietnam, US" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2017 . Retrieved March 29, 2017 .

^ King, Jessica (August 10, 2012).

"U.S. in first effort to clean up Agent Orange in Vietnam" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2013 . Retrieved August 11, 2012 .

^ Gustafson, Mai L. (1978).

War and Shadows: The Haunting of Vietnam . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press. p. 125.

^ Nature, 17 Apr. 2003, "The extent and patterns of usage of Agent Orange and other herbicides in Vietnam" , Vol. 422, p. 681 ^ a b The Atlantic, 20 Jul. 2019, "The U.S.'s Toxic Agent Orange Legacy: Washington Has Admitted to the Long-Lasting Effects of Dioxin Use in Vietnam, But Has Largely Sidestepped the Issue in Neighboring Cambodia and Laos" ^ "Agent Orange's Legacy" . The Cambodia Daily. March 20, 2004. Archived from the original on May 5, 2014 . Retrieved May 5, 2014 .

^ "4 Decades on, U.S. Starts Cleanup of Agent Orange in Vietnam" .

The New York Times . New York. August 9, 2012 . Retrieved May 5, 2014 .

^ Verdcourt, B.; Trump, E.C. (1969).

Common Poisonous Plants of East Africa . Collins. p. 254.

ISBN 978-0-00-211120-1 . Retrieved July 3, 2024 .

References [ edit ] CBWInfo.com (2001).

A Brief History of Chemical and Biological Weapons: Ancient Times to the 19th Century . Retrieved November 24, 2004.

Chomsky, Noam (March 4, 2001).

Prospects for Peace in the Middle East , page 2. Lecture.

Cordette, Jessica, MPH(c) (2003).

Chemical Weapons of Mass Destruction . Retrieved November 29, 2004.

Croddy, Eric (2001), Chemical and Biological Warfare , Copernicus, ISBN 978-0-387-95076-1 Smart, Jeffery K., M.A. (1997).

History of Biological and Chemical Warfare . Retrieved November 24, 2004.

United States Senate, 103d Congress , 2d Session. (May 25, 1994).

The Riegle Report . Retrieved November 6, 2004.

Gerard J Fitzgerald. American Journal of Public Health. Washington: Apr 2008. Vol. 98, Iss. 4; p. 611 Гречко, А.А. (1976).

Годы Войны . Военное Издательство Министерства Оборонны СССР.Москва.

Further reading [ edit ] Leo P. Brophy and George J. B. Fisher; The Chemical Warfare Service: Organizing for War Office of the Chief of Military History , 1959; L. P. Brophy, W. D. Miles and C. C. Cochrane, The Chemical Warfare Service: From Laboratory to Field (1959); and B. E. Kleber and D. Birdsell, The Chemical Warfare Service in Combat (1966). official US history; Glenn Cross, Dirty War: Rhodesia and Chemical Biological Warfare, 1975–1980 , Helion & Company, 2017 Gordon M. Burck and Charles C. Flowerree; International Handbook on Chemical Weapons Proliferation 1991 L. F. Haber.

The Poisonous Cloud: Chemical Warfare in the First World War Oxford University Press: 1986 James W. Hammond Jr; Poison Gas: The Myths Versus Reality Greenwood Press, 1999 Jiri Janata, Role of Analytical Chemistry in Defense Strategies Against Chemical and Biological Attack , Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, 2009 Ishmael Jones, The Human Factor: Inside the CIA's Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture , Encounter Books, New York 2008, revised 2010, ISBN 978-1-59403-382-7 . WMD espionage.

Benoit Morel and Kyle Olson; Shadows and Substance: The Chemical Weapons Convention Westview Press, 1993 Adrienne Mayor, "Greek Fire, Poison Arrows & Scorpion Bombs: Biological and Chemical Warfare in the Ancient World" Overlook-Duckworth, 2003, rev ed with new Introduction 2008 Geoff Plunkett, Chemical Warfare in Australia: Australia's Involvement In Chemical Warfare 1914 – Today, (2nd Edition), 2013.

. Leech Cup Books. A volume in the Army Military History Series published in association with the Army History Unit.

Jonathan B. Tucker .

Chemical Warfare from World War I to Al-Qaeda (2006) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chemical warfare .

Official website of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Rule 74. The use of chemical weapons is prohibited.

– section on chemical weapons from Customary IHL Database , an "updated version of the Study on customary international humanitarian law conducted by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and originally published by Cambridge University Press ." Chemical Warfare information page Archived November 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine , from the Disaster Information Management Research Center of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services including links to relevant sources in the U.S. National Library of Medicine v t e Agents used in chemical warfare incapacitation riot control Blood agents Cyanogen Cyanogen bromide Cyanogen chloride (CK) Hydrogen cyanide (AC) Arsine Cacodyl cyanide Cacodyl oxide Hydrogen sulfide Phosphine Carbon monoxide Phosphorus trifluoride Methyl cyanoformate Iron pentacarbonyl Nickel tetracarbonyl 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin Glycolonitrile Lactonitrile Acetone cyanohydrin Stibine Chloral cyanohydrin Blister agents Arsenicals Ethyldichloroarsine (ED) Methyldichloroarsine (MD) Phenyldichloroarsine (PD) Lewisite (L) Lewisite 2 (L2) Lewisite 3 (L3) Sulfur mustards Levinstein mustard (EA-229) T Q CEES Nitrogen mustards HN1 HN2 HN3 TL-301 Nettle agents Phosgene oxime (CX) Other KB-16 Dibutylchloromethyltin chloride Selenium oxychloride Phenacyl bromide Dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate Dimethyl fumarate Chalcone hydrazone Methylnitronitrosoguanidine Norcantharidin Cantharidin T-2 mycotoxin Nerve agents G-agents Tabun (GA) Sarin (GB) Chlorosarin (ClGB) Thiosarin (SGB) Soman (GD) Chlorosoman (ClGD) Ethylsarin (GE) GH Cyclosarin (GF) GP Fluorotabun EA-1356 EA-4352 Crotylsarin V-agents EA-2192 EA-3148 VE VG VM VP VR VS VX EA-1763 Chinese VX V-sub x (GD-7) GV agents GV (EA-5365) Novichok agents A-208 A-232 A-234 A-242 A-262 C01-A035 C01-A039 C01-A042 Carbamates Dimethylcarbamoyl fluoride EA-3887 EA-3887A EA-3966 EA-3990 EA-4056 T-1123 T-1152 T-1194 Octamethylene-bis(5-dimethylcarbamoxyisoquinolinium bromide) TL-599 TL-1238 TL-1299 TL-1317 Miotine (AR-28/T-1843) 3152 CT 4-686-293-01 (Agent 1-10) Other Diisopropyl fluorophosphate Dicyclohexyl phosphorofluoridate EA-2012 EA-2054 EA-2098 EA-2613 2-Ethoxycarbonyl-1-methylvinyl cyclohexyl methylphosphonate Neopentylene fluorophosphate Selenophos Phospholine R-16661 Ro 3-0422 Methanesulfonyl fluoride Dimefox (TL-792) MSPI Precursors Acetonitrile AT ATO AlP A.P.C. complex Chlorosarin Chlorosoman Cyclohexanol 1,8-Dibromooctane N,N-Diisopropylaminoethanol (KB) EA-1250 DIHP ZS DEHP EA-1224 Dimethylamidophosphoric dichloride Dimethylamidophosphoric dicyanide DMHP Ethylphosphonoselenoic dichloride Formaldoxime Nital 4-Hydroxycoumarin Isopropyl alcohol (TB) Methyldichlorophosphine (SW) Methylphosphonyl difluoride (difluoro) (DF) Methylphosphonyl dichloride (dichloro) Nitromethane OPA mixture Phosphoryl chloride Phosphorus pentachloride Phosphorus trichloride (TH) Pinacolone Pinacolyl alcohol Phenacyl chloride QL QL sulfide 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol 3,3,5-Trimethylcyclohexanol Triethyl phosphite Trimethyl phosphite TC TG Neurotoxins Anatoxin-a Saxitoxin (TZ) Coniine Bungarotoxin Botulinum toxin (BTX) Tetanospasmin (TeNT) Ryanodine Ciguatoxin (CTX) Guanitoxin (GTX) Chlorophenylsilatrane Palytoxin (PTX) Maitotoxin (MTX) Tetrodotoxin Veratridine Aconitine Brevetoxin (PbTX) Strychnine Antillatoxin (ATX) Tetraethyllead Dimethylmercury HN1 hydrochloride HN2 hydrochloride HN3 hydrochloride A-8564 Picrotoxin Gelsemine Sulfuryl fluoride Tremorine Oxotremorine Batrachotoxin Tetramethylenedisulfotetramine (TETS) Bicyclic phosphates IPTBO TBPO TBPS Cloflubicyne Trimethylolpropane phosphite Domoic acid Pulmonary/ choking agents Chlorine Bromine Phosgene (CG) Fluorine Perfluoroisobutene Chloropicrin (PS) Dimethyl(trifluoromethylthio)arsine Diphosgene (DP) Disulfur decafluoride (Z) Acrolein Ethyl bromoacetate Perchloromethyl mercaptan Phenylcarbylamine chloride Tetranitromethane Tetrachlorodinitroethane Chlorine trifluoride Perchloryl fluoride Cadmium oxide Cadmium chloride Mercuric chloride Selenium dioxide Selenoyl fluoride Trifluoronitrosomethane Trichloronitrosomethane Nitric oxide Nitrogen dioxide Dinitrogen tetroxide Sulfur dioxide Phosphorus trichloride Methyl isocyanate Ethenone Methyl vinyl ketone Trifluoroacetyl chloride Salcomine Fluomine Uranium hexafluoride Diborane Green Cross Vomiting agents Adamsite (DM) Chloropicrin Litharge - glycerine Diphenylchlorarsine Diphenylcyanoarsine Cacodyl cyanide o-Dianisidine Antimony potassium tartrate Lobeline Incapacitating agents BZ (CS-4030) Apomorphine Butyrophenone EA-4941 (CS-4640) Etorphine EA-2092 CS-4297 Etoxadrol Dimethylheptylpyran (DMHP) Canbisol EA-2148 EA-3167 Nicotine EA-3443 Methaqualone Pethidine EA-3580 Ibogaine EA-3834 Kolokol-1 LSD-25 PAVA spray Psilocybin Sleeping gas Carfentanil JB-318 JB-336 CS-27349 CAR-226,086 CAR-301,060 CAR-302,196 CAR-302,282 CAR-302,668 Benperidol Desflurane Enflurane Bufotenin Isoflurane Halothane Sevoflurane Pentazocine Procarbazine Fluphenazine Chlorpromazine Lachrymatory agents Xylyl bromide Pepper spray (OC) Mace (spray) Phorbol esters Ingenol mebutate RTX CN CS CR CNS Benzyl chloride Benzyl bromide Benzyl iodide Bromobenzyl cyanide Thiophosgene Chloroacetone Bromoacetone Bromomethyl ethyl ketone Acrolein Phenacyl bromide Chloroacetophenone oxime Ethyl bromoacetate Ethyl iodoacetate Iodoacetone Allyl isothiocyanate Hexamethylene diisocyanate Crotonaldehyde Croton oil DRC-5593 Malodorant agents Thioacetone Allicin Skatole Cadaverine Putrescine Cornea-clouding agents Lewisite CX KB-16 Methyl cyanoacrylate N-Methylmorpholine Allyl alcohol Osmium tetroxide Acrolein Cacodyl cyanide Diglycolic acid esters Biological toxins Abrin Aconitine Cyclopiazonic acid Histrionicotoxins Aflatoxins Anatoxin-a Batrachotoxin Botulinum toxin Brevetoxin Ciguatoxin Domoic acid Enterotoxin type B Grayanotoxin Guanitoxin Maitotoxin Modeccin Palytoxin Ricin Saxitoxin Shiga toxin T-2 mycotoxin Tetanospasmin Tetrodotoxin Volkensin Veratridine Tumor promoting agents Phorbol esters 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate Croton oil Other Methyl fluoroacetate Napalm (variants and mixtures) Fluoroethyl fluoroacetate Depleted uranium post-combustion uranium oxides Plutonium and its compounds Polonium White phosphorus List of chemical warfare agents CB military symbol v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250816130946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.078 seconds
Real time usage: 1.327 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6792/1000000
Revision size: 89865/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 361719/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5047/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 388035/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.548/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10993190/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  931.103      1 -total
 44.53%  414.632      1 Template:Reflist
 18.31%  170.440     27 Template:Cite_web
  6.93%   64.538      1 Template:Chemical_agents_sidebar
  6.30%   58.699     13 Template:Citation
  6.15%   57.242      7 Template:Navbox
  6.14%   57.199      1 Template:Short_description
  5.23%   48.707      1 Template:Commons_category
  5.03%   46.853      1 Template:Sister_project
  4.88%   45.469      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:50073:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816130946 and revision id 1304671842. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_warfare&oldid=1304671842 " Categories : Chemical warfare Warfare by type Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2017 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical warfare 34 languages Add topic

