Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Veg and non-veg jokes 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Off-color humor 7 languages Español فارسی Nederlands 日本語 Simple English Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Americanism used to describe jokes of a vulgar nature A postcard containing off-color humor Off-color humor (also known as vulgar humor , crude humor , crass humor , coarse humor or shock humor ) is humor that deals with topics that may be considered to be in poor taste or vulgar . Many comedic genres (including jokes, prose , poems , black comedy , blue comedy , insult comedy , cringe comedy and skits ) may incorporate "off-color" elements.

Most commonly labeled as "off-color" are acts concerned with sex, a particular ethnic group, or gender. Other off-color topics include violence, particularly domestic abuse; excessive swearing or profanity ; toilet humor ; national superiority or inferiority , pedophilic content, and any topics generally considered impolite or indecent. Generally, the point of off-color humor is to induce laughter by evoking a feeling of shock and surprise in the comedian's audience. In this way, off-color humor is related to other forms of postmodern humor, such as the anti-joke .

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Off-color jokes were used in Ancient Greek comedy , including the humor of Aristophanes .

[ 1 ] His work parodied some of the great tragedians of his time, especially Euripides , using τὸ φορτικόν / ἡ κωμῳδία φορτική (variously translated as " low comedy ", "vulgar farce ", "disgusting, obscene farces") that received great popularity among his contemporaries.

[ 2 ] William Shakespeare , the 16th-century playwright and poet, is well known for his ribald humor. Almost every one of his plays contains suggestive jokes and innuendo .

Jonathan Swift , an Irish satirist in the 17th century, used scatological humor in some of his pieces, including his famous essay A Modest Proposal and his rather crude poem " The Lady's Dressing Room ", in which the speaker comments on the goings-on in a 17th-century woman's room, including her business in her chamber pot.

Dirty jokes were once considered subversive and underground, and rarely heard in public. Comedian Lenny Bruce was tried, convicted, and jailed for obscenity after a stand-up performance that included off-color humor in New York City in 1964. Comedian and actor Redd Foxx was well known in nightclubs in the 1960s and 1970s for his raunchy stand-up act , but toned it down for the television shows Sanford and Son and The Redd Foxx Comedy Hour , stating in the first monologue of the latter show that the only similarity between the show and his nightclub act was that "I'm smoking".

[ 3 ] American society has become increasingly tolerant of off-color humor since that time. Such forms of humor have become widely distributed and more socially acceptable, in part due to the mainstream success in the 1970s and 1980s of comedians like Peter Cook and Dudley Moore 's alter-egos Derek and Clive , Dolemite , and Andrew Dice Clay .

George Carlin and Richard Pryor have used it as an effective tool for social commentary.

In the 1990s and modern era, comedians such as Bill Hicks , Doug Stanhope , and Dave Chappelle have used shocking content to draw attention to their criticism of social issues, especially censorship and the socioeconomic divide.

Dave Attell and Louis C.K.

are noted for their absurdist off-color humor. The cartoon Beavis and Butt-head was especially off-color in its early episodes, which included numerous depictions of animal cruelty. The highly praised television show South Park also popularized the use of offensive humor, for which the show has become infamous.

The Aristocrats is perhaps the most famous dirty joke in the US and is certainly one of the best-known and most oft-repeated among comedians themselves.

Tom Green has used shock humor in The Tom Green Show and the film Freddy Got Fingered , using outrageous stunts and jokes to draw an audience in.

In British humor , the genre of " sick jokes " is often used to shock by poking fun at taboo or as a reaction against political correctness . Examples include the website B3ta and its accompanying book The Bumper B3ta Book of Sick Jokes , [ 4 ] the humor wiki Sickipedia and the adult comic Viz .

Veg and non-veg jokes [ edit ] In some parts of the world, sexual humor in particular is known as "non-veg" humor, contrasted with the "veg" jokes that are more acceptable in polite company. The use of the term "non-veg" is probably a reference to the carnal nature of sexual humor, and can be viewed in the context of the prevalence of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dietary preferences.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Dick joke Ethnic jokes Flatulence humor Gross out Nam-ı Kemal jokes Rationale of the Dirty Joke Ribaldry Rudeness Sex comedy Sophomoric humor References [ edit ] ^ Murphy, Charles T. (1972). "Popular Comedy in Aristophanes".

The American Journal of Philology .

93 (1): 169– 189.

doi : 10.2307/292910 .

ISSN 0002-9475 .

JSTOR 292910 .

^ Lewis, Amy (1 January 2020).

"Aristophanes And The Poetics Of Low Comedy" .

Publicly Accessible Penn Dissertations : 10.

^ "The Redd Foxx Show : Redd Foxx Comedy Hour" . Archived from the original on 2006-02-17 . Retrieved 2005-07-27 .

^ Manuel, compiled by Rob (2006).

The bumper b3ta book of sick jokes . London: Friday.

ISBN 978-1-905548-28-6 .

^ Kanak Hirani Nautiyal (9 Jun 2005).

"Porn again and again" .

Times of India . Times Internet Limited.

Archived from the original on 2012-11-14 . Retrieved 2009-04-11 .

^ Tuteja, Joginder (November 24, 2006).

" "Even critics laugh at non-veg jokes" - Sangeeth Sivan" .

IndiaGlitz . Archived from the original on Dec 14, 2007 . Retrieved 2009-04-11 .

v t e Comedy Topics Comedian Comedic device Comedy festival Comedy troupe Comic timing Farce Humorist Humour Impersonator Impressionist Irony Joke Off-color humor Ribaldry Sophomoric humor Toilet humour Prank call Punch line Satire Visual gag Wit Word play Film Country American British French Italian Genre Action Fantasy Horror Mockumentary Parody Remarriage Romance Science fiction Screwball Sex Italian Mexican Silent Slapstick Stoner Thriller Theatre Country Europe Ancient Greek comedy Comédie-Française Comédie-Italienne Corral de comedias Theatre of ancient Rome Asia China Xiangsheng Hong Kong Mo lei tau Indonesia Lenong Ludruk Japan Kyōgen Manzai Owarai Rakugo Sarugaku Korea Genre Boulevard theatre Comedy drama Comedy of humours Comedy of manners Comedy of menace Commedia dell'arte Double act Improvisational Macchietta One-person show Pantomime Harlequinade Restoration comedy Sentimental comedy Comédie larmoyante Shadow play Shakespearean comedy Sketch comedy Spex Stand-up comedy Street theatre Theatre of the absurd Tragicomedy Vaudeville Music and dance Ballad opera Cabaret Café-chantant Café-théâtre Comédie-ballet Comedy club Light music Music hall Musical theatre Opéra bouffe Opéra bouffon Opera buffa Opéra comique Operetta Revue Media Music Album Rock Hip hop Parody Novelty Musical comedians Novel Radio Television Mockumentary Roast Sitcom Animated sitcom Black sitcom Teen sitcom Subgenres Alternative Black Blue Character Christian Clown Cringe Deadpan Documentary High / low Insult Observational Physical Prop Self-referential Shock Sick Slapstick Topics Surreal Ventriloquism Zombie Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Off-color_humor&oldid=1301580092 " Categories : Humour Off-color humor Obscenity Black comedy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 15:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Off-color humor 7 languages Add topic

