Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Family 3 References 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gillis Hooftman 3 languages Deutsch Nederlands Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch merchant, banker and shipbuilder (1521–1581) This article contains translated text and the factual accuracy of the translation should be checked by someone fluent in German and English.

( March 2025 ) Gillis Hooftman Gillis Hooftman (left) and Margaretha van Nispen, painting by Marten de Vos Born Gillis Hooftman van Eyckelberg c.

1521 Eupen , Habsburg Netherlands Died 19 January 1581 (aged 59–60) Antwerp , Spanish Netherlands Gillis Hooftman van Eyckelberg , ( German : Ägidius Hauptmann ; 1521 – 19 January 1581, Antwerp ) was a Dutch merchant, trader, banker, and shipbuilder from the Duchy of Limburg . Hooftman was one of richest men of his time in the prosperous city of Antwerp , the trading center of the Spanish Netherlands .

A medallion by Steven van Herwijck with a portrait of Gillis Hooftman Life and work [ edit ] Gillis Hooftman was the son of Erken (Arnold) Arnt Hauptmann (d. 1545), a bailiff of the Lathof in the Stockem neighborhood of Eupen, and of Tryntgen (Katharina) Hoesch. The family originated from the Rhineland , and its earlier name of Eichelberg was changed to a Limburger form, van Eyckelberg.

[ 1 ] A fiefdom in Eupen-Stockem named after Hauptmann, as is the "Hauptmann Column"  was erected to help travelers find their way through the marshlands of the High Fens.

The international trade in timber was the key to the success of his trading house. His business contacts reached as far as Russia, and eventually Hooftman was in a position to purchase several trading vessels. Sources state that Hooftman may have owned more than 100 ships at his peak. These ships sailed to ports in the Baltic Sea , and also pioneered Dutch trading with ports of the Arctic Ocean , and North Africa.

By 1559, Hooftman had become one of the richest men in Antwerp, and was living on the "Steenstraat", near the Het Steen fortress. In 1578 he bought the "Pulhof" quarter in Berchem, and in 1580, he acquired the Van Affinghem Abbey's retreat in the Mattestraat. That same year he also acquired the Cleydael Castle, and became the Landlord of Cleydael and Aartselaar . He became active in local politics, and for many years, he was a member of the Antwerp City Council.

Family [ edit ] Johanna Hooftman with husband Antonio Anselmo and two children. Painting by Marten de Vos Hooftman married three times.

Hooftman married firstly Maria Petitpas with no issue.

Hooftman married secondly his niece Anna van Achterhout (died 1562), the daughter of his brother Heinrich, with issue 4 children including: Johanna Hooftman (1555–97) who married the cloth merchant Antonio Anselmo. Martin de Vos painted portraits of the couple, which appear in the Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium in Brussels .

[ 2 ] On 14 February 1568 in Antwerp Cathedral, Hooftman married thirdly Margaretha van Nispen (1545–1598), a sister of Peter Paul Rubens ' brother-in-law, with issue 7 children including: Anna Hooftman who married firstly the financier Sir Horatio Palavicino (1540–1600) and secondly, as a widow, Sir Oliver Cromwell (cir 1562–1655, the uncle of the Lord Protector) Beatrice Eichelberg Hooftman (died 1644) who married Philips de Soete de Laecke, Heer van Villers On 19 January 1581, Hooftman died at Antwerp.

References [ edit ] Willi Berens: Ein großer Eupener: Gillis Hooftman In: Eupener Geschichts- und Museumsverein (Hrsg.): Geschichtliches Eupen.

Band II. Markus-Verlag, Eupen 1968. pp. 56–81 Notes [ edit ] ^ Genealogische Daten Gillia Hooftman , Geni.com (login required) ^ "De Gulden Passer. Jaargang 80 · DBNL" .

External links [ edit ] Kurzbiografie - A brief biography (in Dutch) Gillis Hooftman: Businessman and Patron Deux Médailles à l'Effigie de l'Armateur Anversois Gillis Hooftman (in French) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gillis_Hooftman&oldid=1286208063 " Categories : 16th-century Dutch businesspeople 1521 births 1581 deaths Dutch bankers Businesspeople from Antwerp People of the Eighty Years' War Dutch merchants Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles to be checked after translation Wikipedia articles to be checked after translation from German Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 12:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gillis Hooftman 3 languages Add topic

