Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Greater China 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština ChiShona Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Region with cultural ties to Chinese people Greater China Traditional Chinese 大中華 Simplified Chinese 大中华 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Dà Zhōnghuá Bopomofo ㄉㄚˋ ㄓㄨㄥˉ ㄏㄨㄚˊ Wade–Giles Ta 4 Chung 1 -hua 2 IPA [tâ.ʈʂʊ́ŋ.xwâ] Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Daai6 zung1 waa4 IPA [taj˨ tsʊŋ˥ wa˩] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Tāi Tiong-hôa In ethnogeography , " Greater China " is a loosely defined term that refers to the region sharing cultural and economic ties with the Chinese people , often used by international enterprises or organisations in unofficial usage.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ failed verification ] The notion contains a "great deal of ambiguity in its geographical coverage and politico-economic implications", [ 5 ] because some users use it to refer to "the commercial ties among ethnic Chinese, whereas others are more interested in cultural interactions, and still others in the prospects for political reunification".

[ 6 ] The term encompass "linkages among regional Chinese communities", [ 7 ] [ 8 ] but usually refers to an area encompassing the People’s Republic of China ( mainland China , Hong Kong , Macau ) and the Republic of China (known as Taiwan ), places where the majority population is culturally Chinese.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Some analysts may also include places which have predominantly ethnic Chinese population such as Singapore .

[ 11 ] The term's usage is contested; some observers in Taiwan characterise the term as harmful or a conflation of distinct polities and markets, [ 4 ] while the Chinese government has avoided it, either to allay fears of its economic expansionism or to avoid suggesting Taiwan (known as the Republic of China) and the People's Republic of China are on equal footing.

[ original research?

] Australian sinologist Wang Gungwu has characterised the concept as a "myth", and "wrong" if applied to overseas Chinese communities.

[ 12 ] Usage [ edit ] Multinational corporations frequently use the term when naming their headquarters in the region. For example, Procter & Gamble uses the term to name its regional headquarters in Guangzhou that also operates in Hong Kong and Taipei ; [ 13 ] Apple Inc.

uses it when referring to its regional headquarters in Shanghai .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The term is often used to avoid invoking sensitivities over the political status of Taiwan .

[ 16 ] Contrastingly, it has been used in reference to Chinese irredentism in nationalist contexts, such as the notion that China should reclaim its "lost territories" to create a Greater China.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] History [ edit ] Map from the 1944 American propaganda film The Battle of China , showing the territories of the Republic of China : China proper , Manchuria , Mongolia , Sinkiang , and Tibet Territories claimed by the Republic of China on a monument to Chiang Kai-shek in Wuqiu The term has been used for a long time, but with differing scopes and connotations.

During the 1930s, George Cressey , an American academic who did work for the US State Department throughout his career, used the term to refer to the entirety of the territory controlled by the Qing dynasty , as opposed to China proper .

[ 19 ] Usage by the United States on government maps in the 1940s as a political term included territories claimed by the Republic of China that were part of the previous Qing Empire, or geographically to refer to topographical features associated with China that may or may not have lain entirely within Chinese political borders.

[ 19 ] The concept began to appear again in Chinese-language sources in the late 1970s, referring to the growing commercial ties between the mainland and Hong Kong, with the possibility of extending these to Taiwan, with perhaps the first such reference being in a Taiwanese journal Changqiao in 1979.

[ 19 ] The English term subsequently re-emerged in the 1980s to refer to the growing economic ties between the regions as well as the possibility of political unification.

[ 19 ] It is not an institutionalized entity such as the EU , ASEAN , or AU . The concept is a generalization to group several markets seen to be closely linked economically and does not imply sovereignty .

[ 16 ] The concept does not always include Taiwan, for instance Cisco uses "Greater China and Taiwan" to refer to the market.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Adoption of Chinese literary culture Bamboo network Chinese expansionism Chinese imperialism Chinese irredentism Chinese nationalism Sinosphere Nanyang History of China List of tributaries of China Nine-dash line Sinocentrism Sinophone Greater Britain References [ edit ] ^ "Pact row could harm Greater China economic integration: ANZ" .

Focus Taiwan . 2 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 November 2018 .

^ MTV Channels In Southeast Asia and Greater China To Exclusively Air The Youth Inaugural Ball Archived 22 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine – MTV Asia ^ 1 June 2008, Universal Music Group realigns presence in Greater China Archived 14 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Television Asia ^ a b Lee, James (6 August 2021).

" 'Greater China' is a harmful myth" .

Taipei Times . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

^ Huang, Jianli (2010). "Conceptualizing Chinese Migration and Chinese Overseas: The Contribution of Wang Gungwu".

Journal of Chinese Overseas : 12.

^ Harding, Henry (1993). "The concept of "Greater China": Themes, variations and reservations".

The China Quarterly .

136 : 660– 686.

doi : 10.1017/S030574100003229X .

S2CID 154522700 .

^ William, Yat Wai Lo (2016).

"The concept of greater China in higher education: adoptions, dynamics and implications" .

Comparative Education .

52 : 26– 43.

doi : 10.1080/03050068.2015.1125613 .

However, some analysts see the Greater China concept as a way to summarise 'the linkages among the fair-flung international Chinese community', thereby incorporating Singapore and overseas Chinese communities in their usage of the term (Harding 1993, 660; also see Wang 1993).

^ Harding, Harry (December 1993).

"The Concept of "Greater China": Themes, Variations and Reservations*" .

The China Quarterly .

136 : 660– 686.

doi : 10.1017/S030574100003229X .

ISSN 1468-2648 .

S2CID 154522700 .

^ "Apple overtakes Lenovo in China sales" . Financial Times. 18 August 2011.

Archived from the original on 27 November 2011 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ 4月29日日间新闻摘要（大中华区） [29 April: Daily news summary (Greater China)].

Reuters (in Chinese). 29 April 2019.

^ William, Yat Wai Lo (2016).

"The concept of greater China in higher education: adoptions, dynamics and implications" .

Comparative Education .

52 : 26– 43.

doi : 10.1080/03050068.2015.1125613 .

This term can be narrowly defined as referring to a geographic concept that consists of the People's Republic of China, the Republic of China, the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and the Macau Special Administrative Region, where ethnic Chinese comprise the majority of the population. In this sense, the term is used to describe the ethnic and the associated political, economic and cultural ties among these Chinese societies (Harding 1993; Cheung 2013).

^ He, Henry Yuhuai (2001). "Greater China" 大中华 .

Dictionary of the Political Thought of the People's Republic of China . M. E. Sharpe. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 978-0-765-60569-6 .

^ "P&G in Greater China" .

www.pgcareers.com . Retrieved 16 March 2020 .

^ "Isabel Ge Mahe named Apple's managing director of Greater China" .

Apple Newsroom . Retrieved 16 March 2020 .

^ Dowell, Andrew; Mickle, Tripp (14 March 2020).

"Apple Closes All Its Stores Outside China Over Coronavirus" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 16 March 2020 .

^ a b Aretz, Tilman (2007).

The greater China factbook . Taipei: Taiwan Elite Press.

ISBN 978-986-7762-97-9 .

OCLC 264977502 .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2009.

^ Tseng, Hui-Yi (2017).

Revolution, State Succession, International Treaties and the Diaoyu/Diaoyutai Islands . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 66.

ISBN 9781443893688 .

^ Kim, Samuel S. (1979).

China, the United Nations, and World Order .

Princeton University Press . p.

43 .

ISBN 9780691100760 .

^ a b c d Harding, Harry (December 1993). "The Concept of 'Greater China': Themes, Variations and Reservations".

The China Quarterly .

136 (136, Special Issue: Greater China): 660– 686.

doi : 10.1017/S030574100003229X .

S2CID 154522700 .

^ "The Rundown: Pegatron's Tesla Ambitions, Tech Sector Bonuses, and Cisco's New Software Center" .

topics.amcham.com.tw . Taiwan Topics. 18 January 2021 . Retrieved 18 January 2021 .

v t e Cross-strait relations Diplomatic posts Hong Kong Economic, Trade and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Hong Kong Macau Economic and Cultural Office (Taiwan) Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Macau Diplomacy Opening of the South-North route Restoration of Taiwan strait shipping Kinmen Agreement Wang–Koo summit Cross-strait charter 2004 Taiwanese cross-strait relations referendum May 17 Statement 2005 Pan–Blue visits to mainland China Cross-strait high-level talks First Chen–Chiang summit Second Chen–Chiang summit Fourth Chen–Chiang summit Fifth Chen–Chiang summit Sixth Chen–Chiang summit Seventh Chen–Chiang summit Tuan Tuan and Yuan Yuan Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait CEO Summit Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Jinjiang–Kinmen Pipeline 2014 Wang–Zhang meetings 2015 Xi–Chu meeting First Ma–Xi meeting Straits Forum Shanghai-Taipei City Forum Second Ma–Xi meeting Conflicts Chinese Civil War Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Retreat of the government of the Republic of China to Taiwan Guanbi policy First Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Battle of Dong-Yin Battle of Dongshan Battle of East Chongwu Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Senkaku Islands Dispute Incidents Capture of the Tuapse Kashmir Princess United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 Joint Communiqué on the Establishment of Diplomatic Relations CAAC Flight 296 China Airlines Flight 334 1987 Lieyu massacre Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Min Ping Yu No. 5202 1990 Guangzhou Baiyun airport collisions Qiandao Lake incident China Airlines Flight 611 Sunflower Student Movement Braga incident Anti-Black Box Curriculum Movement Wang Liqiang Freedom pineapples 2021 Solomon Islands unrest Chinese military exercises around Taiwan 2022 2023 2024 2025 Taiwan Exercise 2024 Kinmen Chinese motorboat capsizing incident Legislation Cross-Strait Act Proposed National Unification Promotion Law Anti-Secession Law Anti-Infiltration Act Organizations All-China Federation of Taiwan Compatriots Alumni Association of Huangpu Military Academy Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Association for Tourism Exchange Across the Taiwan Straits Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs China Council for the Promotion of Peaceful National Reunification Cross-Straits Common Market Foundation Cross-Strait Economic, Trade and Culture Forum Cross-Strait Peace Forum Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Institute of Taiwan Studies Lienchiang Cross-Strait Matters Forum Mainland Affairs Council National Unification Council Straits Exchange Foundation Taiwan Affairs Office Taiwan.cn Taiwan Competitiveness Forum Taiwan Strait Tourism Association Concepts 1992 Consensus Both sides of the Taiwan Strait are one family China Circle Chinese unification Chinese nationalism Chinese irredentism Chinese Taipei Cross-Strait Economic Zone Dang Guo Deng's Six Conceptions Four Noes and One Without Fujian Demonstration Zone Greater China Han chauvinism Hu's Four Points Hu's Six Points Jiang's Eight Points Message to Compatriots in Taiwan Never promise to renounce the use of force One China One China framework One China principle One-China policy One Country on Each Side One country, two systems Propaganda in China Cross-strait propaganda Qian's Seven Points Republic of China on Taiwan Self-determination Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Socialism with Chinese characteristics Special non-state-to-state relations Six Assurances Taiwan, China Two Chinas Three Noes Three Links Taiwan consensus Taiwan independence movement Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan United front in Taiwan Under the Roof of One China Xi Jinping Thought Xi's Five Points Ye's Nine Points White Paper on the Taiwan Question Zhonghua minzu Related Fujian–Taiwan relationship Hong Kong–Taiwan relations Hong Kong–Taiwan Economic and Cultural Co-operation and Promotion Council Taiwan–Hong Kong Economic and Cultural Co-operation Council Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Pro-ROC camp Macau–Taiwan relations Chinese Travel Document Taiwan Entry Permit Mainland Travel Permit for Taiwan Resident Cross-strait language database ECFA Debate Geostrategy in Taiwan HMS Aurora (12) China and the United Nations China and the World Bank Chinese intelligence activity abroad Chinese information operations and information warfare Chinese Soviet Republic Freedom of religion in China Foreign relations of China Timeline of diplomatic relations with China Opinion polling on Taiwanese identity Political status of Taiwan Foreign relations of Taiwan Timeline of diplomatic relations of Taiwan Anti-Communist Hero Milk Tea Alliance Taishang G3 Beijing–Taipei Expressway G99 Taiwan Ring Expressway China National Highway 228 (Taiwan) Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs Commission Tibet Religious Foundation of His Holiness the Dalai Lama The World Turned Upside Down Go and Reclaim the Mainland Pro–Republic of China sentiment 2045 Reversed Front Zero Day Attack Category:Cross-strait relations v t e Pan-nationalist concepts Ideas Atlanticism Afghan-Pakistani unionism Austro-Slavism Berberism Bulgarian-Romanian unionism Canada-USA unionism Centralamericanism Czechoslovakism Dutch-Indonesian unionism Enosis Estonian-Finnish unionism Eurasianism Fertile Crescent unionism Gaucho traditionalism [ pt ] Greek-Yugoslavian unionism Hungarian-Romanian unionism Gran Colombia unionism Indian-Pakistani Unionism Israeli-Palestinian unionism Latinoamericanism [ es ] Hellenoturkism Hispanoamericanism [ es ] League of East European States Miatsum Neo-Ottomanism One China Romanian-Moldovan unionism Pan-Africanism Union of African States Mali Federation Sahel-Benin Union Pan-Americanism Pan-Andinism [ es ] Ecuadorian-Peruvian-Bolivian unionism Peruvian-Bolivian unionism [ es ] Pan-Arabism Hashemite unionism United Arab States United Arab Republic Federation of Arab Republics Libyan-Syrian Union Arab Islamic Republic Jordania-Palestine unionism Union of Arab Republics (1972) Iraq-Kuwait unionism Pan-Asianism Pan-Caribbean Pan-Caucasianism Pan-Celticism Pan-Europeanism European unionism Pan-European nationalism Pan-Finnicism Pan-Ugrism Pan-Germanism Panhispanism Pan-Huiism Pan-Iberism Pan-Indianism Pan-Iranism Pan-Islamism Pan-Latinism Mediterraneanism Pan-Mongolism Pan-Oceanianism Polish-Czechoslovak unionism Polish-Lithuanian-Belarusian-Ukrainian unionism Polish-Lithuanian-Ruthenian unionism Reintegrationism Saint Martin unionism Scandinavism Pan-Slavism Pan-Tatarism [ ru ; tt ] Pan-Turkism Rattachism Rhodesia-Nyasaland unionism Soviet reunificationism Switzerland expansion Turanism Hungarian Turanism Yugoslavism Territorial concepts Abya Yala African federation Anglosphere Anglo-American unificationism Antillean Confederation Arab Union Arab world Assyria Balkan Federation Baltoscandia Basque Country Benelux unification British unionism Imperial Federation Cascadia movement Catalan Countries Celtic union Cossackia Danubian Confederation [ de ] East African Federation Federalisation of the European Union Greater Cambodia Caribbean Antilles West Indies Federation Franco-British Union Gran Colombia Greater Albania Unification of Albania and Kosovo Greater Argentina Greater Belarus Greater Bosnia Greater Bulgaria Greater China Greater Croatia Eritrean national identity nationalism Ethiopian national identity nationalism Greater Finland Galicia irredenta Greater Hungary Greater India Greater Indonesia Greater Iran Greater Iraq Greater Israel Greater Italy Greater Mauritania Greater Mexico Greater Moldova Greater Morocco Greater Nepal Greater Netherlands Greater Norway Greater Palestine Greater Poland Greater Portugal [ pt ] Greater Romania Greater Russia Greater Samoa Greater Serbia Greater Somalia Greater Spain Greater Syria Greater Tamil Nadu Great Timor Greater Ukraine Greater Vietnam Greater Yemen Greater Yugoslavia Hispanidad Indosphere Intermarium United States of Poland North American Union Latin Africa Lusosphere Malay world Maphilindo Megali Idea (Greece) Misak-ı Millî (Turkey) Kurdistan Occitania Padanian nationalism Pashtunistan Patria Grande Polynesian confederation Russian world Sahel Confederation Senegambia Confederation Sinosphere Tamazgha Triune Russia Union State United Armenia United Ireland United Macedonia Upper Peru Whole Azerbaijan Turan Zambesia Pan-ethnic groups Latinos , Hispanic peoples Habesha peoples Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greater_China&oldid=1304952572 " Categories : Chinese nationalism Country classifications Cross-strait relations Cultural regions Geography of China Historical regions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2025 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from June 2025 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 04:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greater China 35 languages Add topic

