Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mineral estate 2 Types of mineral estate Toggle Types of mineral estate subsection 2.1 Unified estate 2.2 Severed/split estate 2.3 Fractional ownership 3 Severed/split estate 4 Major elements 5 Leasing Toggle Leasing subsection 5.1 Ownership 5.2 Leasing 5.3 Division order 5.4 Oil and gas lease 5.5 Royalty check 6 Surface use agreement 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Mineral rights 5 languages Deutsch فارسی 日本語 Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Property rights to exploit an area for the minerals This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mineral rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mineral rights are property rights to exploit an area for the minerals it harbors. Mineral rights can be separate from property ownership (see Split estate ).  Mineral rights can refer to sedentary minerals that do not move below the Earth's surface or fluid minerals such as oil or natural gas.

[ 1 ] There are three major types of mineral property: unified estate, severed or split estate, and fractional ownership of minerals.

[ 1 ] Mineral estate [ edit ] Owning mineral rights (often referred to as a "mineral interest" or a "mineral estate") gives the owner the right to exploit, mine, or produce any or all minerals they own.

Minerals can refer to oil, gas, coal, metal ores, stones, sands, or salts. An owner of mineral rights may sell, lease, or donate those minerals to any person or company as they see fit. Mineral interests can be owned by private landowners, private companies, or federal, state or local governments.  Sorting these rights are a large part of mineral exploration.  A brief outline of rights and responsibilities of parties involved can be found here.

[ 2 ] Types of mineral estate [ edit ] Unified estate [ edit ] Unified estates, sometimes referred to as "fee simple" or "unified tenure" mean that the surface and mineral rights are not severed.

[ 3 ] Severed/split estate [ edit ] This type of estate occurs when mineral and surface ownership are separated.  This can occur from prior ownership of mineral rights or is commonly performed when land is passed between family generations.  Today corporations own a significant portion of mineral rights beneath private individuals.

[ 3 ] Fractional ownership [ edit ] Here a percentage of the mineral property is owned by two or more entities.  This can occur when owners leave fractions of the rights to multiple children or grandchildren.

[ 3 ] Severed/split estate [ edit ] Mineral estates can be severed, or separated, from surface estates. There are two main avenues to mineral rights severance: the surface property may be sold and the minerals retained, or the minerals may be sold and the surface property retained, though the former is more common.

[ 4 ] When mineral rights have been severed from the surface rights (or property rights), it is referred to as a "split estate." In a split estate, the owner of the mineral rights has the right to develop those minerals, regardless of who owns the surface rights.  This is because in United States law, mineral rights trump surface rights.

[ 5 ] The U.S. historical precedent for this severance roots from western expansion and The Land Ordinance Act of 1785 and The Northwest Ordinance Act of 1789 at the cost of dispossessed Natives.

[ 5 ] Severability was further reinforced by the Homestead Act of 1862 (OHA) and the 1862 Railroad Act.

[ 5 ] Agricultural patents and the California gold rush of 1848 began placing lands that were mineral abundant into private hands and furthered the precedent of mineral rights outweighing surface rights.

[ 5 ] This was a crucial step in the development of an economic system based largely on private incentives and market transactions.

[ 6 ] An early case involving a property dispute between a father and son involving ownership of coal veins in Pennsylvania is cited stating; “One who has the exclusive right to mine coal upon a tract of land has the right of possession even as against the owner of the soil, so far as it is necessary to carry on mining operations.” (Turner v. Reynolds, 1854).  A later case in Texas in 1862 set precedent by stating “it is a well-established doctrine from the earliest days of the common law, that the right to the minerals thus reserved carries with it the right to enter, dig and carry them away." (Cowan v. Hardeman, 1862).  Some may argue that the U.S. justice system's enabling of this precedent is further exacerbated by industry lobbying that enables the status quo of favoring oil and gas development vs other innovations.

[ 5 ] This severability can create tension between mineral rights owners and surface rights owners if the surface rights owners do not want to allow the mineral rights owners to use their property to access their minerals.

[ 7 ] This is becoming ever more present in the light of recent unconventional oil and gas development (UOGD) made feasible by technological advancement such as hydraulic fracturing .

[ 5 ] Problems include water pollution, fluid storage issues and surface damages.  These are especially common in the West Virginia gas wells of the Marcellus Shale.

[ 7 ] Often, companies will offer a surface rights owner a surface use agreement, which can provide financial compensation to the surface owner, or more commonly, offer some concessions on how the minerals are accessed. For example, some surface use agreements require the company to access the property from specific roads or points on the property.

A major issue involving fluid mineral rights is the "rule of capture" whereby minerals capable of migrating beneath the Earth's surface can be extracted, even if the original source was another person's mineral property.

[ 8 ] Such claims typically are protected by various states' oil and gas regulatory agencies whose broader mandate is to promote conservation and minimize conflicts between mineral owners.

[ 8 ] Major elements [ edit ] The five elements of a mineral right are: [ 9 ] The right to use as much of the surface as is reasonably necessary to access the minerals The right to further convey rights The right to receive bonus consideration [ 10 ] The right to receive delay rentals [ 11 ] The right to receive royalties The owner of a mineral interest may separately convey any or all of the above-listed interests. Minerals may be possessed as a life estate , which does not permit a person to sell them, but merely that they own the minerals so long as they live.  After this, the rights revert to a predesignated entity, such as a specific organization or person.

It is possible for a mineral right owner to sever and sell an oil and gas royalty interest, while keeping the other mineral rights. In such case, if the oil lease expires, the royalty interest is extinguished, its purchaser has nothing, and the mineral owner still owns the minerals.

Leasing [ edit ] An owner of mineral rights may choose to lease those mineral rights to a company for development at any point. Signing a lease signals that both parties agree to the terms laid out in the lease. Lease terms typically include a price to be paid to the mineral rights owner for the minerals to be extracted, and a set of circumstances under which those minerals are to be extracted. For instance, a mineral rights owner might request that the company minimize any noise and light pollution when extracting the minerals. Leases are usually term-limited, meaning the company has a limited amount of time to develop the resources; if they do not begin development within that time-frame they forfeit their right to extract those minerals.

The four components of mineral rights leasing are: [ 12 ] Ownership Leasing The division order The royalty check Ownership [ edit ] There are three distinct but related aspects of ownership. They are: [ 13 ] Legal description Net mineral acres Ownership type Leasing [ edit ] To bring oil and gas reserves to market, minerals are conveyed for a specified time to oil companies through a legally binding contract known as a lease. This arrangement between individual mineral owners and oil companies began prior to 1900 [ clarification needed ] and still thrives today. Before exploration can begin, the mineral owner (lessor) and the oil company (lessee) must agree to certain terms regarding the rights, privileges and obligations of the respective parties during the exploration and possible production stages.

Although there are numerous other important details, the basic structure of the lease is straightforward: in exchange for an up-front lease bonus payment, plus a royalty percentage of the value of any production, the mineral owner grants the oil company the right to drill for a period of time, known as the primary term. If the term of the oil or gas lease extends beyond the primary term, and a well was not drilled, then the Lessee is required to pay the lessor a delay rental. This delay rental could be $1 or more per acre. In some cases, no drilling occurs and the lease simply expires.

The duration of the lease may be extended when drilling or production starts. This enters into the period of time known as the secondary term, which applies for as long as oil and gas is produced in paying quantities.

[ 14 ] Division order [ edit ] A division order is not a contract. It is a stipulation, derived from the lease agreement and other agreements, as to what the operator of a well or an oil or gas purchaser will disburse in terms of revenue to the mineral owner and others. The purpose of the division order is to show how the mineral revenues are divided up between the oil company, the owners of the mineral rights (royalty owners) and the overriding royalty interest owners.
The division order needs a signature, a current address and social security number for individual royalty owners or tax identification number for companies.

Oil and gas lease [ edit ] An oil and gas lease is a contract because it contains consideration, consent, legal tangible items and competency.

The term of the lease. Usually there is a primary term and a secondary term. Each term has conditions set up either by the lessor or lessee to fulfill.

The royalty rate. This is how the rates are divided and how it is calculated from the revenues produced from the mineral rights.

If the lessor receives a bonus If there is a delay rental agreement—any delay in production by the lessee for a negotiated period, the lessee can pay the lessor a negotiated amount of money per year to keep the contract active If there is a "shut-in royalty" agreement—royalties are paid at a negotiated rate per acre, only while the well is not producing oil or gas Many other line items can be negotiated by the time the contract is complete. The rights of all parties are defined in agreements; and, when mineral production begins, the division order states how much revenue goes to each party involved.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Royalty check [ edit ] Mineral owners may receive a monthly royalty check if oil, gas, or any other substances of value are extracted from below the surface and either sold or used by an oil and gas operating company. Royalty statements include the production and revenue figures for both the individual owner and the entire well. The royalty paid is a function of the net value of the proceeds from the sale of the oil, gas, or other substance, multiplied by the owner's revenue interest decimal, less any amounts deducted for taxes or other deductions.

[ 17 ] The revenue decimal used to calculate the amount of an owner's royalty check is calculated with the following equation: [ 18 ] A = Net mineral acres owned U = Number of mineral acres in the oil and gas drilling unit or pool R = The royalty assigned to the mineral rights owner by the oil and gas lease covering the minerals P = Participation factor assigned to the tracts owned by the mineral owner as described in a unit agreement Y = Additional ownership factor assigned to the owner's mineral rights by any other arrangement or agreement D = Deductions Revenue interest decimal = ( A ÷ ÷ U ) × × R × × ( P × × Y − − D ) {\displaystyle =(A\div U)\times R\times (P\times Y-D)} It is common for royalty checks to fluctuate between pay periods due to monthly changes in oil or gas prices, or changes in the volumes produced by the associated oil or gas wells.  Additionally, royalties may cease altogether if the associated wells quit producing marketable quantities of oil or gas, if the operating company has changed hands and the new operator has not yet established a new payment account for the owner, or if the operating company or product purchaser is missing appropriate paperwork or proper documentation of changes in ownership or contact information.

[ 19 ] Surface use agreement [ edit ] A surface use agreement (SUA) is a contract between a property owner and a mineral rights holder that dictates how the mineral rights are to be developed.

[ 20 ] Meaning, when mineral rights are extracted by a company that does not own the property above where the minerals are located, the company has the legal right to extract those minerals regardless. However, companies will often enter into voluntary negotiations with the surface rights owner to ensure that the operations all go smoothly. In such cases, the company will offer a SUA, in which property owners may ask for financial compensation or other concessions regarding how the minerals are extracted. See sample.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Look up concession in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Air rights Bergregal - mining rights in Europe Environmental impact assessment Easement General Mining Act of 1872 Land rights Mining law Oil and gas law in the United States Split estate Stock-Raising Homestead Act of 1916 Water rights References [ edit ] ^ a b Fitzgerald, Timothy (January 2017).

"Understanding Mineral Rights" (PDF) .

msuextension.org .

^ Environmental Quality Council, The brochure reflects Montana law as ofOctober 1, 2013. (2013).

"A Guide to Split Estates in Oil and Gas Development" (PDF) .

leg.mt.gov .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Fitzgerald, Timothy (January 2017).

"Understanding Mineral Rights" .

msuextension.org .

^ Fambrough, J., 2009.

Minerals, surface rights and royalty payments . Real Estate Center, Texas A&M University, Technical Report 840 ^ a b c d e f Ryder, Stacia S.; Hall, Peter M. (2017). "This land is your land, maybe: A historical institutionalist analysis for contextualizing split estate conflicts in U.S. unconventional oil and gas development".

Land Use Policy .

63 : 149– 159.

Bibcode : 2017LUPol..63..149R .

doi : 10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.01.006 .

ISSN 0264-8377 .

^ Libecap, Gary D. (1978). "Economic Variables and the Development of the Law: The Case of Western Mineral Rights".

The Journal of Economic History .

38 (2): 338– 362.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050700105121 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

S2CID 154319708 .

^ a b Collins, A. R.; Nkansah, K. (2015-10-07). "Divided Rights, Expanded Conflict: Split Estate Impacts on Surface Owner Perceptions of Shale Gas Drilling".

Land Economics .

91 (4): 688– 703.

doi : 10.3368/le.91.4.688 .

ISSN 0023-7639 .

S2CID 154383113 .

^ a b Fitzgerald, Timothy (January 2017).

"Understanding Mineral Rights" (PDF) .

msuextension.org .

^ "Mineral Rights 101 - Infinity Resources" .

www.infinityresourcesco.com .

^ "Oil and Gas Lease Bonus" .

marcellusmineralowners.com . 17 July 2014.

^ "delay rental - Schlumberger Oilfield Glossary" .

www.glossary.oilfield.slb.com .

^ "Mineral Rights 101 | Infinity Resources" .

infinityresourcesco.com . Retrieved 2023-07-28 .

^ Stafford, Jim (1981).

Look Before You Lease . Roar Press. p. 31.

^ Wagner, Bret.

"Introduction to Mineral Rights Leasing" .

Mineral Rights Coach . Bret Wagner . Retrieved 30 December 2012 .

^ "Lease & Division Orders - San Saba" .

sansabaroyalty.com .

^ "Division Order – Understanding Oil and Gas Division Orders" .

www.mineralweb.com .

^ "How to Read Oil and Gas Royalty Statements" .

Blue Mesa Minerals . Retrieved 5 August 2019 .

^ "Understanding Operator Royalty Checks" . Caddo Minerals . Retrieved 6 May 2016 .

^ "Oil and Gas Royalty Calculator" .

Mineral Rights Resources . PA Gas Lease Forum . Retrieved 19 Jul 2019 .

^ "Surface Use Agreements: What They Are and How To Get One - Texas Agriculture Law" .

agrilife.org . 20 January 2015.

^ "Texas Sample Oil & Gas Lease and Surface Use Agreement - Earthworks" .

earthworksaction.org . 9 June 2011.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Mining Claim ".

How to File a US Federal Mining Claim ' War Brewing' over Mining Rights in Rural BC , TheTyee.ca, June 14, 2006 Surface Rights vs. Mineral Rights What Is A Mining Claim, Legally?

v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National Japan Other NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mineral_rights&oldid=1285669540 " Categories : Real property law Mining law and governance Oil and gas law Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2014 This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mineral rights 5 languages Add topic

