Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 The site 4 Famous residents Toggle Famous residents subsection 4.1 Coins 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Velia 46 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Corsu Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Magyar მარგალური مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°09′39″N 15°09′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.16083°N 15.15500°E ﻿ / 40.16083; 15.15500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Classical city ruins in Italy For other uses, see Velia (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Velia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Velia Ancient Greek : Ὑέλη, Ελέα View of the excavations and the tower at Velia Shown within Italy Alternative name Hyele, Ele, Elea Location Velia, Province of Salerno , Campania , Italy Region Magna Graecia Coordinates 40°09′39″N 15°09′18″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.16083°N 15.15500°E ﻿ / 40.16083; 15.15500 Type city History Builder Settlers from Phocaea Founded Between 538 and 535 BC Associated with Parmenides , Zeno , Statius Site notes Website Parco archeologico di Elea-Velia (in Italian) UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park with the Archaeological Sites of Paestum and Velia, and the Certosa di Padula Type Cultural Criteria iii, iv Designated 1998 (22nd session ) Reference no.

842 Region Europe and North America Velia was the Roman name of an ancient city on the coast of the Tyrrhenian Sea . It is located near the modern village of Novi Velia near Ascea in the Province of Salerno , Italy.

It was founded by Greeks from Phocaea as Hyele ( Ancient Greek : Ὑέλη ) around 538–535 BC. The name later changed to Ele and then Elea ( / ˈ ɛ l i ə / ; Ancient Greek : Ἐλέα ) before it became known by its current Latin and Italian name during the Roman era.

The city was known for being the home of the philosophers Parmenides and Zeno of Elea , as well as the Eleatic school of which they were a part.

Geography [ edit ] The site of the acropolis of ancient Elea was once a promontory called Castello a Mare, meaning "castle on the sea" in Italian. It now lies inland and was renamed Castellammare della Bruca in the Middle Ages . The city later developed on the coastal plain below.

History [ edit ] The Porta Rosa , of sandstone blocks, is a rare exemplar of a Greek arch, circa 4th century BC According to Herodotus , in 545 BC Ionian Greeks fled Phocaea , in modern Turkey, which was being besieged by the Persians.

[ citation needed ] After some wanderings (8 to 10 years) at sea, they stopped in Reggio Calabria , where they were probably joined by Xenophanes , who was at the time at Messina , and then moved north along the coast and founded the town of Hyele. According to Virgil , [ 1 ] Velia is the place where the body of Palinurus washed ashore.

[ 2 ] Around the 5th century BC, the city was known for its flourishing trade relations. It also took on considerable cultural importance for its pre-Socratic philosophical school, known as the Eleatic School , founded by Parmenides and carried forward by his student Zeno , famous for his paradoxes.

In the 4th century it entered the league of cities committed to stopping the advance of the Lucanians , who had already occupied nearby Poseidonia ( Paestum ) and were threatening Elea.

It joined an alliance with Rome in 273 BC and was included in the ancient province of Lucania .

[ citation needed ] Elea had excellent relations with Rome: it supplied ships for the Punic wars (3rd-2nd century) and sent young priestesses for the cult of Demeter (Ceres), coming from the local aristocratic families. It became a holiday and health resort for Roman aristocrats, perhaps also thanks to the presence of the medical-philosophical school.

In 88 BC Elea was ascribed to the Romilia tribe, becoming a Roman municipium with the name of Velia, but with the right to maintain the Greek language and to mint its own coins. In the second half of the 1st century BC it served as a naval base, first for Brutus (44 BC) and then for Octavian (38 BC). The prosperity of the city continued until the end of the 1st century AD, when numerous villas and small settlements were built, together with new public buildings and thermae, but the progressive silting up of the port led the city to progressive isolation and impoverishment.

From the end of the imperial age, the last inhabitants were forced to take refuge in the upper part of the Acropolis to escape the advancement of marshy land.

The site [ edit ] Roman baths Remains of the city walls can be seen, with traces of one gate and several towers, of a total length of over three miles, and belong to three different periods, in all of which the local crystalline limestone is used.

Bricks with Greek brick-stamps were also employed in later times of a unique shape, each having two rectangular channels on one side.

There are remains of cisterns.

[ 3 ] In 2022, excavations led to the discovery of the archaic temple of Athena on the acropolis of Velia. The oldest temple dates to 540-530 BC, the years following the battle of Alalia .

[ 4 ] Two well-preserved bronze Greek helmets with Etruscan design found there including metal fragments from weapons thought to be offerings to the goddess after the battle.

[ 5 ] The temple visible today on the Acropolis dates to the Hellenistic period.

[ 6 ] The Porta Rosa road was the main street of Elea, circa 4th-3rd centuries BC The medieval tower of Velia built out of a Greek temple Famous residents [ edit ] The father of the Roman poet Publius Papinius Statius was born in Hyele ( Silv 5.3.127).

Parmenides , philosopher and founder of the Eleatics Zeno of Elea , Eleatic philosopher known for his paradoxes Wikimedia Commons has media related to Velia (town) .

Coins [ edit ] Drachma , circa 535-510 BC Stater struck 334-300 BC Silver coin from Velia, circa 280 BC, with Athena on the obverse, and a lion devouring a stag on the reverse See also [ edit ] List of ancient Greek cities References [ edit ] ^ Virgil, Book 6 Aeneid ^ Frederick Ahl (trans.), ed. (2007).

Virgil's Aeneid . Oxford UP. pp.

139– 40.

ISBN 978-0-19-923195-9 .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Ashby, Thomas (1911). " Velia ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 978.

^ Acropoli di Velia: riemerge il tempio arcaico di Atena https://www.classicult.it/acropoli-di-velia-tempio-arcaico-di-atena/ ^ D'emilio, Frances.

"Ancient helmets, temple ruins found at dig in southern Italy" .

phys.org . Retrieved 2022-02-27 .

^ Wolf, Markus (2023).

Hellenistische Heiligtümer in Kampanien. Sakralarchitektur im Grenzgebiet zwischen Großgriechenland und Rom [Hellenistic sanctuaries in Campania. Sacred architecture in the border region between Greater Greece and Rome]. DAI Rom Sonderschriften, vol. 26. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, ISBN 978-3-447-11940-5 , pp. 71-76.

External links [ edit ] Official website Archived 2022-04-23 at the Wayback Machine (in Italian) Cilento National Park website (in Italian) v t e Archaeological sites in Campania Province of Avellino Aeclanum Aequum Tuticum Compsa Province of Benevento Benevento Arch of Trajan Roman Theatre Caudium Ligures Baebiani Saticula Province of Caserta Allifae Ausona Calatia Cales Santa Maria Capua Vetere Arch of Hadrian (Capua) Amphitheatre of Capua Casilinum Sant'Angelo in Formis Sinuessa Trebula Balliensis Vescia Province of Naples Atella Baiae Cumae Grotta di Cocceio Herculaneum Villa of the Papyri Liternum Miseno Piscina Mirabilis Naples Aqua Augusta Bourbon Tunnel Catacombs of San Gaudioso Catacombs of San Gennaro Crypta Neapolitana Virgil's tomb Macellum of Naples Oplontis Villa Poppaea Palazzo a Mare Pompeii Pozzuoli Flavian Amphitheater (Pozzuoli) Lucrinus Lacus Lake Avernus Macellum of Pozzuoli Portus Julius Stabiae Suessula Castello Barbarossa Villa of Augustus Villa Jovis Villa Boscoreale Province of Salerno Monte Pruno Paestum Heraion at the mouth of the Sele Temple of Athena Second Temple of Hera Tomb of the Diver Pertosa Caves Velia Villa Romana of Minori v t e Towns, villages and zones of Cilentan Coast Torre Kernot Laura Paestum Licinella Mattine Agropoli Tresino Santa Maria San Marco Licosa Ogliastro Marina Case del Conte Agnone Cilento Mezzatorre Acciaroli Pioppi Marina di Casalvelino Velia Marina di Ascea Marina di Pisciotta Caprioli Palinuro Cape Palinuro Marina di Camerota Porto Infreschi Scario Policastro Bussentino Capitello Villammare Sapri v t e World Heritage Sites in Italy Northwest Crespi d'Adda Genoa Historic center Ivrea Mantua and Sabbioneta Monte San Giorgio 1 Porto Venere , Palmaria , Tino and Tinetto , Cinque Terre Residences of the Royal House of Savoy Rhaetian Railway in the Albula / Bernina Landscapes 1 Rock Drawings in Valcamonica Sacri Monti of Piedmont and Lombardy Santa Maria delle Grazie, Milan Vineyard Landscape of Piedmont : Langhe - Roero and Monferrato Northeast Aquileia The Dolomites Ferrara Le Colline del Prosecco di Conegliano e Valdobbiadene Modena Cathedral , Torre della Ghirlandina and Piazza Grande, Modena Orto botanico di Padova Padua's fourteenth-century fresco cycles Porticoes of Bologna Ravenna Venice Verona City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto Central Assisi and Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Etruscan Necropolises of Cerveteri and Tarquinia Great Spa Towns of Europe - Montecatini Terme Florence Hadrian's Villa Medici villas Piazza del Duomo, Pisa Pienza Rome 2 San Gimignano Siena Urbino Val d'Orcia Villa d'Este South Alberobello Amalfi Coast Appian Way (with Via Traiana ) Castel del Monte, Apulia Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park , Paestum and Velia , Certosa di Padula Herculaneum Oplontis and Villa Poppaea Naples Historic Centre Royal Palace of Caserta , Aqueduct of Vanvitelli and San Leucio Complex Pompeii Sassi di Matera Islands Aeolian Islands Arab-Norman Palermo and the Cathedral Churches of Cefalù and Monreale Archaeological Area of Agrigento Barumini nuraghes Domus de Janas Mount Etna Syracuse and Necropolis of Pantalica Val di Noto Villa Romana del Casale Countrywide Longobards in Italy, Places of Power (568–774 A.D.) Brescia Cividale del Friuli Castelseprio Spoleto Temple of Clitumnus located at Campello sul Clitunno Santa Sofia located at Benevento Sanctuary of Monte Sant'Angelo located at Monte Sant'Angelo Prehistoric pile dwellings around the Alps 3 Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe 4 Venetian Works of Defence between 15th and 17th centuries 5 Bergamo Palmanova Peschiera del Garda 1 with Switzerland 2 with the Holy See 3 with Austria , France , Germany , Slovenia , and Switzerland 4 with 17 other countries 5 with Croatia and Montenegro v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Velia&oldid=1303104060 " Categories : Populated places established in the 6th century BC Phocaean colonies Ionian colonies in Magna Graecia Roman towns and cities in Magna Grecia World Heritage Sites in Italy Frazioni of the Province of Salerno Localities of Cilento Former populated places in Italy Greek colonies in Lucania Archaeological sites in Campania Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Italy National museums of Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with Italian-language sources (it) All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 03:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Velia 46 languages Add topic

