Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Centrifuge tubes 3 Safety 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Laboratory centrifuge 6 languages العربية Čeština Igbo 日本語 کوردی Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Equipment to spin liquid samples at high speed This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Laboratory centrifuge" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Laboratory centrifuge A Hettich tabletop laboratory centrifuge Uses Separation Related items Gas centrifuge Ultracentrifuge A laboratory centrifuge is a piece of laboratory equipment , driven by a motor, which spins liquid samples at high speed. 
There are various types of centrifuges, depending on the size and the sample capacity.

[ 1 ] Like all other centrifuges , laboratory centrifuges work by the sedimentation principle , where the centripetal acceleration is used to separate substances of greater and lesser density.

Types [ edit ] Laboratory centrifuge There are various types of centrifugation: Differential centrifugation , often used to separate certain organelles from whole cells for further analysis of specific parts of cells Isopycnic centrifugation , often used to isolate nucleic acids such as DNA Sucrose gradient centrifugation , often used to purify enveloped viruses and ribosomes, and also to separate cell organelles from crude cellular extracts There are different types of laboratory centrifuges: Microcentrifuges devices for small tubes from 0.2 ml to 2.0 ml (micro tubes), up to 96 well-plates, compact design, small footprint; up to 30,000 g Clinical centrifuges moderate-speed devices used for clinical applications like blood collection tubes Multipurpose high-speed centrifuges devices for a broad range of tube sizes, high variability, big footprint Ultracentrifuges analytical and preparative models Because of the heat generated by air friction (even in ultracentrifuges, where the rotor operates in a good vacuum), and the frequent necessity of maintaining samples at a given temperature, many types of laboratory centrifuges are refrigerated and temperature regulated.

Centrifuge tubes [ edit ] Centrifuge tubes are precision-made, high-strength tubes of glass or plastic made to fit exactly in rotor cavities. They may vary in capacity from 50 mL down to much smaller capacities used in microcentrifuges used extensively in molecular biology laboratories.  Microcentrifuges typically accommodate disposable plastic microcentrifuge tubes with capacities from 250 μL to 2.0 mL .

Glass centrifuge tubes can be used with most solvents, but tend to be more expensive. They can be cleaned like other laboratory glassware , and can be sterilized by autoclaving . Small scratches from careless handling can cause failure under the strong forces imposed during a run.  Glass tubes are inserted into soft rubber sleeves to cushion them during runs.  Plastic centrifuge tubes, especially tend to be less expensive and, with care, can be just as durable as glass. Water is preferred when plastic centrifuge tubes are used. They are more difficult to clean thoroughly, and are usually inexpensive enough to be considered disposable.

Disposable plastic "microlitre tubes" of 0.5ml to 2ml are commonly used in microcentrifuges. They are molded from a flexible transparent plastic similar to polythene , are semi-conical in shape, with integral, hinged sealing caps.

Larger samples are spun using centrifuge bottles, which range in capacity from 250 to 1000 millilitres. Although some are made of heavy glass, centrifuge bottles are usually made of shatterproof plastics such as polypropylene or polycarbonate. Sealing closures may be used for added leak-proof assurance.

Safety [ edit ] An Eppendorf laboratory centrifuge The load in a laboratory centrifuge must be carefully balanced. This is achieved by using a combination of samples and balance tubes which all have the same weight or by using various balancing patterns without balance tubes.

[ 2 ] It is an interesting mathematical problem to solve the balance pattern given n slots and k tubes with the same weight. It is known that the solution exists if and only if both k and n-k can be  expressed as a sum of prime factors of n.

[ 3 ] Small differences in mass of the load can result in a large force imbalance when the rotor is at high speed. This force imbalance strains the spindle and may result in damage to the centrifuge or personal injury. Some centrifuges have an automatic rotor imbalance detection feature that immediately discontinues the run when an imbalance is detected.

Before starting a centrifuge, an accurate check of the rotor and lid locking mechanisms is mandatory. A spinning rotor can cause serious injury if touched. Modern centrifuges generally have features that prevent accidental contact with a moving rotor as the main lid is locked during the run.

Centrifuge rotors have tremendous kinetic energy during high speed rotation. Rotor failure, caused by mechanical stress from the high forces imparted by the motor, can occur due to manufacturing defects, routine wear and tear, or improper use and maintenance. Such a failure can be catastrophic failure , especially with larger centrifuges, and generally results in total destruction of the centrifuge. While centrifuges generally have safety shielding to contain these failures, such shielding may be inadequate, especially in older models, or the entire centrifuge unit may be propelled from its position, resulting in damage to nearby personnel and equipment. Uncontained rotor failures have shattered laboratory windows and destroyed refrigerators and cabinetry. To reduce the risk of rotor failures, centrifuge manufacturers specify operating and maintenance procedures to ensure that rotors are regularly inspected and removed from service or derated (only operated at lower speeds) when they are past their expected lifetime.

[ 4 ] Another potential hazard is the aerosolization of hazardous samples during centrifugation. To prevent contamination of the laboratory, rotor lids with special aerosol-tight gaskets are available. The rotor can be loaded with the samples within a hood and the rotor lid fixed on the rotor. Afterwards, the aerosol-tight system of rotor and lid is transferred to the centrifuge. The rotor can then be fixed within the centrifuge without opening the lid. After the run, the entire rotor assembly, including the lid, is removed from the centrifuge to the hood for further steps, maintaining the samples within a closed system.

A ThermoFisher laboratory bench-top centrifuge.

See also [ edit ] Ultracentrifuge Separation Cytocentrifuge References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Laboratory centrifuges .

Look up centrifuge in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

^ Susan R. Mikkelsen & Eduardo Cortón. Bioanalytical Chemistry, Ch. 13. Centrifugation Methods. John Wiley & Sons, Mar 4, 2004, pp. 247-267.

^ Frothingham, R (February 1999).

"Centrifugation without a balance tube" .

American Laboratory .

31 (19). Shelton, CT: International Scientific Communications : 10.

ISSN 0044-7749 . Retrieved March 18, 2011 .

^ The Centrifuge Problem - Numberphile ^ Cornell University EH&S.

"Centrifuge Accident" . Retrieved 29 December 2010 .

v t e Laboratory equipment General Heaters Dryers Alcohol burner Bunsen burner Desiccator Heating mantle Hot plate Lab oven Kiln Meker–Fisher burner Striker Teclu burner Water bath Vacuum dry box Mixers Shakers Chemostat Homogenizer Liquid whistle Magnetic stirrer Mortar and pestle Shaker Sonicator Static mixer Stirring rod Vortex mixer Wash bottle Stands Clamps Holders Beaker clamp Clamp holder Tripod Burette clamp Extension clamp Flask clamp Funnel support Iron ring Pinch clamp Retort stand Screw clamp Test tube holder Test tube rack Wire gauze Lab drying rack Containers Storage Agar plate Cryogenic storage dewar Incubator Laminar flow cabinet Microtiter plate Petri dish Picotiter plate Refrigerator Weighing boat Weighing dish Other items Aspirator Autoclave Balance brush Cork borer Crucible Filter paper File Forceps Centrifuge Microscope Pipeclay triangle Spectrophotometer Splint Stopper Scoopula Spatula Test tube brush Wire brush Inoculation needle Inoculation loop Glassware Apparatus Dean–Stark Soxhlet extractor Kipp's Bottles Boston round Condensers Cold finger Liebig Dishes Evaporating Petri Syracuse Watch glass Flasks Büchner Vacuum (Dewar) Erlenmeyer Fernbach Fleaker Florence Retort Round-bottom Schlenk Volumetric Funnels Büchner Hirsch Dropping Separatory Measuring devices Burette Conical measure Cuvette Eye dropper Eudiometer Graduated cylinder Ostwald viscometer Pipette Tubes Drying Cragie Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Test Thiele Thistle Other items Beaker Bell jar Gas syringe Vial Analytical chemistry Compositional AutoAnalyzer CHN analyzer Colorimeter Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) device Gas chromatograph (GC) Liquid chromatograph (LC) Mass spectrometer (MS) pH indicator pH meter Microscopy Scanning electron microscope (SEM) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) Thermochemistry Calorimeter differential scanning Melting-point apparatus Thermometer Thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) Other items Analytical balance Colony counter Spiral plater Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument Plate reader Electronics Control devices Bench power supply Current source Voltage source Function generator Galvanostat Pulse generator Potentiostat Measurement Ammeter Logic analyzer Multimeter Network analyzer Oscilloscope Spectrum analyzer Time-domain reflectometer Transistor tester Voltmeter Tools Heat gun Soldering iron Tweezers Wire stripper General Alligator clip Test probe Safety Personal protective equipment (PPE) Lab coat Face shield Respirator Rubber apron Safety shower Eye and hand Acid-resistant gloves Eyewash station Glove box Medical gloves Nitrile gloves Safety glasses Safety goggles Other items Biosafety cabinet Fire blanket Fire extinguisher Fume hood Safety cabinet Solvent cabinet Instruments used in medical laboratories NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rjjpn
Cached time: 20250817061413
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.336 seconds
Real time usage: 0.440 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1233/1000000
Revision size: 8049/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 89653/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1635/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23335/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.222/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6210503/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  368.505      1 -total
 31.58%  116.357      1 Template:Reflist
 27.00%   99.490      1 Template:Cite_journal
 22.70%   83.637      1 Template:Laboratory_equipment
 22.18%   81.719      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.77%   54.420      1 Template:Short_description
 14.23%   52.448      1 Template:Refimprove
 12.88%   47.475      1 Template:Ambox
 10.61%   39.084      6 Template:Navbox
  8.91%   32.850      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12285825:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817061413 and revision id 1283317309. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Laboratory_centrifuge&oldid=1283317309 " Categories : Centrifuges Laboratory equipment Chemical equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2008 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 19:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Laboratory centrifuge 6 languages Add topic

