Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Method Toggle Method subsection 2.1 Summary 2.2 In practice 3 Errors Toggle Errors subsection 3.1 Almanac error 3.2 Lunar distance observation 3.3 Total error 4 In literature 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Lunar distance (navigation) 5 languages Català Deutsch Español עברית 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Angular distance between the Moon and another celestial body For the history of the lunar distance method, see History of longitude .

Finding Greenwich time while at sea using a lunar distance. The lunar distance is the angle between the Moon and a star (e.g., the Sun). In the above illustration the star Regulus is used. The altitudes of the two bodies are used to make corrections and determine the time.

In celestial navigation , lunar distance , also called a lunar , is the angular distance between the Moon and another celestial body . The lunar distances method uses this angle and a nautical almanac to calculate Greenwich time if so desired, or by extension any other time. That calculated time can be used in solving  a spherical triangle . The theory was first published by Johannes Werner in 1524, before the necessary almanacs had been published. A fuller  method was published in 1763 and used until about 1850 when it was superseded by the marine chronometer . A similar method uses the positions of the Galilean moons of Jupiter .

Purpose [ edit ] In celestial navigation , knowledge of the time at Greenwich (or another known place) and the measured positions of one or more celestial objects allows the navigator to calculate longitude .

[ 1 ] Reliable marine chronometers were unavailable until the late 18th century and not affordable until the 19th century.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] After the method was first published in 1763 by British Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne , based on pioneering work by Tobias Mayer , for about a hundred years (until about 1850) [ 5 ] mariners lacking a chronometer used the method of lunar distances to determine Greenwich time as a key step in determining longitude.  Conversely, a mariner with a chronometer could check its accuracy using a lunar determination of Greenwich time.

[ 2 ] The method saw usage all the way up to the beginning of the 20th century on smaller vessels that could not afford a chronometer or had to rely on this technique for correction of the chronometer.

[ 6 ] Method [ edit ] Summary [ edit ] The method relies on the relatively quick movement of the moon across the background sky, completing  a circuit of 360 degrees in 27.3 days (the sidereal month), or 13.2 degrees per day. In one hour it will move approximately half a degree, [ 1 ] roughly its own angular diameter , with respect to the background stars and the Sun.

Using a sextant , the navigator precisely measures the angle between the moon and another body .

[ 1 ] That could be the Sun or one of a selected group of bright stars lying close to the Moon's path, near the ecliptic . At that moment, anyone on the surface of the earth who can see the same two bodies will, after correcting for parallax , observe the same angle. The navigator then consults a prepared table of lunar distances and the times at which they will occur.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] By comparing the corrected lunar distance with the tabulated values, the navigator finds the Greenwich time for that observation. 
Knowing Greenwich time and local time, the navigator can work out longitude.

[ 1 ] Local time can be determined from a sextant observation of the altitude of the Sun or a star.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Then the longitude (relative to Greenwich) is readily calculated from the difference between local time and Greenwich Time, at 15 degrees per hour of difference.

In practice [ edit ] Having measured the lunar distance and the heights of the two bodies, the navigator can find Greenwich time in three steps: Preliminaries : Almanac tables predict lunar distances between the centre of the Moon and the other body (published between 1767 and 1906 in Britain).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] However, the observer cannot accurately find the centre of the Moon (or Sun, which was the most frequently used second object). Instead, lunar distances are always measured to the sharply lit, outer edge (the limb, not terminator ) of the Moon (or of the Sun). The first correction to the lunar distance is the distance between the limb of the Moon and its center. Since the Moon's apparent size varies with its varying distance from the Earth, almanacs give the Moon's and Sun's semidiameter for each day.

[ 12 ] Additionally the observed altitudes are cleared of semidiameter.

Clearing : The lunar distance is corrected for the effects of parallax and atmospheric refraction on the observation. The almanac gives lunar distances as they would appear if the observer were at the center of a transparent Earth.  Because the Moon is so much closer to the Earth than the stars are, the position of the observer on the surface of the Earth shifts the relative position of the Moon by up to an entire degree.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The clearing correction for parallax and refraction is a trigonometric function of the observed lunar distance and the altitudes of the two bodies.

[ 15 ] Navigators used collections of mathematical tables to work these calculations by any of dozens of distinct clearing methods. For practical applications today the tables by Bruce Stark [ 16 ] may be used for clearing the lunar distance. They are constructed such that only additions and subtractions of tabulated numbers are required instead of trigonometric evaluations.

Finding the time : The navigator, having cleared the lunar distance, now consults a prepared table of lunar distances and the times at which they will occur in order to determine the Greenwich time of the observation.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Predicting the position of the moon years in advance requires solving the three-body problem , since the earth, moon and sun were all involved.

Euler developed the numerical method they used, called Euler's method , and  received a grant from the Board of Longitude to carry out the computations.

Having found the (absolute) Greenwich time, the navigator either compares it with the observed local apparent time (a separate observation) to find his longitude, or compares it with the Greenwich time on a chronometer (if available) if one wants to check the chronometer.

[ 1 ] Errors [ edit ] Almanac error [ edit ] By 1810, the errors in the almanac predictions had been reduced to about one-quarter of a minute of arc. By about 1860 (after lunar distance observations had mostly faded into history), the almanac errors were finally reduced to less than the error margin of a sextant in ideal conditions (one-tenth of a minute of arc).

Lunar distance observation [ edit ] Later sextants (after c.

1800 ) could indicate angle to 0.1 arc-minutes, after the use of the vernier was popularized by its description in English in the book Navigatio Britannica published in 1750 by John Barrow , the mathematician and historian.  In practice at sea, actual errors were somewhat larger.  
If the sky is cloudy or the Moon is new (hidden close to the glare of the Sun), lunar distance observations could not be performed.

Total error [ edit ] A lunar distance changes with time at a rate of roughly half a degree, or 30 arc-minutes, in an hour.

[ 1 ] The two sources of error, combined, typically amount to about one-half arc-minute in Lunar distance, equivalent to one minute in Greenwich time, which corresponds to an error of as much as one-quarter of a degree of longitude, or about 15 nautical miles (28 km) at the equator.

In literature [ edit ] Captain Joshua Slocum , in making the first solo circumnavigation of the Earth in 1895–1898, somewhat anachronistically used the lunar method along with dead reckoning in his navigation . He comments in Sailing Alone Around the World on a sight taken in the South Pacific . After correcting an error he found in his log tables , the result was surprisingly accurate: [ 17 ] I found from the result of three observations, after long wrestling with lunar tables, that her longitude agreed within five miles of that by dead-reckoning.
This was wonderful; both, however, might be in error, but somehow I felt confident that both were nearly true, and that in a few hours more I should see land; and so it happened, for then I made out the island of Nukahiva , the southernmost of the Marquesas group, clear-cut and lofty. The verified longitude when abreast was somewhere between the two reckonings; this was extraordinary. All navigators will tell you that from one day to another a ship may lose or gain more than five miles in her sailing-account, and again, in the matter of lunars, even expert lunarians are considered as doing clever work when they average within eight miles of the truth...

The result of these observations naturally tickled my vanity, for I knew it was something to stand on a great ship’s deck and with two assistants take lunar observations approximately near the truth. As one of the poorest of American sailors, I was proud of the little achievement alone on the sloop, even by chance though it may have been...

The work of the lunarian, though seldom practised in these days of chronometers, is beautifully edifying, and there is nothing in the realm of navigation that lifts one’s heart up more in adoration.

In his 1777 book, "A Voyage around the World", naturalist Georg Forster described his impressions of navigation with captain James Cook on board the ship HMS Resolution in the South Pacific. Cook had two of the new chronometers on board, one made by Larcum Kendall the other by John Arnold , following the lead of the famous John Harrison clocks. On March 12, 1774, approaching Easter Island , Forster found praiseworthy the method of lunar distances as the best and most precise method to determine longitude, as compared to clocks which may fail due to mechanical problems.

See also [ edit ] Royal Observatory, Greenwich Josef de Mendoza y Ríos John Harrison History of longitude Longitude prize Henry Raper Bowditch's American Practical Navigator Nathaniel Bowditch References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Norie, J. W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 222. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ a b Norie, J. W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 221. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ Taylor, Janet (1851).

An Epitome of Navigation and Nautical Astronomy (Ninth ed.). Taylor. p. 295f . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

Nautical Almanac 1849-1851.

^ Britten, Frederick James (1894).

Former Clock & Watchmakers and Their Work . New York: Spon & Chamberlain. p.

230 . Retrieved 2007-08-08 .

Chronometers were not regularly supplied to the Royal Navy until about 1825 ^ Lecky, Squire, Wrinkles in Practical Navigation ^ Bowditch, Nathaniel (2002).

"Chapter 1" .

The American Practical Navigator . United States: National Imagery and Mapping Agency . p.

7 – via Wikisource .

^ a b Royal Greenwich Observatory.

"DISTANCES of Moon's Center from Sun, and from Stars EAST of her" . In Garnet (ed.).

The Nautical Almanac and Astronomical Ephemeris for the year 1804 (Second American Impression ed.). New Jersey: Blauvelt. p. 92. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

; Wepster, Steven.

"Precomputed Lunar Distances" . Archived from the original on 2007-12-15 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ Norie, J. W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 226. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ Norie, J. W. (1828).

New and Complete Epitome of Practical Navigation . London. p. 230. Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-08-02 .

^ The Nautical Almanac and Astronomical Ephemeris, for the year 1767 , London: W. Richardson and S. Clark, 1766 ^ The Nautical Almanac Abridged for the Use of Seamen, 1924 ^ Dunlop, G.D.; Shufeldt, H.H. (1972).

Dutton's navigation and Piloting . Annapolis, Maryland, USA: Naval Institute Press . p. 409.

The authors show an example of correcting for lunar semidiameter.

^ Duffett-Smith, Peter (1988).

Practical Astronomy with your Calculator, third edition . Cambridge University Press. p. 66.

ISBN 9780521356992 .

^ Montenbruck and Pfleger (1994).

Astronomy on the Personal Computer, second edition . Springer. pp.

45– 46.

ISBN 9783540672210 .

^ Schlyter, Paul.

"The Moon's topocentric position" .

^ Stark, Bruce (2010).

Stark Tables for Clearing the Lunar Distance, third edition . Starpath Publications.

ISBN 9780914025214 .

^ Captain Joshua Slocum, Sailing Alone Around the World, Chapter 11 , 1900 New and complete epitome of practical navigation containing all necessary instruction for keeping a ship's reckoning at sea ... to which is added a new and correct set of tables - by J. W. Norie 1828 Andrewes, William J.H. (Ed.): The Quest for Longitude . Cambridge, Mass. 1996 Forbes, Eric G.: The Birth of Navigational Science . London 1974 Jullien, Vincent (Ed.): Le calcul des longitudes: un enjeu pour les mathématiques, l`astronomie, la mesure du temps et la navigation . Rennes 2002 Howse, Derek: Greenwich Time and the Longitude . London 1997 Howse, Derek: Nevil Maskelyne. The Seaman's Astronomer.

Cambridge 1989 National Maritime Museum (Ed.): 4 Steps to Longitude . London 1962 External links [ edit ] About Lunars... by George Huxtable. (Free tutorial) Navigation Spreadsheets: Lunar distance Navigational Algorithms - free software for Lunars Longitude by Lunars online Time and Position by C-program LUNARS-V13 An Essay on Lunar Distance Method, by Richard Dunn Archived 2015-11-06 at the Wayback Machine v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lunar_distance_(navigation)&oldid=1286338588 " Categories : Geodesy Lunar science Navigation Celestial navigation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 07:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lunar distance (navigation) 5 languages Add topic

