Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Owlstone Photography Prize 2 Projects Toggle Projects subsection 2.1 Nova 2.2 Meteor 2.3 Martlet 3 Press coverage 4 Recognition 5 Outreach 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents CU Spaceflight Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Student-run society at Cambridge University This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "CU Spaceflight" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "CU Spaceflight" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Teddy bears lifted to 30,085 metres above sea level on a helium balloon in a materials experiment by CU Spaceflight and SPARKS science club. Each of the bears wore a different space suit designed by 11- to 13-year-olds from SPARKS.

CU Spaceflight is a student-run society at the University of Cambridge . It is founded with the aim of achieving access to space , with minimal financial expenses. The society is supported by the Cambridge-MIT Institute .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The society was founded in the summer of 2006, with the specific goal of launching a rocket into space for less than GBP £1000.

[ 2 ] As of November, 2007, CU Spaceflight has launched five non-crewed high-altitude balloons , of which two were not successful: [ 3 ] Nova 2 was blown into the North Sea and Nova 5 failed to ignite the Martlet 1 solid rocket motor, but landed in a reusable state.

CU Spaceflight is a participant of the UK High Altitude Society .

Owlstone Photography Prize [ edit ] This photo from the Nova 1 flight, entitled "Earth from 32 km" , won the Owlstone Photography Prize for 2007 On 27 June 2007, CU Spaceflight won the Owlstone Photography Prize, having submitted an unenhanced photograph from the Nova 1 flight, displaying the curvature of the Earth as seen from Near space . The entry was entitled "Earth from 32 km". CU Spaceflight won a cash prize and 25-hours of workshop time.

[ 4 ] Projects [ edit ] As of 2007 [update] , Cambridge University Spaceflight has three projects which it is pursuing; all three are critical to the long-term goal of successfully launching a rocket into space and retrieving it.

Nova [ edit ] Nova is CU Spaceflight's first project and has the objective of launching high-altitude balloons on test flights to near space . The lifting gas used is helium .

Mission Name Launch Date Notes Nova 0 N/A Prototype for the Nova programme, and never flew, despite being capable of doing so.

[ 5 ] Nova 1 9 November 2006 Launched from Cambridge , UK. It reached a maximum altitude of 32 kilometres (105,000 feet) and landed by parachute 3 hours later.

[ 1 ] Following recovery, 857 still images were downloaded from the on-board cameras.

[ 6 ] Nova 2 19 November 2006 The near spacecraft suffered a mechanical failure and was blown off into the North Sea by high winds . All contact was lost and it has yet to be recovered. Nova 2 was the first unsuccessful mission in the Nova programme.

Nova 3 21 January 2007 It was originally intended to carry a UK High Altitude Society payload consisting of several modules, but electronic failures prevented this from being the case. Nova 3 served as a test flight for a cutdown mechanism, and was located in Germany on 23 January 2007. The payload was arranged to be sent back to CU Spaceflight.

Nova 4 7 March 2007 Concept demonstrator for a launch platform for the Martlet 1 rocket. The payload carried included all components necessary to fire a rocket except the rocket itself. The mission reached 20 kilometres, and landed at 8 m/s .

Nova 5 24 March 2007 Launched from the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge , into overcast cloud. It was launched in front of a crowd at the Cambridge Science Week (as part of CU Spaceflight's outreach programme ). It was intended to fire the Martlet 1 rocket, but the igniter failed and the rocket never left the balloon. Both vehicles were recovered on 12 April 2007, in a fully reusable state. Following the unsuccessful mission, CU Spaceflight announced they would be working towards their next Martlet launch with the MIT Rocket Team , an MIT student society also aimed at cheap space access.

Nova 6 24 July 2008 After an extended period of not launching due to insurance difficulties, CU Spaceflight returned the Nova programme to flight with the launch of Nova 6 . After analysis of GPS data logs after a successful landing, it was officially confirmed that Nova 6 had broken Nova 1's altitude record, thus setting a new British record (Nova 1 was the prior record holder), about 260 metres higher than that of the first flight.

Nova 7 25 July 2008 The high-altitude balloon was launched shortly after 3:30 AM BST. The near spacecraft was successfully recovered.

Nova 8 28 August 2008 Launched 4:07 AM BST; dawn launch. Successfully videoed and photographed sunrise from high altitude , a major mission objective. Recovered less than a kilometre from software-predicted landing site.

Nova 9 1 December 2008 Launched in collaboration with Parkside School carrying 4 teddies wearing spacesuits designed by students up to 30 kilometres. This launch received significant press coverage around the world.

Meteor [ edit ] Meteor is a project designed to provide a landing system for falling body to a 100-metre accuracy, from any point within the Earth's atmosphere .
The Meteor project will use a paraglider to land objects.

Martlet [ edit ] Martlet is the project aimed at the development of a small rocket and launch system which can be launched from a Nova balloon in the upper atmosphere .

CU Spaceflight aim the final Martlet rocket to be less than 1 metre long, weigh 3.5 kilograms, and carry a 0.5 kg payload. The intended cost per launch is less than GBP £1000. The rocket will be a solid-fuel rocket . Its objective is to reach suborbital space – i.e. reaching altitudes in excess of 100 km ( the boundary of space ).

The idea of a balloon-launched rocket – a rockoon – is not new, but is rarely practiced. The incentives for air-based launch are that the altitude the balloons reach are in the near space region – which is above 99% of the atmosphere – thus resulting in significantly less atmospheric drag , requiring far less rocket fuel .

Mission Name Launch Date Notes Martlet 0 1 March 2009 A successful ground launch of a prototype for the final Martlet rocket. It was launched at the EARS rocketry site reaching a height just under 9,000 ft and a speed of around the speed of sound . The rocket motor used was a commercial J-class motor, however the rocket casing is designed for a motor with three times the power.

Press coverage [ edit ] Since its inception, Cambridge University Spaceflight has been covered by several major news sources, including The Guardian [ 7 ] and BBC News .

[ 8 ] Photos from the Nova 9 launch were printed in many national newspapers including The Times , The Daily Telegraph and The Daily Mail . Members of the team also gave interviews to the Discovery Channel , Sky News and the BBC World Service .

Recognition [ edit ] Following the success of Nova 1 and the announcement of the Martlet and Meteor projects, CU Spaceflight has received interest from the university's Department for Atmospheric Chemistry and the British Antarctic Survey on the results of its work.

Outreach [ edit ] CU Spaceflight has performed talks in secondary schools in and around Cambridge , UK, and continues to offer to do so, hoping to raise the profile of engineering and aerospace in particular.

During the 2007 Cambridge Science Festival , [ 9 ] CU Spaceflight launched their Nova 5 balloon in front of a large crowd.

See also [ edit ] High-altitude balloon Amateur rocketry Spaceflight References [ edit ] ^ a b Nova Press release Archived 26 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ CU Spaceflight Home page ^ CU Spaceflight News page Archived 7 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Owlstone Photography Competition at the Department of Engineering winning image" .

University of Cambridge . 27 June 2007 . Retrieved 18 November 2007 .

^ Nova programme page Archived 7 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ All 857 photos from Nova 1 Archived 17 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Sample, Ian (19 September 2006).

"To the edge of space for £1,000" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 18 November 2007 .

^ "Low-cost space flight for camera" .

BBC News . 18 September 2006 . Retrieved 18 November 2007 .

^ "Cuspaceflight.co.uk" .

External links [ edit ] CU Spaceflight official Forum CU Spaceflight official website MIT Rocket Team UK High Altitude Society Camera Captures Dramatic Curvature of the Earth, During a Test Flight by Cambridge University v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=CU_Spaceflight&oldid=1260793804 " Categories : Clubs and societies of the University of Cambridge Spaceflight Rocketry Ballooning Organizations established in 2006 2006 establishments in England Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2023 Articles with topics of unclear notability from January 2012 All articles with topics of unclear notability Organization articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from January 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements Use British English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 2 December 2024, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents CU Spaceflight Add languages Add topic

