Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development and origin Toggle Development and origin subsection 1.1 Complete contract theory 2 Main models of agency problems Toggle Main models of agency problems subsection 2.1 Moral hazard 2.2 Example of possible solution to moral hazard 2.3 Adverse selection 2.4 Signalling 3 Incomplete contracts 4 Expected utility theory 5 Examples of contract theory 6 Incentive Design Toggle Incentive Design subsection 6.1 Rewards on Absolute Performance and Relative Performance 6.2 Design contracts for multiple employees 6.3 Information elicitation 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Contract theory 18 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Dansk فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic analysis of contracts This article is about the economic analysis of contracts. For legal definitions and contract law, see Contract .

From a legal point of view, a contract is an institutional arrangement for the way in which resources flow, which defines the various relationships between the parties to a transaction or limits the rights and obligations of the parties.

From an economic perspective, contract theory studies how economic actors can and do construct contractual arrangements, generally in the presence of information asymmetry . Because of its connections with both agency and incentives , contract theory is often categorized within a field known as law and economics . One prominent application of it is the design of optimal schemes of managerial compensation. In the field of economics, the first formal treatment of this topic was given by Kenneth Arrow in the 1960s. In 2016, Oliver Hart and Bengt R. Holmström both received the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for their work on contract theory, covering many topics from CEO pay to privatizations .

Holmström focused more on the connection between incentives and risk, while Hart on the unpredictability of the future that creates holes in contracts.

[ 1 ] A standard practice in the microeconomics of contract theory is to represent the behaviour of a decision maker under certain numerical utility structures, and then apply an optimization algorithm to identify optimal decisions. Such a procedure has been used in the contract theory framework to several typical situations, labeled moral hazard , adverse selection and signalling . The spirit of these models lies in finding theoretical ways to motivate agents to take appropriate actions, even under an insurance contract. The main results achieved through this family of models involve: mathematical properties of the utility structure of the principal and the agent, relaxation of assumptions, and variations of the time structure of the contract relationship, among others. It is customary to model people as maximizers of some von Neumann–Morgenstern utility functions , as stated by expected utility theory .

Development and origin [ edit ] Contract theory in economics began with 1991 Nobel Laureate Ronald H. Coase's 1937 article "The Nature of the Firm". Coase notes that "the longer the duration of a contract regarding the supply of goods or services due to the difficulty of forecasting, then the less likely and less appropriate it is for the buyer to specify what the other party should do." [ 2 ] That suggests two points, the first is that Coase already understands transactional behaviour in terms of contracts, and the second is that Coase implies that if contracts are less complete then firms are more likely to substitute for markets. The contract theory has since evolved in two directions. One is the complete contract theory and the other is the incomplete contract theory.

Complete contract theory [ edit ] Complete contract theory states that there is no essential difference between a firm and a market; they are both contracts. Principals and agents are able to foresee all future scenarios and develop optimal risk sharing and revenue transfer mechanisms to achieve sub-optimal efficiency under constraints. It is equivalent to principal-agent theory.

[ 3 ] Armen Albert Alchian and Harold Demsetz disagree with Coase's view that the nature of the firm is a substitute for the market, but argue that both the firm and the market are contracts and that there is no fundamental difference between the two. They believe that the essence of the firm is a team production, and that the central issue in team production is the measurement of agent effort, namely the moral hazard of single agents and multiple agents.

[ 4 ] Michael C. Jensen and William Meckling believe that the nature of a business is a contractual relationship. They defined a business as an organisation. Such an organisation, like the majority of other organisations, as a legal fiction whose function is to act as a connecting point for a set of contractual relationships between individuals.

[ 5 ] James Mirrlees and Bengt Holmström et al. developed a basic framework for single-agent and multi-agent moral hazard models in a principal-agent framework with the help of the favourable labour tool of game theory.

Eugene F. Fama et al. extend static contract theory to dynamic contract theory, thus introducing the issue of principal commitment and the agent's reputation effect into long-term contracts.

[ 6 ] Eric Brousseau and Jean-Michel Glachant believe that contract theory should include incentive theory，incomplete contract theory and the new institutional transaction costs theory.

[ 7 ] Main models of agency problems [ edit ] Moral hazard [ edit ] The moral hazard problem refers to the extent to which an employee's behaviour is concealed from the employer: whether they work, how hard they work and how carefully they do so.

[ 8 ] In moral hazard models, the information asymmetry is the principal's inability to observe and/or verify the agent's action. Performance-based contracts that depend on observable and verifiable output can often be employed to create incentives for the agent to act in the principal's interest.  When agents are risk-averse, however, such contracts are generally only second-best because incentivization precludes full insurance.

The typical moral hazard model is formulated as follows. The principal solves: max w ( ⋅ ⋅ ) E [ y ( e ^ ^ ) − − w ( y ( e ^ ^ ) ) ] {\displaystyle \max _{w(\cdot )}E\left[y({\hat {e}})-w(y({\hat {e}}))\right]} subject to the agent's "individual rationality (IR)" constraint, E [ u ( w ( y ( e ^ ^ ) ) ) − − c ( e ^ ^ ) ] ≥ ≥ u ¯ ¯ {\displaystyle E\left[u(w(y({\hat {e}})))-c({\hat {e}})\right]\geq {\bar {u}}} and the agent's "incentive compatibility (IC)" constraint, E [ u ( w ( y ( e ^ ^ ) ) ) − − c ( e ^ ^ ) ] ≥ ≥ E [ u ( w ( y ( e ) ) ) − − c ( e ) ] ∀ ∀ e {\displaystyle E\left[u(w(y({\hat {e}})))-c({\hat {e}})\right]\geq E\left[u(w(y(e)))-c(e)\right]\ \forall e} , where w ( ⋅ ⋅ ) {\displaystyle w(\cdot )} is the wage for the agent as a function of output y {\displaystyle y} , which in turn is a function of effort: e {\displaystyle e} .

c ( e ) {\displaystyle c(e)} represents the cost of effort, and reservation utility is given by u ¯ ¯ {\displaystyle {\bar {u}}} .

u ( ⋅ ⋅ ) {\displaystyle u(\cdot )} is the "utility function", which is concave for the risk-averse agent, is convex for the risk-prone agent, and is linear for the risk-neutral agent.

If the agent is risk-neutral and there are no bounds on transfer payments, the fact that the agent's effort is unobservable (i.e., it is a "hidden action") does not pose a problem. In this case, the same outcome can be achieved that would be attained with verifiable effort: The agent chooses the so-called "first-best" effort level that maximizes the expected total surplus of the two parties. Specifically, the principal can give the realized output to the agent, but let the agent make a fixed up-front payment. The agent is then a "residual claimant" and will maximize the expected total surplus minus the fixed payment. Hence, the first-best effort level maximizes the agent's payoff, and the fixed payment can be chosen such that in equilibrium the agent's expected payoff equals his or her reservation utility (which is what the agent would get if no contract was written). Yet, if the agent is risk-averse, there is a trade-off between incentives and insurance. Moreover, if the agent is risk-neutral but wealth-constrained, the agent cannot make the fixed up-front payment to the principal, so the principal must leave a "limited liability rent" to the agent (i.e., the agent earns more than his or her reservation utility).

The moral hazard model with risk aversion was pioneered by Steven Shavell, Sanford J. Grossman , Oliver D. Hart , and others in the 1970s and 1980s.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] It has been extended to the case of repeated moral hazard by William P. Rogerson and to the case of multiple tasks by Bengt Holmström and Paul Milgrom .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The moral hazard model with risk-neutral but wealth-constrained agents has also been extended to settings with repeated interaction and multiple tasks.

[ 13 ] While it is difficult to test models with hidden action empirically (since there is no field data on unobservable variables), the premise of contract theory that incentives matter has been successfully tested in the field.

[ 14 ] Moreover, contract-theoretic models with hidden actions have been directly tested in laboratory experiments.

[ 15 ] Example of possible solution to moral hazard [ edit ] A study on the solution to moral hazard concludes that adding moral sensitivity to the principal–agent model increases its descriptiveness, prescriptiveness, and pedagogical usefulness because it induces employees to work at the appropriate effort for which they receive a wage. The theory suggests that as employee work efforts increase, so proportional premium wage should increases also to encourage productivity.

[ 16 ] Adverse selection [ edit ] In adverse selection models, the principal is not informed about a certain characteristic of the agent at the time the contract is written. The characteristic is called the agent's "type". For example, health insurance is more likely to be purchased by people who are more likely to get sick. In this case, the agent's type is his or her health status, which is privately known by the agent. Another prominent example is public procurement contracting: The government agency (the principal) does not know the private firm's cost. In this case, the private firm is the agent and the agent's type is the cost level.

[ 17 ] In adverse selection models, there is typically too little trade (i.e., there is a so-called "downward distortion" of the trade level compared to a "first-best" benchmark situation with complete information), except when the agent is of the best possible type (which is known as the "no distortion at the top" property). The principal offers a menu of contracts to the agent; the menu is called "incentive-compatible" if the agent picks the contract that was designed for his or her type. In order to make the agent reveal the true type, the principal has to leave an information rent to the agent (i.e., the agent earns more than his or her reservation utility, which is what the agent would get if no contract was written). Adverse selection theory has been pioneered by Roger Myerson , Eric Maskin , and others in the 1980s.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] More recently, adverse selection theory has been tested in laboratory experiments and in the field.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Adverse selection theory has been expanded in several directions, e.g. by endogenizing the information structure (so the agent can decide whether or not to gather private information) and by taking into consideration social preferences and bounded rationality .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Signalling [ edit ] In signalling models, one party chooses how and whether or not to present information about itself to another party to reduce the information asymmetry between them.

[ 25 ] In signaling models, the signaling party agent and the receiving party principal have access to different information. The challenge for the receiving party is to decipher the credibility of the signaling party so as to assess their capabilities. The formulation of this theory began in 1973 by Michael Spence through his job-market signaling model. In his model, job applicants are tasked with signalling their skills and capabilities to employers to reduce the probabilities for the employer to choose a lesser qualified applicant over a qualified applicant. This is because potential employers lack the knowledge to discern the skills and capabilities of potential employees.

[ 26 ] Incomplete contracts [ edit ] Contract theory also utilizes the notion of a complete contract , which is thought of as a contract that specifies the legal consequences of every possible state of the world.  More recent developments known as the theory of incomplete contracts , pioneered by Oliver Hart and his coauthors, study the incentive effects of parties' inability to write complete contingent contracts. In fact, it may be the case that the parties to a transaction are unable to write a complete contract at the contract stage because it is either difficult to reach an agreement to get it done or it is too expensive to do so, [ 8 ] e.g. concerning relationship-specific investments. A leading application of the incomplete contracting paradigm is the Grossman-Hart-Moore property rights approach to the theory of the firm (see Hart, 1995).

Because it would be impossibly complex and costly for the parties to an agreement to make their contract complete, [ 27 ] the law provides default rules which fill in the gaps in the actual agreement of the parties.

During the last 20 years, much effort has gone into the analysis of dynamic contracts.  Important early contributors to this literature include, among others, Edward J. Green , Stephen Spear, and Sanjay Srivastava.

Expected utility theory [ edit ] Much of contract theory can be explained through expected utility theory . This theory indicates that individuals will measure their choices based on the risks and benefits associated with a decision. A study analyzed that agents' anticipatory feelings are  affected by uncertainty. Hence why principals need to form contracts with agents in the presence of information asymmetry to more clearly understand each party's motives and benefits.

[ 28 ] Examples of contract theory [ edit ] George Akerlof described adverse selection in the market for used cars .

In certain models, such as Michael Spence 's job-market model, the agent can signal his type to the principal which may help to resolve the problem.

Leland and Pyle's (1977) IPO theory for agents (companies) to reduce adverse selection in the market by always sending clear signals before going public.

Incentive Design [ edit ] In the contract theory, the goal when designing incentives is to motivate employees by giving them rewards. Trading on service level/quality, results, performance or goals. It can be seen that reward determines whether the incentive mechanism can fully motivate employees.

[ 29 ] In view of the large number of contract theoretical models, the design of compensation under different contract conditions is different.

[ 29 ] Rewards on Absolute Performance and Relative Performance [ edit ] Source: [ 29 ] Absolute performance-related reward: The reward is in direct proportion to the absolute performance of employees.

Relative performance-related reward: The rewards are arranged according to the performance of the employees, from the highest to the lowest.

Absolute performance-related reward is an incentive mechanism widely recognized in economics in the real society, because it provides employees with the basic option of necessary and effective incentives. But, absolute performance-related rewards have two drawbacks.

There will be people who cheat Vulnerable to recessions or sudden growth But of course, "...people who cheat..." is not unique to absolute  performance--people would cheat to be higher on the whatever measuring scale there is--whether it is the absolute (actually measured by whatever extortionist operates the chequers' office)or by relative according to the history assigned hierarchy and ultimately by the "extortionist who operates the chequers' ofice.) Design contracts for multiple employees [ edit ] Source: [ 29 ] Considering absolute performance-related compensation is a popular way for employers to design contracts for more than one employee at a time, and one of the most widely accepted methods in practical economics.

There are also other forms of absolute rewards linked to employees' performance. For example, dividing employees into groups and rewarding the whole group based on the overall performance of each group. But one drawback of this method is that some people will fish in troubled waters while others are working hard, so that they will be rewarded together with the rest of the group. It is better to set the reward mechanism as the competitive competition, and obtain higher rewards through better performance.

Information elicitation [ edit ] A particular kind of a principal-agent problem is when the agent can compute the value of an item that belongs to the principal (e.g. an assessor can compute the value of the principal's car), and the principal wants to incentivize the agent to compute and report the true value.

[ 30 ] See also [ edit ] Agency cost Allocative efficiency Efficient contract theory Clawback Complete contract Contract Contract awarding Default rule First-order approach Incomplete contracts Mechanism design New institutional economics Perverse incentive References [ edit ] ^ Domonoske, Camila (10 October 2016).

"It's Agreed: Nobel Prize In Economics Awarded For Contract Theory" . NPR . Retrieved 2020-11-10 .

^ Coase, R. H. (November 1937).

"The Nature of the Firm" .

Economica .

4 (16): 386– 405.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0335.1937.tb00002.x .

ISSN 0013-0427 .

^ Garen J (1994), "Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory", Journal of Political Economy , 102(6):1175–1199, doi : 10.1086/261967 .

^ Alchian A A and Demsetz H (2005) ‘Production, information costs and economic organization’, Revista de administração de emprêsas, 45(3):92–108.

^ Jensen MC and Meckling WH (1976), "Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure", Journal of Financial Economics , 3(4):305–360, doi : 10.1016/0304-405X(76)90026-X .

^ Fama E F (1980), "Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm", Journal of Political Economy , 88(2):288–307, doi : 10.1086/260866 .

^ Brousseau E and Glachant J-M (2002) The economics of contracts: theories and applications, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge ; New York.

^ a b Zhang, Yanru (2017).

Contract Theory for Wireless Networks by Yanru Zhang, Zhu Han . Cham: Springer International Publishing: Imprint: Springer.

^ Shavell, Steven (1979). "Risk sharing and incentives in the principal and agent relationship".

Bell Journal of Economics .

10 (1): 55– 73.

doi : 10.2307/3003319 .

JSTOR 3003319 .

^ Grossman, Sanford J.; Hart, Oliver D. (1983). "An analysis of the principal-agent problem".

Econometrica .

51 (1): 7– 46.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.190.2716 .

doi : 10.2307/1912246 .

JSTOR 1912246 .

^ Rogerson, William P. (1985). "Repeated moral hazard".

Econometrica .

53 (1): 69– 76.

doi : 10.2307/1911724 .

JSTOR 1911724 .

S2CID 56436801 .

^ Homström, Bengt; Milgrom, Paul (1991). "Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset ownership, and job design".

Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization .

7 : 24– 52.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.715.3715 .

doi : 10.1093/jleo/7.special_issue.24 .

^ Ohlendorf, Susanne; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2012).

"Repeated Moral Hazard And Contracts With Memory: The Case of Risk Neutrality" (PDF) .

International Economic Review .

53 (2): 433– 452.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2354.2012.00687.x .

S2CID 14035249 .

^ Prendergast, Canice (1999). "The Provision of Incentive in Firms".

Journal of Economic Literature .

37 : 7– 63.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.558.6657 .

doi : 10.1257/jel.37.1.7 .

^ Hoppe, Eva I.; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2018).

"Hidden action and outcome contractibility: An experimental test of moral hazard theory" .

Games and Economic Behavior .

109 : 544– 564.

doi : 10.1016/j.geb.2018.02.006 .

^ Stevens, Douglas E.; Thevaranjan, Alex (January 2010). "A moral solution to the moral hazard problem".

Accounting, Organizations and Society .

35 (1): 125– 139.

doi : 10.1016/j.aos.2009.01.008 .

^ Laffont, Jean-Jacques; Tirole, Jean (1993).

A theory of incentives in procurement and regulation . MIT Press.

^ Baron, David P.; Myerson, Roger B. (1982). "Regulating a monopolist with unknown costs".

Econometrica .

50 (4): 911– 930.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.407.6185 .

doi : 10.2307/1912769 .

JSTOR 1912769 .

^ Maskin, Eric; Riley, John (1984). "Monopoly with incomplete information".

RAND Journal of Economics .

15 (2): 171– 196.

JSTOR 2555674 .

^ Hoppe, Eva I.; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2015).

"Do sellers offer menus of contracts to separate buyer types? An experimental test of adverse selection theory" .

Games and Economic Behavior .

89 : 17– 33.

doi : 10.1016/j.geb.2014.11.001 .

^ Chiappori, Pierre-Andre; Salanie, Bernard (2002). "Testing Contract Theory: A Survey of Some Recent Work". In Dewatripont; et al. (eds.).

Advances in Economics and Econometrics . Cambridge University Press.

^ Crémer, Jacques ; Khalil, Fahad; Rochet, Jean-Charles (1998). "Contracts and productive information gathering".

Games and Economic Behavior .

25 (2): 174– 193.

doi : 10.1006/game.1998.0651 .

^ Hoppe, Eva I.; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2013).

"Contracting under incomplete information and social preferences: an experimental study" (PDF) .

Review of Economic Studies .

80 (4): 1516– 1544.

doi : 10.1093/restud/rdt010 .

^ Köszegi, Botond (2014). "Behavioral Contract Theory".

Journal of Economic Literature .

52 (4): 1075– 1118.

doi : 10.1257/jel.52.4.1075 .

^ Connelly, Brian L.; Certo, S. Trevis; Ireland, R. Duane (December 10, 2010). "Signaling Theory: A Review and Assessment".

Journal of Management .

37 : 39– 67.

doi : 10.1177/0149206310388419 .

S2CID 145334039 .

^ Spence, Michael (August 1973). "Job Market Signaling".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

87 (3): 355– 374.

doi : 10.2307/1882010 .

JSTOR 1882010 .

^ Hart, Oliver and Moore, John,  1988.  "Incomplete Contracts and Renegotiation," Econometrica , 56(4), pp. 755–785.

^ Caplin, Andrew; Leahy, John (2001). "Psychological Expected Utility Theory and Anticipatory Feelings".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

116 (1): 55– 79.

doi : 10.1162/003355301556347 .

^ a b c d Zhang, Yanru; Han, Zhu (2017).

Contract Theory for Wireless Networks by Yanru Zhang, Zhu Han . Cham : Springer International Publishing : Imprint: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-53288-2 .

^ Alkoby, Shani; Sarne, David; Segal-Halevi, Erel; Sharbaf, Tomer (2018-07-09).

"Eliciting Truthful Unverifiable Information" .

Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems . AAMAS '18. Richland, SC: International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: 1850– 1852.

External links [ edit ] Bolton, Patrick and Dewatripont, Mathias ,  2005.: Contract Theory .

MIT Press .

Description and preview.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques , and David Martimort, 2002.

The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent Model .

Description , "Introduction," Archived 2016-06-12 at the Wayback Machine & down for chapter links.

(Princeton University Press, 2002) Martimort, David, 2008. "contract theory," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

Salanié, Bernard, 1997.

The Economics of Contracts: A Primer . MIT Press, Description (2nd ed., 2005) and chapter-preview links.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Contract_theory&oldid=1299493958 " Categories : Asymmetric information Game theory Law and economics Mathematical economics Microeconomic theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 19:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Contract theory 18 languages Add topic

