Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Life 3 Philosophical ideas 4 Works 5 Books Toggle Books subsection 5.1 Asrār al-ḥekam fi’l-moftataḥ wa’l-moḵtatam 6 Translations 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Works cited 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Hadi Sabzavari 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian philosopher, mystic theologian and poet Hadi Sabzavari A picture of Molla Hadi which represents the actual oldest picture of an Islamic philosopher Born 1797 Sabzevar , Iran Died 1873 Sabzevar , Iran Other names Sharaf al-Mulk, Hujjat al-Haq, Sheikh al-Rayees Academic background Influences The Quran , Mulla Sadra , Nasir al-Din al-Tusi , Ibn Arabi , Avicenna , Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi , Rumi Academic work Era 19th century School or tradition Shia Islam , Transcendent theosophy Main interests philosophy , theology , kalam , logic , Persian literature , science Notable works Asrar al-hikam ("The Secrets of Wisdom"), Sharh-i manzumah ("A Treatise on Logic in Verse"), Influenced 20th century Islamic philosophy, Henry Corbin , Hossein Nasr Hadi Sabzavari ( Persian : ملا هادی سبزواری ) or Hajj Molla Hadi Sabzavari (1797–1873 CE / 1212 - 1289 AH) was an Iranian [ 1 ] Shia cleric, philosopher, mystic theologian and poet.

[ 2 ] Historical background [ edit ] Molla Hadi lived in the Qajar period. According to his description, this period was along with descend of Hikmah; he also complained of his period for the sake of lacking knowledge and philosophy.

[ citation needed ] This kind of thinking was common among Islamic philosophers. There was an intellectual and spiritual turmoil in the Qajar period. In fact, in this period, Iranian encountered with new European thought and revival of traditional thinking; also in this period we can see the diverse developments in beliefs like Kaka'i , Shaykhism , Babism and the Baháʼí Faith and at the same time weakness and disappearance of Shia .

[ 3 ] Molla Hadi is counted as one of the four prominent masters of the Tehran philosophical school, along with Aqa ‘Ali Mudarris, Aqa Muhammad Riza Qumshihi, Mirza Abul Hasan Jelveh.

[ citation needed ] Life [ edit ] He was born in Sabzevar , Iran [ 2 ] to a family of land-owning merchants.

[ 2 ] His formal education started at a young age under his cousin, Molla Hosayn Sabzavari, [ 2 ] and he wrote a small treatise at the age of seven.

[ 2 ] His father died when he was seven or eight years old and his uncle Molla Ḥosayn Sabzavari, became his caretaker. When he reached the age of ten, he was taken by his cousin to Mashhad . There, he resided in the Hajj Hasan madrasa near the mausoleum of Imam Reza , where he studied Arabic , Islamic Jurisprudence , logic , and the principles of religion and law with Molla Hosay for a period of ten years.

[ 2 ] When he turned twenty, he returned to his hometown of Sabzavar. From there, he prepared his plans for the Hajj and set out in the direction of Isfahan . During this period, Isfahan was an important intellectual center of Iran , where philosophy and intellectual mysticism ('Erfan) flourished.

Among the important masters of these tradition at the time, the names of Mollā ʿAli Nuri (died 1830–31) and Mollā Esmāʿil Eṣfahāni, a student of Nuri, were prominent. They taught Islamic philosophy, mostly of Sadr al-Din Shirazi and his school. He remained in Isfahan for around eight or nine years, where he studied under these two undisputed masters of Mulla Sadra 's school of philosophy. He concentrated on the main works of Mulla Sadra, such as the Asfar and Al-Shawahed al-Robubiya.

[ 2 ] Simultaneously, he also studied Islamic jurisprudence with Aqa Mohammad 'Ali Najafi, one of the major Shia scholars of Isfahan .

[ 2 ] In Isfahan , Sabzevari lived a life of piety despite having received a substantial inheritance.

[ 2 ] According to the orientalist Edward Browne , “he used to take pains to discover which of the students stood most in need of pecuniary help, and would then secretly place sums of money in their room during their absence, without leaving any clue that would lead to the identification of the donor. In this way he is said to have expended no less than 100,000 tumáns (about 30,000 Pounds Sterling), while he was in Isfahan, leaving himself only so much as he deemed necessary for his own maintenance”.

[ 2 ] In In 1826–27, Sabzavari returned to Mashhad . There he began to teach in the Hājj Hasan madrasa although the scholars in Mashhad did not have the same interest in philosophy as Isfahan . The atmosphere of Mashhad was not as open as Isfahan for the pursuit of intellectual sciences. However, he continued to teach both the transmitted science as well as the intellectual sciences. He thought the intellectual sciences based on his work al-Manzuma, which he must have composed in Isfahan . His commentary on this important work of his however was completed in 1845. In 1831–32, he set out for Sabzavar where he made preparation for the Hajj . He left for Mecca in 1832–33 where he performed the rites of the pilgrimage. He returned to Iran in 1834–35 during the interval of the death of Fath Ali Shah Qajar . During this period of anarchy, traveling within Iran had become dangerous. Having lost his wife in Hajj, he settled in Kerman while waiting for calmer conditions to return to Khorasan . During the year he spent in Kerman , he was engaged in asceticism while agreeing to sweep the religious school for its keeper who provided him a room to live in. He married the keeper's daughter that year who was later to accompany him to Sabzavar . At this time, no one knew his real identity and degree of knowledge.

[ citation needed ] In 1836–37, Sabzavari set to Sabzavar and established a center for the study of Islamic philosophy and gnosis. The school he established rivaled with the schools of Tehran and Isfahan due to his personality. For a period of 10 months, he also taught in Mashhad . However, the rest of time was spent in Sabzevar where he made the Fasihiya school the center of teaching. This school became known as Madrasa-ye Ḥāji, where part of it still survives till this day.  Scholars and students began to flock from all over Persia, Iraq, Turkey, Caucasus, India and even Tibet . His name became widespread all over Iran so much so that in 1857–58, when Naser al-Din Shah Qajar made a pilgrimage to Mashhad , he stopped in Sabzavar and paid a visit to hakim Sabzavari.

[ citation needed ] The Qajar King became very impressed by the philosopher and asked his royal photographer Aqa Reza 'Akkas-Bashi to photograph the hakim.  The picture, which is widely available, is the oldest picture of an Islamic philosopher.  The Qajar king also requested from him a book in Persian containing the complete theory and cycle of traditional philosophy. Sabzavari obliged and composed the two Persian books: the Asrāral-ḥekam, which he dedicated to Naser al-Din Shah and also another book titled Hedāyat al-ṭālebin.  Sabzavari died suddenly in 1872, probably as a result of heart failure. The date of his death is recorded in several chronographs, including the numerical value of the couplet ka namord zendatar shod ("He did not die but became more alive after his passing") which was composed by one of his students.

[ citation needed ] Philosophical ideas [ edit ] The importance and contribution of Hakim Sabzevari is mainly in the precise explanation of  Transcendent Theosophy (al-hikmah al-muta’āliyah) and the resolution of its problems, as well as in the continuation of this wisdom and Islamic wisdom in general through the writing of numerous works and the cultivation of numerous students. However, this does not mean that Hakim Sabzavari was simply one of the prominent spokesmen of mulla sadra's Thoughts and lacked philosophical innovation. Because whenever a philosopher goes beyond repeating the words of the past, innovation has taken place. Therefore, things like presenting a new definition or analysis, posing new questions, criticizing and refuting an opinion by presenting a new argument on a theory, discovering new dimensions of a theory, proposing a new theory, establishing a new branch in philosophy, and finally presenting a philosophical system can be considered as forms of philosophical innovation.
The innovations of the Sabzavari can be examined in the following categories: ontology, theology, cosmology, anthropology, epistemology, and moral philosophy.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Sabzavari wrote some fifty-two works of prose and poetry in both Arabic and Persian .

[ 2 ] He wrote the Asrar al-hikmah ("The Secrets of Wisdom"), which, together with his Arabic treatise Sharh-i manzumah ("A Treatise on Logic in Verse"), remains a basic text for the study of hikmat doctrines in Iran. Not limited to philosophy, he also wrote poetry under the name of Asrar and completed a commentary on the Masnavi of Jalal ad-Din ar-Rumi, the great mystic poet of Islam.

[ 1 ] For philosophy in the reign of Nasir al-Din Shah Qajar (1848–1896), he was what Mulla Sadra had been in the reign of Shah Abbas I . He was also the faithful interpreter of Mulla Sadra and Transcendent Theosophy . He played a part in making Mulla Sadra the 'master thinker' of the Iranian philosophers. It could even be said that circumstances permitted him, to a greater extent than Mulla Sadra , to give free rein to his genius as a mystical theosopher, because there was greater freedom of self-expression during the Safavid epoch.

[ 5 ] Books [ edit ] Sabzevari wrote numerous works in Persian and Arabic .  He wrote works dealing with an array of subjects from prosody to logic to theology. However, the majority of his works deal with philosophy and mysticism.

Šarḥ al-manẓuma, is a work in Arabic also known as Ḡorar al-farāʾed. It is one of his more notable books which was completed around 1845. Till this day, it is still taught in religious seminaries in Iran with numerous later commentaries. The work is a versified summary and commentary of the transcendence philosophy of Mulla Sadra .

Asrār al-ḥekam fi’l-moftataḥ wa’l-moḵtatam [ 6 ] Šarḥ-e abyāt-e moškela-ye Maṯnawi in Persian is a commentary of the Mathnawi of Mowalana Jalal al-Din Rumi Hedāyat al-ṭālebin, a book composed in Persian at the request of Nasir al-Din Shah Qajar Ta'liqat Asrar ol-Ebadah Aljabr wal ekhtiar Osul ad-Din Nebrās al-hodā A poem cycle Asrār al-ḥekam fi’l-moftataḥ wa’l-moḵtatam [ edit ] This book was written for Naser al-Din Shah after the Shah while passing through Sabzavār asked Mulla Hadi Sabzevari to write a him a book about man's origin and destination in Persian together with the mysteries of God's oneness.

[ 6 ] The book was completed in 1868 and it deals with concepts of illuminative wisdom (ešrāq) and peripatetic philosophy , and is rich in intuitive and mystic insights.

[ 6 ] The gnosis of Sabzavari falls into three categories which are: (1) knowledge of God, consisting of knowledge of the beginning and knowledge of the end; (2) knowledge of one's self; (3)  knowledge of God's commands, consisting of knowledge of every rule of divine law (šarīʿa) and knowledge of the spiritual path (ṭarīqa). On the basis of this classification, the book is divided into two parts.

[ 6 ] Part I of the book consists of seven chapters: proof of the Necessarily Existent (wāǰeb al-woǰūd), knowledge of God's attributes God's actions knowledge of one's self and psychology (maʿāref-e nafs) knowledge of man's origin and destination, absolute prophethood Imamate Part II comprises four chapters ritual purity (ṭahāra) prayer (ṣalāt) alms fasting (ṣīām).

The most important part of the book is on the proof of the Necessarily Existent (i.e., God).

Translations [ edit ] The Metaphysics of Sabzvârî , tr. from the Arabic by Mehdi Mohagheg and Toshihico Izutso , Delmar, New York, 1977.

See also [ edit ] Mulla Sadra Suhrawardi Avicenna Hossein Nasr Islamic philosophy References [ edit ] ^ a b "Sabzevari, Hajji Hadi." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 12 Jan. 2007  < http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-9064639 > ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "HĀDI SABZAVĀRI" in Encyclopaedia Iranica ^ ( Keddie 1981 , pp. 40–48) ^ shidanshid & tavakoli.

Hakim Sabzevari's Philosophical Innovations . qom: Research Institute of Hawzah and University (Hawzah wa Dāneshgāh Research Institute). p. 1.

^ Corbin (1993), p.358 ^ a b c d M. Moḥaqqeq, "ASRĀR AL-ḤEKAM" in Encyclopaedia Iranica Works cited [ edit ] Keddie, Nikki, R. (1981).

Roots of Revolution: an Interpretive History . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300026115 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Corbin, Henry (1993).

History of Islamic Philosophy, Translated by Liadain Sherrard, Philip Sherrard . London; Kegan Paul International in association with Islamic Publications for The Institute of Ismaili Studies.

ISBN 0-7103-0416-1 .

The Metaphysics of Sabzvârî, tr. from the Arabic by Mehdi Mohagheg and Toshihico Izutso, Delmar, New York, 1977.

Seyyed Hossein Nasr, "HĀDI SABZAVĀRI" in Encyclopaedia Iranica shidanshid & tavakoli.

Hakim Sabzevari's Philosophical Innovations . qom: Research Institute of Hawzah and University (Hawzah wa Dāneshgāh Research Institute).

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Israel People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hadi_Sabzavari&oldid=1280406241 " Categories : 19th-century Iranian poets Islamic philosophers 19th-century Muslim scholars of Islam Iranian Shia scholars of Islam People from Sabzevar 1797 births 1873 deaths 19th-century Iranian philosophers Iranian Muslim mystics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hadi Sabzavari 9 languages Add topic

