Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Remit 3 Management structure 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Historic England 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public body to protect the historical environment of England Historic England Formation 1 April 2015 ( 2015-04-01 ) Legal status Non-departmental public body Headquarters The Engine House, Fire Fly Avenue, Swindon , SN2 2EH [ 1 ] Chairman Neil Mendoza Chief Executive Duncan Wilson Employees 964 FTE [ 2 ] Website historicengland .org .uk Historic England (officially the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England ) is an executive non-departmental public body of the British Government sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport . It is tasked with protecting the historic environment of England by preserving and listing historic buildings , scheduling ancient monuments , registering historic parks and gardens , advising central and local government, and promoting the public's enjoyment of, and advancing their knowledge of, ancient monuments and historic buildings.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The body was created by the National Heritage Act 1983 , and operated from April 1984 to April 2015 under the name of English Heritage .

[ 4 ] In 2015, following the changes to English Heritage's structure that moved the protection of the National Heritage Collection into the voluntary sector in the English Heritage Trust , the body that remained was rebranded as Historic England.

[ 5 ] The body also inherited the Historic England Archive from the former English Heritage, and projects linked to the archive such as Britain from Above, which saw the archive work with the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland to digitise, catalogue and put online 96,000 of the oldest Aerofilms images. The archive also houses various national collections, including the results of older projects, such as the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England and Images of England (providing online access to images of listed buildings in England as of 2002).

In February 2025, Historic England acquired the Janette Rosing Collection of historic photographs describing it as of "great national significance".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Remit [ edit ] Historic England's Swindon office, home to its archives Historic England's former London office at Holborn Bars Historic England inherited English Heritage's position as the UK government's statutory adviser and a statutory consultee on all aspects of the historic environment and its heritage assets.

[ 8 ] This includes archaeology on land and underwater, historic buildings sites and areas, designated landscapes and the historic elements of the wider landscape.

[ 9 ] It monitors and reports on the state of England's heritage and publishes the annual Heritage at Risk survey which is one of the UK government's official statistics . It is tasked to secure the preservation and enhancement of the human-made heritage of England for the benefit of future generations.

[ 9 ] Its remit involves: Caring for nationally important archive collections of photographs, drawings and other records which document the historic environment of England and date from the eighteenth century onwards.

Giving grants to national and local organisations for the conservation of historic buildings, monuments and landscapes. In 2013/14 over £13 million worth of grants were made to support heritage buildings.

[ 10 ] Advising central UK government on which English heritage assets are nationally important and should be protected by designation (i.e. listing, scheduling, etc.).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Administering and maintaining the National Heritage List for England , which is a register of England's: listed buildings , protected wrecks , registered battlefields , registered parks and gardens , scheduled monuments and World Heritage Sites .

[ 13 ] Advising local authorities on managing changes to the most important parts of heritage.

Providing expertise through advice, training and guidance to improve the standards and skills of people working in heritage, practical conservation and access to resources. In 2009–2010 it trained around 200 professionals working in local authorities and the wider sector.

[ 10 ] Consulting and collaborating with other heritage bodies, local and national planning organisations e.g. the preparation of the 2010 Planning Policy Statement for the Historic Environment (PPS5).

[ 14 ] Commissioning and conducting archaeological research, including the publication of Heritage Counts [ 15 ] and Heritage at Risk on behalf of the heritage sector; these are annual research surveys into the state of England's heritage.

It is not responsible for approving alterations to listed buildings. The management of listed buildings is the responsibility of local planning authorities and the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government .

[ 14 ] Historic England also owns the National Heritage Collection of nationally important historic sites, currently in public care. It does not run these sites as this function is instead carried out by the English Heritage Trust under licence until 2025.

[ 16 ] Management structure [ edit ] The Secretary of State at the Department for Culture, Media and Sport appoints members of the Commission, which is the governing board of the Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England and oversees the work of Historic England.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Since September 2023, the chair of the Commission is Lord Mendoza .

[ 19 ] The body is run by an executive team, led since the 2015 restructuring by Duncan Wilson .

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Conservation in the United Kingdom – Overview of the structure of environmental and cultural conservation in the UK Heritage Open Days – Annual celebration of England's architecture Cadw – Welsh Government historic environment service Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Wales – Archival institution in Wales Historic Environment Scotland – Scottish government agency Manx National Heritage – National heritage organisation of the Isle of Man National Trust – Conservation organisation in England, Wales and Northern Ireland National Trust for Scotland – Conservation charity that protects and promotes Scotland's natural and cultural heritage Natural England – UK non-departmental public body Department for Communities – Northern Irish government department Lists Index of conservation articles List of heritage registers List of country houses in the United Kingdom List of museums in England References [ edit ] ^ "Historic England Limited" .

Companies House . Retrieved 20 December 2019 .

^ "Historic England Annual Report and Accounts 2023-24" .

Historic England . 30 July 2024.

^ National Heritage Act 1983 .

legislation.gov.uk .

^ "Historic England's Role" .

Historic England . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "New Era for England's Heritage" .

English Heritage . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ Fabbro, Lauren Del (21 February 2025).

"Historic England acquires over 8,000 photographs offering 'glimpse into past' " .

The Standard . Retrieved 21 February 2025 .

^ Bakare, Lanre (21 February 2025).

"Historic England acquires collection featuring some of UK's oldest photos" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 21 February 2025 .

^ "Historic Environment" . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ a b "Funding of the Arts and Heritage" . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ a b "English Heritage Annual Report and Accounts" .

Historic England . English Heritage. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

^ "Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979" . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ "National Heritage Act 1983, Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England" . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ "Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990" . Retrieved 16 May 2011 .

^ a b "Planning Policy Statement 5: Planning for the Historic Environment" . Government of the United Kingdom. 23 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010 – via Internet Archive.

^ "Heritage Counts" .

Historic England . Retrieved 2 June 2022 .

^ "Historic England and the English Heritage Trust" .

Historic England . Retrieved 12 March 2025 .

^ "Who We Are" .

Historic England . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ "Culture Secretary appoints new Historic England Commissioners" .

GOV.UK . Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport. 6 January 2016 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ "Historic England Commissioners' Biographies: Lord Mendoza CBE" .

Historic England . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ "Executive Team Biographies: Duncan Wilson CBE" .

Historic England . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Historic England .

Official website The Historic England Archive : search over 1 million catalogue entries describing photographs, plans and drawings of England's buildings and historic sites Britain from Above : the Aerofilms collection of aerial photographs, 1919–1953 National Heritage List for England v t e Department for Culture, Media and Sport Headquarters: 100 Parliament Street Ministers Secretary of State Lisa Nandy Minister of State Minister of State for Creative Industries, Arts and Tourism : Chris Bryant Under-Secretaries of State Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Sport, Media, Civil Society and Youth : Stephanie Peacock Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Gambling: The Baroness Twycross Non-ministerial departments Charity Commission National Archives Non-departmental public bodies Advisory Advisory Council on National Records and Archives Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest Theatres Trust Treasure Valuation Committee Executive Arts Council England British Film Institute Gambling Commission Historic England Horserace Betting Levy Board National Heritage Memorial Fund National Lottery Community Fund Sport England Sports Grounds Safety Authority UK Anti-Doping UK Sport VisitBritain VisitEngland Museums British Library British Museum Horniman Museum Museum of the Home Imperial War Museums National Gallery National Museums Liverpool National Portrait Gallery Natural History Museum Royal Armouries Royal Museums Greenwich Science Museum Group Sir John Soane's Museum Tate Victoria and Albert Museum Wallace Collection Tribunal Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal Other bodies BBC BBC Board Channel Four Television Corporation Churches Conservation Trust Historic Royal Palaces National Citizen Service S4C S4C Authority The Royal Parks Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historic_England&oldid=1297590165 " Categories : Historic England Heritage organisations in England Heritage registers in England British architectural history Conservation in England English Heritage Historic sites in England Interested parties in planning in England National archaeological organizations National heritage organizations Department for Culture, Media and Sport Non-departmental public bodies of the United Kingdom government Government agencies established in 2015 2015 establishments in England Research organisations in England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from July 2022 Use dmy dates from April 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historic England 12 languages Add topic

