Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Electronic structure of the sugar-phosphate backbone 2 Phosphodiesters in DNA and RNA 3 Peptide nucleic acids 4 Role in metabolism 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sugar phosphates 4 languages 한국어 Português Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Glucose-6-phosphate Phytic acid Sugar phosphates ( sugars that have added or substituted phosphate groups) are often used in biological systems to store or transfer energy . They also form the backbone for DNA and RNA . Sugar phosphate backbone geometry is altered in the vicinity of the modified nucleotides.

Examples include: Dihydroxyacetone phosphate Glucose-6-phosphate Phytic acid Teichoic acid Electronic structure of the sugar-phosphate backbone [ edit ] The sugar-phosphate backbone has multiplex electronic structure and the electron delocalisation complicates its theoretical description. Some part of the electronic density is delocalised over the whole backbone and the extent of the delocalisation is affected by backbone conformation due to hyper-conjugation effects. Hyper-conjugation arises from donor-acceptor interactions of localised orbitals in 1,3 positions.

Phosphodiesters in DNA and RNA [ edit ] The phosphodiester backbone of DNA and RNA consists of pairs of deoxyribose or ribose sugars linked by phosphates at the respective 3' and 5' positions. The backbone is negatively charged and hydrophilic , which allows strong interactions with water.

[ 1 ] Sugar-phosphate backbone forms the structural framework of nucleic acids , including DNA and RNA .

[ 2 ] Sugar phosphates are defined as carbohydrates to which a phosphate group is bound by an ester or an either linkage, depending on whether it involves an alcoholic or a hemiacetalic hydroxyl, respectively.

Solubility , acid hydrolysis rates, acid strengths, and ability to act as sugar group donors are the knowledge of physical and chemical properties required for the analysis of both types of sugar phosphates. The photosynthetic carbon reduction cycle is closely associated with sugar phosphates, and sugar phosphates are one of the key molecules in metabolism ,(Sugar phosphates are major players in metabolism due to their task of storing and transferring energy. Not only ribose 5-phosphate but also fructose 6-phosphate are an intermediate of the pentose-phosphate pathway which generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and pentoses from glucose polymers and their degradation products.) oxidative pentose phosphate pathways, gluconeogenesis , important intermediates in glycolysis . Sugar phosphates are not only involved in metabolic regulation and signaling but also involved in the synthesis of other phosphate compounds.

[ 3 ] Peptide nucleic acids [ edit ] Peptide nucleic acid (PNA) is a nucleic acid in which natural nucleic acid has been replaced by a synthetic peptide backbone formed from N -(2-amino-ethyl)-glycine units along with sugar phosphate backbone forming in an achiral and uncharged moiety that mimics RNA or DNA oligonucleotides . PNA cannot be degraded inside living cells but it is chemically stable and resistant to hydrolytic (enzymatic) cleavage .

[ 4 ] Role in metabolism [ edit ] Sugar phosphates are major players in metabolism due to their task of storing and transferring energy. Not only ribose 5-phosphate but also fructose 6-phosphate are an intermediate of the pentose-phosphate pathway which generates nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and pentoses from glucose polymers and their degradation products. The pathway is known as glycolysis where the same carbohydrates are degraded into pyruvates thus providing energy.

[ 5 ] Enzymes are catalysed for the reactions of these pathways. Some enzymes contain metal centers in their active site which is important part of the enzymes and as well as for the catalysed reaction. The phosphate group can coordinate to the metal center for example, 1,6-bisphosphatase and ADP-ribose pyrophosphatase.

Phosphoglycerate and several sugar phosphates that are known intermediates of the Calvin photosynthetic carbon cycle , stimulate light-dependent carbon dioxide fixation by isolated chloroplasts. This ability is shared by certain other metabolites (e.g. glucose 1-phosphate) from which the accepted Calvin-cycle intermediates could easily be derived by known metabolic routes.

References [ edit ] ^ "Sugar-phosphate backbone" . 12 September 2020.

^ "Phosphate Backbone" .

^ "Case Study: Sugar Phosphates - Methods for Analysis of Carbohydrate Metabolism in Photosynthetic Organisms - Chapter 14".

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-803396-8.00014-4 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Baerlocher, Gabriela M.; Lansdorp, Peter M. (2004). "Telomere Length Measurements Using Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization and Flow Cytometry".

Cytometry, 4th Edition: New Developments . Methods in Cell Biology. Vol. 75. pp.

719– 750.

doi : 10.1016/S0091-679X(04)75031-1 .

ISBN 9780125641708 .

PMID 15603450 .

^ "Coordination Chemistry of Sugar-Phosphate complexes" (PDF) . Retrieved 2018-02-07 .

External links [ edit ] Sugar+Phosphates at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sugar_phosphates&oldid=1286297533 " Categories : Glycomics Phosphates Nucleotides DNA RNA Hidden category: CS1 errors: missing periodical This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sugar phosphates 4 languages Add topic

