Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Musical movement 3 Critiques 4 Influence 5 Post Tropicália 6 Seminal albums 7 See also 8 Further reading 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Tropicália 20 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Brazilian music genre and cultural movement For other uses, see Tropicália (disambiguation) .

Tropicália Stylistic origins Musical Pop rock psychedelia samba baroque pop Jovem Guarda bossa nova baião afoxê frevo fado Art Manifesto Antropófago pop art Brazilian concrete movement Cultural origins Late 1960s, Southeast Region , Brazil Derivative forms MPB , [ 1 ] pós-tropicalismo Other topics Jovem Guarda samba rock Tropicália ( Portuguese pronunciation: [tɾopiˈkaʎɐ, tɾɔpiˈkaljɐ] ), also known as tropicalismo ( [tɾopikɐˈlizmu, tɾɔpikaˈ-] ), was a Brazilian art movement that arose in the late 1960s. It was characterized by the amalgamation of Brazilian genres—notably the union of the popular and the avant-garde , as well as the melding of Brazilian tradition and foreign traditions and styles.

[ 2 ] Today, tropicália is chiefly associated with the musical faction of the movement, which merged Brazilian and African rhythms with British and American psychedelia and pop rock . The movement also included works of film, theatre, and poetry.

The term tropicália (tropicalismo) has multiple connotations in that it played on images of Brazil being that of a "tropical paradise".

[ 3 ] Tropicalia was presented as a "field for reflection on social history".

[ 4 ] The movement was begun by a group of musicians from Bahia notably Caetano Veloso , Gilberto Gil , Gal Costa , Tom Zé , and the poet-lyricist Torquato Neto . Later the group moved from Salvador (the capital of Bahia) to São Paulo where they met with collaborators Os Mutantes and Rogério Duprat among others. They went on to produce the 1968 album Tropicália: ou Panis et Circencis , which served as the movement's manifesto.

Tropicália was not only an expression in analyzing and manipulating culture but also a mode of political expression. The tropicália movement came to fruition at a time when Brazil's military dictatorship and left-wing ideas held distinct but prominent amounts of power simultaneously. The tropicalists' rejection of both sides' version of nationalism (the military's conservative patriotism and the ineffectual bourgeois anti-imperialism) was met with criticism and harassment.

[ 5 ] The dissolution of the movement by the early 1970s gave rise to a new wave of soloists and groups identifying as “post-tropicalist”. The movement has inspired many artists nationally and internationally. Additionally, tropicalia continues to be a main feature in the original Bahian group and their fellows’ work.

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] A dominant principle of tropicália was antropofagia , a type of cultural "cannibalism" that encouraged the consumption of disparate influences, both temporal and geographic, as well as categorical, out of which could be created something uniquely Brazilian. It was a blurring of lines and preexisting conceptions of high and low art forms, as well as prestigious and marginalized artistic and political expressions. The idea was originally put forth by poet Oswald de Andrade in his Manifesto Antropófago , published in 1928, and was developed further by the tropicalistas in the 1960s.

[ 2 ] While concrete poets were not an initial influence upon the group's works, the two groups, particularly Veloso, Gil, and Augusto de Campos, would go on to share an intellectual partnership in São Paulo.  This partnership would help the tropicalistas to form connections with other artists around the city, most notably Rogério Duprat.

[ 2 ] Helio Oiticica ’s 1967 work “Tropicalia” shares its name and aesthetic with the movement. The movement also utilized Carmen Miranda , a Brazilian/Portuguese international star, who in Brazil had come to be viewed as inauthentic. The use of Carmen Miranda's image and motifs became synonymous with the movement. Veloso in particular would imitate the icons gestures and mannerisms during performances. This usage was intentionally done as a means to address the concept of "authenticity". Miranda was seen as presenting a caricature of what true Brazilian-ness was by Brazilians while international audiences saw her as a representative of Brazil and its culture. This dichotomy provided the means by which the tropicalistas could address the concept of authenticity in such a fashion that it was striking to their audiences.

[ 2 ] Gilberto Gil Founding Member of the Movement Musical movement [ edit ] Caetano Veloso performing at the third Popular Music Festival, October 21, 1967.

Brazilian National Archives .

The 1968 album Tropicália: ou Panis et Circencis is regarded as the musical manifesto of the tropicália movement. Although it was a collaborative project, the main creative forces behind the album were Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil . The album experimented with unusual time signatures and unorthodox song structures, and also mixed tradition with innovation. Politically, the album expressed criticism of the coup d'état of 1964 . Key artists of the movement include Os Mutantes , Gilberto Gil , Gal Costa and Caetano Veloso .

[ citation needed ] According to Maya Jaggi , "Gil was partly inspired by Jorge Ben Jor , a Rio musician on the fringes of the movement, who mixed urban samba and bossa nova with rhythm and blues, soul and funk." [ 6 ] The anarchistic, anti-authoritarian musical and lyrical expressions of the tropicalistas soon made them a target of censorship and repression by the military junta that ruled Brazil in this period, as did the fact some of the collective, including Veloso and Gil, also actively participated in anti-government demonstrations. The tropicalistas' passionate interest in the new wave of American and British psychedelic music of the period - most notably the work of the Beatles - also put them at odds with Marxist-influenced students on Brazil's left, whose aesthetic agenda was strongly nationalistic, and oriented towards 'traditional' Brazilian musical forms. This leftist faction vigorously rejected anything - especially tropicalismo - which they perceived as being tainted by the corrupting influences of Western capitalist popular culture. The politico-artistic tensions between leftist students and the tropicalistas reached a climax in September 1968, with Caetano Veloso's watershed performances at the third International Song Festival, held in the auditorium of Rio's Catholic University, where the audience not surprisingly included a large contingent of left-wing students.

Gal Costa in 1969.

Brazilian National Archives .

Veloso had won a major song prize at the previous year's festival, when he was backed by an Argentinian rock band, and although his unconventional performance caused some initial consternation, he managed to win over the crowd and was feted as a new star of Brazilian popular music. By late 1968, however, Veloso was fully immersed in the tropicalia experiment, and his performances, which were expressly intended as provocative art "happenings", caused a near-riot. In the first round of the competition on 12 September, Veloso was initially greeted by enthusiastic applause, but the mood quickly changed when the music started. Veloso came on dressed in a bright green plastic tunic, festooned with electrical wires and necklaces strung with animal teeth, and his backing band Os Mutantes were also dressed in similarly outlandish attire. The ensemble launched into a barrage of psychedelic music, played at high volume, and Veloso further outraged the students with his overtly sexual stage movements. The crowd reacted angrily, shouting abuse at the performers and booing loudly, and their fury was only exacerbated by the surprise appearance of an American pop singer, John Dandurand , who joined Veloso on stage and grunted incoherently into the microphone.

Os Mutantes , 1969.

Brazilian National Archives .

After such a powerful negative reaction, Veloso was unsure whether to appear in the second round on 15 September, but his manager convinced him to go on, and this chaotic performance was recorded live and later released as a single. The students in the audience began hissing as soon as Veloso's name was announced, even before he had even taken the stage. Wearing the same green costume (minus the wires and necklaces), Veloso came on with Os Mutantes amid a storm of catcalls, and the group launched into a provocative new song Veloso had written for the occasion, "É Proibido Proibir" (" It is Forbidden to Forbid "), the title of which he had taken from a photo of a Parisian protest poster, which he had seen reproduced in a local magazine. The booing and jeering was soon so loud that Veloso struggled to be heard over the din, and he again deliberately taunted the leftists with his sexualised stage actions. Within a short time the performers were being pelted with fruit, vegetables, eggs and a rain of paper balls, and a section of the audience expressed their disapproval by standing up and turning their backs to the performers, prompting Os Mutantes to respond in kind by turning their backs on the audience. Infuriated by the students' reaction, Veloso stopped singing and launched into a furious improvised monologue, haranguing the students for their behaviour and denouncing what he saw as their cultural conservatism. He was then joined by Gilberto Gil, who came on stage to show his support for Veloso, and as the tumult reached a crescendo, Veloso announced he was withdrawing from the competition, and after deliberately finishing the song out of tune, the tropicalistas defiantly walked offstage, arm-in-arm.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] On December 27, 1968, Veloso and Gil were arrested and imprisoned by the military government over the political content of their work. After two months, the two were released and subsequently forced to seek exile in London , where they lived and resumed their musical careers until they were able to return to Brazil in 1972.

In 1993, Veloso and Gil released the album Tropicália 2 , celebrating 25 years of the movement and commemorating their earlier musical experiments.

[ 8 ] Critiques [ edit ] Tropicália's controversy can be traced to the uncertain and unfriendly relationship the members of the movement had with the mass media. The movement's emphasis on art clashed with the media's need for mass appeal and marketability. Tropicália additionally had an image of sensuality and flamboyance. This was a protest to the reinstated oppression of Brazil's military rule in the 1960s, and an additional cause for media pushback.  In 1968, tropicália events at clubs, music festivals, and television shows attracted media attention and aroused tension between Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil and their critics. This widespread interest attracted the attention and suspicion of the military, who feared tropicália's influence of protest in the cultural realm.

Near the end of 1968, tropicália experienced a shift to a more overt association with international countercultures and movements, most notably that of African-American Black Power in the United States. The movement was becoming increasingly leftist, and pushed for artistic output.

[ 9 ] At a later tropicália concert in the same year, during a performance by Caetano Veloso, a riot erupted in the auditorium between tropicalists and supporters of nationalist-participant music. The nationalists were primarily college students, and the uproar culminated with screams and hurling garbage at Veloso. The nationalist-participant group's resistance of the movement was nothing new, but this incident was the tipping point of their opposition. At the nightclub Sucata, tropicália shows became increasingly resistant to Brazil's military-run society. Due to Veloso's refusal to censor the shows to government wishes, the military began to monitor tropicália events. On December 27, 1968, at the peak of government repression, Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil were arrested, detained, and exiled to London for two and a half years.

[ 2 ] Modern critic Roberto Schwarz addresses tropicália's hand in solidifying the idea of the absurd as a permanent evil of Brazil, and its issues with an ideological mentality. However, the approaches of the movement were ever-shifting and did not stick to one central idea.

[ 10 ] Influence [ edit ] Carmen Miranda in 1950 Throughout the 1940s until her death in 1955, the singer and actress Carmen Miranda made Hollywood musicals and performed live.  Before first appearing on Broadway in 1939, she had a successful career in Brazil throughout the 1930s and was known as the "Queen of Samba".  Yet after she gained international success in the United States, many Brazilians regarded her elaborate costume and performance as a caricature of Brazilian culture.

[ 11 ] In Caetano Veloso's 1968 song "Tropicália", the musician references Carmen Miranda whose vulgar iconography were an inspiration.  Caetano Veloso has said Carmen Miranda was a "culturally repulsive object" for his generation.  Scholar Christopher Dunn says that by embracing Carmen, Veloso treats her as "an allegory of Brazilian culture and its reception abroad".

[ 2 ] Many tropicalistas have maintained a presence in Brazilian popular culture, specifically through MPB (Brazilian pop music). Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso are both respectively popular nationally and around the globe. Tom Zé, a tropicalista who had largely faded into obscurity at the end of the movement, saw a resurgence of critical and commercial interest in the 1990s.

[ 2 ] Tropicalismo has been cited as an influence by rock musicians such as David Byrne , Beck , the Bird and the Bee , Arto Lindsay , Devendra Banhart , El Guincho , Of Montreal , and Nelly Furtado . In 1998, Beck released Mutations , the title of which is a tribute to Os Mutantes. Its hit single, " Tropicalia ", reached number 21 on the Billboard Modern Rock singles chart.

Tropicália has morphed not only the Brazilian music scene itself but, the way Brazilian music is viewed. Tropicália expanded what Brazilians view as properly “authentic” and since the '90s broadened the way international audiences experienced and understood Brazilian music. Tropicália created a new precedent for artistic hybridization allowing for a diversity of sounds and styles in those who were inspired by the movement.

[ 2 ] Tom Zé in São Paulo in 2007 In 2021, scientists named a species of Brazilian tree frog , Scinax tropicalia after this movement.

[ 12 ] Post Tropicália [ edit ] Tropicalia introduced two very unusual movements to modern Brazil – antropofagia and concretism [ pt ] . In addition to this was pop music from abroad that helped inaugurate postmodernism in Brazil. In spite of the falling-outs and violence, there is a permanence of tradition in Oswald's antropofagia, who at one point of time conflicted with the idea of Romantic Indianism of the nineteenth century.

[ 13 ] These ideas were and still are seen in theaters and people's notions that involved a relationship that tied back to a longer history of poetic creations.

Moreover, members of tropicalia who were not arrested or tortured, voluntarily escaped into exile in order to get away from the strict and repressing authorities. Many continuously went back and forth between different countries and cities. Some were never able to settle down. People like Caetano, Gil, and Torquato Neto, spent time in places like London, New York, or Paris.

[ 14 ] Some, but not all, were allowed to return to Brazil after years had passed. Others, still could only stay for short periods of time.

At the same time, underground magazines were expanding and this gave those who were overseas a chance to speak up about their experiences. Oiticica, for example, was one who moved to New York and published a magazine article titled, “Mario Montez, Tropicamp”.

[ 15 ] The names for the titles that were used related to the risky and systematic aims during the times of tropicalia. These magazines also told the stories of others who were in the United States and home in Brazil.  By tropicalia going underground, there was a unity of the members within the group because people like Oiticica sent these writing to Brazil so that the articles could circulate locally.

In 2002, Caetano Veloso published an account of the tropicália movement, Tropical Truth: A Story of Music and Revolution in Brazil .  The 1999 compilation Tropicália Essentials , featuring songs by Gilberto Gil , Caetano Veloso , Gal Costa , Tom Zé , and Os Mutantes , is an introduction to the style. Other compilations include The Tropicalia Style (1996), Tropicália 30 Anos (1997), Tropicalia: Millennium (1999), Tropicalia: Gold (2002), and Novo Millennium: Tropicalia (2005). Yet another compilation, Tropicalia: A Brazilian Revolution in Sound , was released to acclaim in 2006.

[ 16 ] A 2012 documentary film, Tropicália , was made on the subject and artists in general; directed by Brazilian filmmaker Marcelo Machado, where Fernando Meirelles served as one of its executive producers.

[ 17 ] Seminal albums [ edit ] Artist Album Year Os Mutantes Os Mutantes 1968 Various Tropicália: ou Panis et Circencis 1968 Caetano Veloso Caetano Veloso 1968 Gilberto Gil Gilberto Gil 1968 Gal Costa Gal Costa 1969 See also [ edit ] Lusotropicalism Exoticism Further reading [ edit ] Paula, José Agrippino. "PanAmérica". 2001. Papagaio.

McGowan, Chris and Pessanha, Ricardo. "The Brazilian Sound: Samba, Bossa Nova and the Popular Music of Brazil."  Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998 ISBN 1-56639-545-3 Dunn, Christopher.

Brutality Garden: Tropicália and the Emergence of a Brazilian Counterculture.

Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2001.

ISBN 0-8078-4976-6 (in Italian) Mei, Giancarlo.

Canto Latino: Origine, Evoluzione e Protagonisti della Musica Popolare del Brasile.

2004. Stampa Alternativa-Nuovi Equilibri. Preface by Sergio Bardotti and postface by Milton Nascimento.

Leorne, Ana.

Tropicália . New York/London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2025.

ISBN 9798765119068 References [ edit ] Gildo De Stefano , Il popolo del samba . La vicenda e i protagonisti della storia della brazilian popular music , Préface by Chico Buarque de Holanda , Introduction by Gianni Minà , RAI Television Editions, Rome 2005, ISBN 8839713484 ^ "Tropicalia" .

AllMusic .

All Media Network . Retrieved November 7, 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Dunn, Christopher (October 15, 2001).

Brutality Garden: Tropicalia and the Emergence of a Brazilian Counterculture . The University of North Carolina Press; 1st New edition (October 15, 2001). pp.

276 .

ISBN 0807849766 .

^ a b Veloso, Caetano, Barbara Einzig, and Isabel de Sena. 2003. Tropical truth: a story of music and revolution in Brazil.

^ Perrone, Charles A. "Nationalism, Dissension, and Politics in Contemporary Brazilian Popular Music." Luso-Brazilian Review 39, no. 1 (2002): 65-78.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3513834 ^ Perrone, Charles A. “Nationalism, Dissension, and Politics in Contemporary Brazilian Popular Music.” Luso-Brazilian Review 39.1 (2002): 65–78. Print.

^ Jaggi, Maya (13 May 2006).

"Blood on the Ground" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ Victoria Langland, "Il est Interdit d’Interdire: The Transnational Experience of 1968 in Brazil", Estudios Interdisciplinarios de América Latina y el Caribe , Vol. 17, No. 1 (2006) ^ Béhague, Gerard, Gerard.

(Spring–Summer 2006).

"Rap, Reggae, Rock, or Samba: The Local and the Global in Brazilian Popular Music (1985–95)" .

Latin American Music Review .

27 (1): 79– 90.

doi : 10.1353/lat.2006.0021 .

S2CID 191430137 .

^ Harte, Colin (November 1, 2013).

"Tropicália Film Review" .

Chasqui .

42 (2): 215– 216.

^ Béhague, Gerard (December 1980). "Brazilian Musical Values of the 1960s and 1970s: Popular Urban Music from Bossa Nova to Tropicalia".

Popular Urban Music from Bossa Nova to Tropicalia .

14 (3): 437– 452.

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-3840.1980.1403_437.x .

^ [1] CARMEN MIRANDA: RIPE FOR IMITATION Indiana University ^ Novaes-e-Fagundes G; K Araujo-Vieira; OM Entiauspe-Neto; IJ Roberto; VGD Orrico; M Solé; CFB Haddad; D Loebmann (2021).

"A new species of Scinax Wagler (Hylidae: Scinaxini) from the tropical forests of Northeastern Brazil" .

Zootaxa .

4903 : 1– 41.

doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.4903.1.1 .

hdl : 11449/207087 . Retrieved May 25, 2022 .

^ Brown, Timothy (2014). The Global Sixties in Sound and Vision. England: palgrave macmillan. p. 40.

ISBN 978-1-137-37522-3 .

^ Harte, Colin (November 2013). "Tropicália". Chasqui: 215–216.

^ Cruz, Max (September 2011). "TROPICAMP: PRE- and POST-TROPICLIA at Once: Some Contextual Notes on Hlio Oiticicas 1971 Text". Afterall: A Journal of Art, Context and Enquiry.

^ Staff.

"Tropicalia: A Brazilian Revolution In Sound" .

Metacritic . Retrieved 2008-05-16 .

^ "Tropicália (2012) - IMDb" .

IMDb .

External links [ edit ] The Best Tropicalia Albums OBJETO SEMI-IDENTIFICADO NO PAIS DO FUTURO: Tropicália and post-tropicalismo in Brasil (1967–1976) at Ràdio Web MACBA Leila Miccolis Brazilian Alternative Press Collection at the Special Collections Division at v t e Music from Lusophone countries Angola Kizomba Batidão romântico Kuduro Rebita Semba Tarraxinha Brazil Axé Baião Brazilian bass Brazilian hip hop Brasília hip hop Stronda Vigilante rap Brazilian jazz Brazilian rock Brazilian thrash metal Forrocore Samba rock Tropicália Brega Brega funk Brega pop Tecno brega Chamarrita Chula (Brazil) Bahia Rio Grande do Sul Forró Electronic forró Forrocore Forró safado Forró pé de serra Pisadinha Piseiro University forró Frevo Funk carioca Funk melody Funknejo Funk ostentação Funk ousadia Proibidão Rasteirinha Guitarrada Música popular brasileira Brega pop Choro Seresta Sertanejo music Funknejo Música Caipira Música Sertaneja Raiz Vanerão Samba Rio urban samba Main subgenres Batucada Bossa nova Pagode Bahian pagode Pagode romântico Partido alto Samba-canção Samba de breque Samba-enredo Fusion genres of Samba Samba-choro Samba-funk Samba-jazz Samba-rap Samba reggae Sambass Ballroom dance Samba de Gafieira Samba rock Bahian samba Rural sambo Samba-batido Samba-chulado Samba-corrido Samba de roda Samba duro Samba junino Samba-raiado Urban sambo Bahian pagode Samba afro Samba reggae Cape Verde Batuque Colá Coladeira Funaná Morna Tabanka Mozambique Marrabenta Portugal Cante Alentejano Chula (Portugal) Chamarrita Desgarrada Fado Hip hop tuga Pimba Portuguese rock Other Goa Guinea-Bissau Macau São Tomé and Príncipe Sri Lanka Timor-Leste Related Latin music v t e Psychedelic music Genres By prefix and style Psychedelic Folk New Weird America Funk Pop Hip hop Rock Soul Cinematic soul Trance Goa trance Nitzhonot Psydub Suomisaundi Acid House Punk Rock Techno Trance Other Chillwave Dream-beat Freakbeat Hypnagogic pop Italian occult psychedelia Krautrock Madchester Neo-psychedelia Dream pop Shoegaze Paisley Underground Sampledelia Space rock Stoner rock Tropicália Zamrock Subcultures Beat Generation Cannabis culture Counterculture of the 1960s Deadhead Freak scene Grebo Hippies Jam band New Age travellers Rave culture San Francisco sound Second Summer of Love Summer of Love UK underground Lists Acid rock artists Neo-psychedelia artists Psychedelic folk artists Psychedelic pop artists Psychedelic rock artists See also Psychedelic rock in Australia and New Zealand Psychedelic rock in Latin America Psychedelia Psychedelic art LSD art Psychedelic drug Psychedelic era Psychedelic experience Psychedelic literature Category:Drug culture Category:Hippie movement Category:Psychedelic musical groups v t e Rock music Components Backbeat Distortion Rock band Electric guitar Electric bass Rhythm section Drum kit Genres by decade of origin (sub-subgenres not included) 1950s Instrumental rock Latin rock Pop rock Rock and roll British Rockabilly Surf music 1960s Anatolian rock Art rock Baroque rock Beat music Big-beat Blues rock Boogie rock Chamber pop Christian rock Comedy rock Country rock Electronic rock Experimental rock Flamenco rock Folk rock Garage rock Hard rock Heavy metal Jam Jazz rock Krautrock Noise rock Occult rock Progressive rock Psychedelic rock Raga rock Roots rock Samba rock Soft rock Southern rock Space rock Swamp rock 1970s Arena rock Cello rock Cock rock Dance-rock Funk rock Glam rock Heartland rock Industrial rock New wave Post-progressive Post-punk Power pop Pub rock (Australia) Pub rock (United Kingdom) Punk rock Shock rock Soft rock Visual kei Yacht rock 1980s Alternative rock Deathrock Dream pop Gothic rock Grebo Grunge Indie rock Jangle pop Rap rock Rock kapak Shoegaze Slacker rock Trop rock 1990s Britpop Emo Math rock Post-grunge Post-rock Stoner rock Sufi rock Viking rock Regional scenes North America American Palm Desert Scene Canadian Costa Rican Cuban Dominican Haitian Mexican Chicano rock Puerto Rican South America Argentine Brazilian Brazilian thrash metal Samba rock Tropicália Chilean Colombian Ecuadorian Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Europe Albanian Belarusian Belgian Bosnian British British rock and roll Britpop Post-Britpop Croatian Danish Dutch Indorock Nederbeat Ultra Estonian Finnish French German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbian Slovenian Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Yugoslavian Art rock Hard rock and heavy metal Extreme metal Neo-rockabilly New wave Post-punk Punk Asia Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Cambodian ( 1959–1975 ) Chinese Filipino Bisrock Indian Bengali Raga Indonesian Iranian Israeli Japanese Visual kei Korean Malaysian Rock kapak Nepalese Pakistani Sufi Russian Taiwanese Thai Turkish Africa Angolan Sahara desert region Zambian Oceania Australian New Zealand Radio formats Active rock Adult album alternative Album-oriented rock Classic rock Mainstream rock Modern rock Progressive rock (radio format) History Culture British Invasion List of years in rock music Origins of rock and roll Country music Jazz Rhythm and blues Electronics in rock music Social effects Rock Against Communism Rock Against Racism Rock Against Sexism Rock music and the fall of communism Rockism and poptimism Women in rock Related Beatlesque List of rock genres Motorik Outlaw country Progressive music Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Rock concert Rock festival Rock musical Rock opera Wagnerian rock Wall of Sound Category Portal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tropicália&oldid=1305207850 " Categories : Tropicália 1960s establishments in Brazil 20th-century art movements Brazilian art Brazilian rock music Psychedelic rock Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with Portuguese IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tropicália 20 languages Add topic

