Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mineraloid 23 languages Asturianu Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-crystalline mineral-like substance This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mineraloid" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A mineraloid is a naturally occurring substance that resembles a mineral , but does not demonstrate the crystallinity of a mineral. Mineraloid substances possess chemical compositions that vary beyond the generally accepted ranges for specific minerals, for example, obsidian is an amorphous glass and not a true crystal ; lignite ( jet ) is derived from the decay of wood under extreme pressure underground; and opal is a mineraloid substance because of its non-crystalline nature.

Pearl is a mineraloid substance because the calcite crystals and the aragonite crystals are bonded by an organic material, and naturally occurs without definite proportions of the components.

The first usage of the term mineraloid substance was in 1909, by mineralogist and geologist Julian Niedzwiedzki, in identifying and describing amorphous substances that resemble minerals.

[ 1 ] Examples [ edit ] Allophane , solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Amber , non-crystalline structure, organic Anthracite or hard coal Bituminous coal Chlorophaeite [ 2 ] Chrysocolla , solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Deweylite , a mixture of serpentine and talc or stevensite [ 3 ] Diatomite Ebonite , [ citation needed ] vulcanized natural or synthetic rubber (organic); lacks a crystalline structure Fulgurite , a variety of the mineraloid lechatelierite Jet , non-crystalline nature, organic (very compact coal) Lechatelierite , nearly pure silica glass, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Leonardite Libyan desert glass Lignite —brown coal Limonite , a mixture of oxides and hydroxides of iron Mercury , (as liquid) Moldavite Mookaite/Radiolarite Obsidian —volcanic glass; non-crystalline structure, a silica rich glass Opal , non-crystalline hydrated silica silicon dioxide, solid (IMA/CNMNC valid mineral name) Ozokerite , a black waxy hydrocarbon mixture Palagonite [ 2 ] Pearl , organically produced carbonate Pele's hair Petroleum , liquid, organic Psilomelane Pumice Pyrobitumen , amorphous fossilized petroleum (noncrystalline, organic) Shungite , black, lustrous, more than 98 weight percent of carbon Sideromelane , [ 2 ] volcanic glass – non-crystalline, an iron rich, silica poor glass Tektite , meteoritic silica rich glass Water , e.g. as inclusions in other crystals, or in the form of rain , (as liquid) Zietrisikite , a mineral hydrocarbon wax See also [ edit ] List of minerals – Mineraloids are listed after minerals in each alphabetically sorted section.

References [ edit ] ^ Titamgim, Dirk (1988). "Rock Chips: What is a Mineraloid?".

Rocks & Minerals .

63 (1): 65.

doi : 10.1080/00357529.1988.11761818 .

^ a b c Peacock, M. A.; Fuller, R. E. (1928).

"Chlorophaeite, sideromelane, and palagonite from the Columbia River Plateau" (PDF) .

American Mineralogist .

13 : 360– 382 . Retrieved 6 September 2017 .

^ Schandl, Eva S.; Gorton, Michael P. (1995).

"Phyllosilicate Alteration of Olivine in The Lower Sheeted Dike Complex, Leg 140, Hole 504B" (PDF) .

Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program, Scientific Results . Proceedings of the Ocean Drilling Program. 137/140: 207– 216.

doi : 10.2973/odp.proc.sr.137140.019.1995 .

ISSN 1096-7451 .

External links [ edit ] The Mineraloids Class . Amethyst Galleries.

This article about a specific mineral or mineraloid is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mineraloid&oldid=1285770895 " Categories : Mineralogy Mineral stubs Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 All stub articles This page was last edited on 15 April 2025, at 17:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mineraloid 23 languages Add topic

