Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical foundation Toggle Historical foundation subsection 1.1 Victorian stream 1.2 German stream 1.3 20th century 2 Definition of measurement in the social sciences 3 Instruments and procedures 4 Theoretical approaches Toggle Theoretical approaches subsection 4.1 Key concepts 5 Standards of quality Toggle Standards of quality subsection 5.1 Testing standards 5.2 Evaluation standards 6 Controversy and criticism 7 Non-human: animals and machines 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychometrics 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory and technique of psychological measurement Not to be confused with psychrometrics , the measurement of the heat and water vapor properties of air.

For other uses of this term and similar terms, see Psychometry (disambiguation) .

This article is about the theory and technique of measurement of psychological attributes. For research design and methodology in psychology, see Psychological statistics . For the mathematical modeling of psychological theories and phenomena, see Mathematical psychology .

Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Psychometrics is a field of study within psychology concerned with the theory and technique of measurement . Psychometrics generally covers specialized fields within psychology and education devoted to testing, measurement, assessment, and related activities.

[ 1 ] Psychometrics is concerned with the objective measurement of latent constructs that cannot be directly observed. Examples of latent constructs include intelligence , introversion , mental disorders , and educational achievement .

[ 2 ] The levels of individuals on nonobservable latent variables are inferred through mathematical modeling based on what is observed from individuals' responses to items on tests and scales.

[ 2 ] Practitioners are described as psychometricians, although not all who engage in psychometric research go by this title. Psychometricians usually possess specific qualifications, such as degrees or certifications, and most are psychologists with advanced graduate training in psychometrics and measurement theory. In addition to traditional academic institutions, practitioners also work for organizations, such as Pearson and the Educational Testing Service . Some psychometric researchers focus on the construction and validation of assessment instruments, including surveys , scales , and open- or close-ended questionnaires . Others focus on research relating to measurement theory (e.g., item response theory , intraclass correlation ) or specialize as learning and development professionals.

Historical foundation [ edit ] Psychological testing has come from two streams of thought: the first, from Darwin , Galton , and Cattell , on the measurement of individual differences and the second, from Herbart , Weber , Fechner , and Wundt and their psychophysical measurements of a similar construct. The second set of individuals and their research is what has led to the development of experimental psychology and standardized testing.

[ 3 ] Victorian stream [ edit ] Charles Darwin was the inspiration behind Francis Galton, a scientist who advanced the development of psychometrics. In 1859, Darwin published his book On the Origin of Species . Darwin described the role of natural selection in the emergence, over time, of different populations of species of plants and animals. The book showed how individual members of a species differ among themselves and how they possess characteristics that are more or less adaptive to their environment. Those with more adaptive characteristics are more likely to survive to procreate and give rise to another generation. Those with less adaptive characteristics are less likely. These ideas stimulated Galton's interest in the study of human beings and how they differ one from another and how to measure those differences.

Galton wrote a book entitled Hereditary Genius which was first published in 1869. The book described different characteristics that people possess and how those characteristics make some more "fit" than others. Today these differences, such as sensory and motor functioning (reaction time, visual acuity, and physical strength), are important domains of scientific psychology. Much of the early theoretical and applied work in psychometrics was undertaken in an attempt to measure intelligence . Galton often referred to as "the father of psychometrics," devised and included mental tests among his anthropometric measures.

James McKeen Cattell , a pioneer in the field of psychometrics, went on to extend Galton's work. Cattell coined the term mental test , and is responsible for research and knowledge that ultimately led to the development of modern tests.

[ 3 ] German stream [ edit ] The origin of psychometrics also has connections to the related field of psychophysics . Around the same time that Darwin, Galton, and Cattell were making their discoveries, Herbart was also interested in "unlocking the mysteries of human consciousness" through the scientific method.

[ 3 ] Herbart was responsible for creating mathematical models of the mind, which were influential in educational practices for years to come.

E.H. Weber built upon Herbart's work and tried to prove the existence of a psychological threshold, saying that a minimum stimulus was necessary to activate a sensory system . After Weber, G.T. Fechner expanded upon the knowledge he gleaned from Herbart and Weber, to devise the law that the strength of a sensation grows as the logarithm of the stimulus intensity. A follower of Weber and Fechner, Wilhelm Wundt is credited with founding the science of psychology. It is Wundt's influence that paved the way for others to develop psychological testing.

[ 3 ] 20th century [ edit ] In 1936, the psychometrician L. L. Thurstone , founder and first president of the Psychometric Society, developed and applied a theoretical approach to measurement referred to as the law of comparative judgment , an approach that has close connections to the psychophysical theory of Ernst Heinrich Weber and Gustav Fechner . In addition, Spearman and Thurstone both made important contributions to the theory and application of factor analysis , a statistical method developed and used extensively in psychometrics.

[ 4 ] In the late 1950s, Leopold Szondi made a historical and epistemological assessment of the impact of statistical thinking on psychology during previous few decades: "in the last decades, the specifically psychological thinking has been almost completely suppressed and removed, and replaced by a statistical thinking. Precisely here we see the cancer of testology and testomania of today." [ 5 ] More recently, psychometric theory has been applied in the measurement of personality , attitudes and beliefs , and academic achievement . These latent constructs cannot truly be measured, and much of the research and science in this discipline has been developed in an attempt to measure these constructs as close to the true score as possible.

Figures who made significant contributions to psychometrics include Karl Pearson , Henry F. Kaiser, Carl Brigham , L. L. Thurstone , E. L. Thorndike , Georg Rasch , Eugene Galanter , Johnson O'Connor , Frederic M. Lord , Ledyard R Tucker , Louis Guttman , and Jane Loevinger .

Definition of measurement in the social sciences [ edit ] The definition of measurement in the social sciences has a long history. A current widespread definition, proposed by Stanley Smith Stevens , is that measurement is "the assignment of numerals to objects or events according to some rule." This definition was introduced in a 1946 Science article in which Stevens proposed four levels of measurement .

[ 6 ] Although widely adopted, this definition differs in important respects from the more classical definition of measurement adopted in the physical sciences, namely that scientific measurement entails "the estimation or discovery of the ratio of some magnitude of a quantitative attribute to a unit of the same attribute" (p. 358) [ 7 ] Indeed, Stevens's definition of measurement was put forward in response to the British Ferguson Committee, whose chair, A. Ferguson, was a physicist. The committee was appointed in 1932 by the British Association for the Advancement of Science to investigate the possibility of quantitatively estimating sensory events. Although its chair and other members were physicists, the committee also included several psychologists. The committee's report highlighted the importance of the definition of measurement. While Stevens's response was to propose a new definition, which has had considerable influence in the field, this was by no means the only response to the report. Another, notably different, response was to accept the classical definition, as reflected in the following statement: Measurement in psychology and physics are in no sense different. Physicists can measure when they can find the operations by which they may meet the necessary criteria; psychologists have to do the same. They need not worry about the mysterious differences between the meaning of measurement in the two sciences (Reese, 1943, p. 49).

[ 8 ] These divergent responses are reflected in alternative approaches to measurement. For example, methods based on covariance matrices are typically employed on the premise that numbers, such as raw scores derived from assessments, are measurements. Such approaches implicitly entail Stevens's definition of measurement, which requires only that numbers are assigned according to some rule. The main research task, then, is generally considered to be the discovery of associations between scores, and of factors posited to underlie such associations.

[ 9 ] On the other hand, when measurement models such as the Rasch model are employed, numbers are not assigned based on a rule. Instead, in keeping with Reese's statement above, specific criteria for measurement are stated, and the goal is to construct procedures or operations that provide data that meet the relevant criteria. Measurements are estimated based on the models, and tests are conducted to ascertain whether the relevant criteria have been met.

[ citation needed ] Instruments and procedures [ edit ] The first psychometric instruments were designed to measure intelligence .

[ 10 ] One early approach to measuring intelligence was the test developed in France by Alfred Binet and Theodore Simon . That test was known as the Test Binet-Simon [ fr ] .The French test was adapted for use in the U. S. by Lewis Terman of Stanford University, and named the Stanford-Binet IQ test .

Another major focus in psychometrics has been on personality testing . There has been a range of theoretical approaches to conceptualizing and measuring personality, though there is no widely agreed upon theory. Some of the better-known instruments include the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory , the Five-Factor Model (or "Big 5") and tools such as Personality and Preference Inventory and the Myers–Briggs Type Indicator . Attitudes have also been studied extensively using psychometric approaches.

[ citation needed ] [ 11 ] An alternative method involves the application of unfolding measurement models, the most general being the Hyperbolic Cosine Model (Andrich & Luo, 1993).

[ 12 ] Theoretical approaches [ edit ] Psychometricians have developed a number of different measurement theories. These include classical test theory (CTT) and item response theory (IRT).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] An approach that seems mathematically to be similar to IRT but also quite distinctive, in terms of its origins and features, is represented by the Rasch model for measurement. The development of the Rasch model, and the broader class of models to which it belongs, was explicitly founded on requirements of measurement in the physical sciences.

[ 15 ] Psychometricians have also developed methods for working with large matrices of correlations and covariances. Techniques in this general tradition include: factor analysis , [ 16 ] a method of determining the underlying dimensions of data. One of the main challenges faced by users of factor analysis is a lack of consensus on appropriate procedures for determining the number of latent factors .

[ 17 ] A usual procedure is to stop factoring when eigenvalues drop below one because the original sphere shrinks. The lack of the cutting points concerns other multivariate methods, also.

[ 18 ] Multidimensional scaling [ 19 ] is a method for finding a simple representation for data with a large number of latent dimensions.

Cluster analysis is an approach to finding objects that are like each other. Factor analysis, multidimensional scaling, and cluster analysis are all multivariate descriptive methods used to distill from large amounts of data simpler structures.

More recently, structural equation modeling [ 20 ] and path analysis represent more sophisticated approaches to working with large covariance matrices . These methods allow statistically sophisticated models to be fitted to data and tested to determine if they are adequate fits. Because at a granular level psychometric research is concerned with the extent and nature of multidimensionality in each of the items of interest, a relatively new procedure known as bi-factor analysis [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] can be helpful. Bi-factor analysis can decompose "an item's systematic variance in terms of, ideally, two sources, a general factor and one source of additional systematic variance." [ 24 ] Key concepts [ edit ] Key concepts in classical test theory are reliability and validity . A reliable measure is one that measures a construct consistently across time, individuals, and situations. A valid measure is one that measures what it is intended to measure. Reliability is necessary, but not sufficient, for validity.

Both reliability and validity can be assessed statistically. Consistency over repeated measures of the same test can be assessed with the Pearson correlation coefficient, and is often called test-retest reliability.

[ 25 ] Similarly, the equivalence of different versions of the same measure can be indexed by a Pearson correlation , and is called equivalent forms reliability or a similar term.

[ 25 ] Internal consistency, which addresses the homogeneity of a single test form, may be assessed by correlating performance on two halves of a test, which is termed split-half reliability ; the value of this Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient for two half-tests is adjusted with the Spearman–Brown prediction formula to correspond to the correlation between two full-length tests.

[ 25 ] Perhaps the most commonly used index of reliability is Cronbach's α , which is equivalent to the mean of all possible split-half coefficients. Other approaches include the intra-class correlation , which is the ratio of variance of measurements of a given target to the variance of all targets.

There are a number of different forms of validity.

Criterion-related validity refers to the extent to which a test or scale predicts a sample of behavior, i.e., the criterion, that is "external to the measuring instrument itself." [ 26 ] That external sample of behavior can be many things including another test; college grade point average as when the high school SAT is used to predict performance in college; and even behavior that occurred in the past, for example, when a test of current psychological symptoms is used to predict the occurrence of past victimization (which would accurately represent postdiction). When the criterion measure is collected at the same time as the measure being validated the goal is to establish concurrent validity ; when the criterion is collected later the goal is to establish predictive validity . A measure has construct validity if it is related to measures of other constructs as required by theory.

Content validity is a demonstration that the items of a test do an adequate job of covering the domain being measured. In a personnel selection example, test content is based on a defined statement or set of statements of knowledge, skill, ability, or other characteristics obtained from a job analysis .

Item response theory models the relationship between latent traits and responses to test items. Among other advantages, IRT provides a basis for obtaining an estimate of the location of a test-taker on a given latent trait as well as the standard error of measurement of that location. For example, a university student's knowledge of history can be deduced from his or her score on a university test and then be compared reliably with a high school student's knowledge deduced from a less difficult test. Scores derived by classical test theory do not have this characteristic, and assessment of actual ability (rather than ability relative to other test-takers) must be assessed by comparing scores to those of a "norm group" randomly selected from the population. In fact, all measures derived from classical test theory are dependent on the sample tested, while, in principle, those derived from item response theory are not.

Standards of quality [ edit ] The considerations of validity and reliability typically are viewed as essential elements for determining the quality of any test. However, professional and practitioner associations frequently have placed these concerns within broader contexts when developing standards and making overall judgments about the quality of any test as a whole within a given context. A consideration of concern in many applied research settings is whether or not the metric of a given psychological inventory is meaningful or arbitrary.

[ 27 ] Testing standards [ edit ] In 2014, the American Educational Research Association (AERA), American Psychological Association (APA), and National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) published a revision of the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing , [ 28 ] which describes standards for test development, evaluation, and use. The Standards cover essential topics in testing including validity, reliability/errors of measurement, and fairness in testing. The book also establishes standards related to testing operations—including test design and development, scores, scales, norms, score linking, cut scores, test administration, scoring, reporting, score interpretation, test documentation, and rights and responsibilities of test takers and test users. Finally, the Standards cover topics related to testing applications, including psychological testing and assessment , workplace testing and credentialing , educational testing and assessment , and testing in program evaluation and public policy.

Evaluation standards [ edit ] In the field of evaluation , and in particular educational evaluation , the Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation [ 29 ] has published three sets of standards for evaluations.

The Personnel Evaluation Standards [ 30 ] was published in 1988, The Program Evaluation Standards (2nd edition) [ 31 ] was published in 1994, and The Student Evaluation Standards [ 32 ] was published in 2003.

Each publication presents and elaborates a set of standards for use in a variety of educational settings. The standards provide guidelines for designing, implementing, assessing, and improving the identified form of evaluation.

[ 33 ] Each of the standards has been placed in one of four fundamental categories to promote educational evaluations that are proper, useful, feasible, and accurate. In these sets of standards, validity and reliability considerations are covered under the accuracy topic. For example, the student accuracy standards help ensure that student evaluations will provide sound, accurate, and credible information about student learning and performance.

Controversy and criticism [ edit ] Because psychometrics is based on latent psychological processes measured through correlations , there has been controversy about some psychometric measures.

[ 34 ] [ page needed ] Critics, including practitioners in the physical sciences , have argued that such definition and quantification is difficult, and that such measurements are often misused by laymen, such as with personality tests used in employment procedures. The Standards for Educational and Psychological Measurement gives the following statement on test validity : "validity refers to the degree to which evidence and theory support the interpretations of test scores entailed by proposed uses of tests".

[ 35 ] Simply put, a test is not valid unless it is used and interpreted in the way it is intended.

[ 36 ] Two types of tools used to measure personality traits are objective tests and projective measures . Examples of such tests are the: Big Five Inventory (BFI), Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI-2), Rorschach Inkblot test , Neurotic Personality Questionnaire KON-2006 , [ 37 ] or Eysenck Personality Questionnaire . Some of these tests are helpful because they have adequate reliability and validity , two factors that make tests consistent and accurate reflections of the underlying construct.

The Myers–Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI), however, has questionable validity and has been the subject of much criticism. Psychometric specialist Robert Hogan wrote of the measure: "Most personality psychologists regard the MBTI as little more than an elaborate Chinese fortune cookie." [ 38 ] Lee Cronbach noted in American Psychologist (1957) that, "correlational psychology, though fully as old as experimentation, was slower to mature. It qualifies equally as a discipline, however, because it asks a distinctive type of question and has technical methods of examining whether the question has been properly put and the data properly interpreted." He would go on to say, "The correlation method, for its part, can study what man has not learned to control or can never hope to control ... A true federation of the disciplines is required. Kept independent, they can give only wrong answers or no answers at all regarding certain important problems." [ 39 ] Non-human: animals and machines [ edit ] Psychometrics addresses human abilities, attitudes, traits, and educational evolution. Notably, the study of behavior, mental processes, and abilities of non-human animals is usually addressed by comparative psychology , or with a continuum between non-human animals and the rest of animals by evolutionary psychology . Nonetheless, there are some advocators for a more gradual transition between the approach taken for humans and the approach taken for (non-human) animals.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] The evaluation of abilities, traits and learning evolution of machines has been mostly unrelated to the case of humans and non-human animals, with specific approaches in the area of artificial intelligence . A more integrated approach, under the name of universal psychometrics , has also been proposed.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory Classical test theory Computational psychometrics Concept inventory Cronbach's alpha Educational assessment Educational psychology Factor analysis Flynn effect Item response theory Likert scale List of international databases on individual student achievement tests List of psychometric software List of schools for psychometrics Omega Operationalisation Quantitative psychology Psychometric Society Psychological testing Rasch model Scale (social sciences) School psychology Standardized test References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary1" . 22 July 2017. Archived from the original on 2017-07-22 . Retrieved 28 June 2022 .

^ a b Tabachnick, B.G.; Fidell, L.S. (2001).

Using Multivariate Analysis . Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 978-0-321-05677-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d Kaplan, Robert M.; Saccuzzo, Dennis P. (2012-05-01).

Psychological Testing: Principles, Applications, and Issues (8th ed.). Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1-133-49201-6 .

^ Nunnally, Jum C.; Bernstein, Ira H. (1994).

Psychometric Theory (3rd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social Sciences/Languages.

ISBN 978-0-07-047849-7 .

^ Leopold Szondi (1960) Das zweite Buch: Lehrbuch der Experimentellen Triebdiagnostik . Huber, Bern und Stuttgart, 2nd edition. Ch.27, From the Spanish translation, B)II Las condiciones estadisticas , p.396. Quotation: el pensamiento psicologico especifico, en las ultima decadas, fue suprimido y eliminado casi totalmente, siendo sustituido por un pensamiento estadistico. Precisamente aqui vemos el cáncer de la testología y testomania de hoy.

^ Stevens, S. S.

(7 June 1946). "On the Theory of Scales of Measurement".

Science .

103 (2684): 677– 680.

Bibcode : 1946Sci...103..677S .

doi : 10.1126/science.103.2684.677 .

PMID 17750512 .

S2CID 4667599 .

^ Michell, Joel (August 1997). "Quantitative science and the definition of measurement in psychology".

British Journal of Psychology .

88 (3): 355– 383.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-8295.1997.tb02641.x .

^ Resse, Thomas Whelan (1943).

"The application of the theory of physical measurement to the measurement of psychological magnitudes, with three experimental examples" .

Psychological Monographs .

55 (3): i–89.

doi : 10.1037/h0093539 .

ISSN 0096-9753 .

^ "Psychometrics" .

Assessmentpsychology.com . Retrieved 28 June 2022 .

^ Stern, Theodore A.; Fava, Maurizio; Wilens, Timothy E.; Rosenbaum, Jerrold F. (2016).

Massachusetts General Hospital comprehensive clinical psychiatry (Second ed.). London. p. 73.

ISBN 978-0323295079 . Retrieved 31 October 2021 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Longe, Jacqueline L., ed. (2022).

The Gale Encyclopedia of Psychology . Vol. 2 (4th ed.). Farmington Hills, Michigan: Gale. p. 1000.

ISBN 9780028683867 .

^ Andrich, David; Luo, Guanzhong (1993-09-01).

"A Hyperbolic Cosine Latent Trait Model For Unfolding Dichotomous Single-Stimulus Responses" .

Applied Psychological Measurement .

17 (3): 253– 276.

doi : 10.1177/014662169301700307 .

ISSN 0146-6216 .

^ Embretson, Susan E.; Reise, Steven Paul (2000).

Item Response Theory for Psychologists . L. Erlbaum Associates.

ISBN 978-0-8058-2818-4 .

^ Hambleton, R.K., & Swaminathan, H. (1985).

Item Response Theory: Principles and Applications.

Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff.

^ Rasch, G. (1960/1980).

Probabilistic models for some intelligence and attainment tests . Copenhagen, Danish Institute for Educational Research, expanded edition (1980) with foreword and afterword by B.D. Wright. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

^ Thompson, B.R. (2004).

Exploratory and Confirmatory Factor Analysis: Understanding Concepts and Applications.

American Psychological Association.

^ Zwick, William R.; Velicer, Wayne F. (1986). "Comparison of five rules for determining the number of components to retain".

Psychological Bulletin .

99 (3): 432– 442.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.99.3.432 .

^ Singh, Manoj Kumar (2021-09-11).

Introduction to Social Psychology . K.K. Publications.

^ Davison, M.L.

(1992).

Multidimensional Scaling.

Krieger.

^ Kaplan, D. (2008).

Structural Equation Modeling: Foundations and Extensions , 2nd ed. Sage.

^ DeMars, Christine E. (2013-10-01).

"A Tutorial on Interpreting Bifactor Model Scores" .

International Journal of Testing .

13 (4): 354– 378.

doi : 10.1080/15305058.2013.799067 .

ISSN 1530-5058 .

^ Reise, Steven P. (2012-09-01).

"The Rediscovery of Bifactor Measurement Models" .

Multivariate Behavioral Research .

47 (5): 667– 696.

doi : 10.1080/00273171.2012.715555 .

ISSN 0027-3171 .

PMC 3773879 .

PMID 24049214 .

^ Rodriguez, Anthony; Reise, Steven P.; Haviland, Mark G. (June 2016).

"Evaluating bifactor models: Calculating and interpreting statistical indices" .

Psychological Methods .

21 (2): 137– 150.

doi : 10.1037/met0000045 .

ISSN 1939-1463 .

PMID 26523435 .

^ Schonfeld, Irvin Sam; Verkuilen, Jay; Bianchi, Renzo (August 2019).

"An exploratory structural equation modeling bi-factor analytic approach to uncovering what burnout, depression, and anxiety scales measure" .

Psychological Assessment .

31 (8): 1073– 1079.

doi : 10.1037/pas0000721 .

ISSN 1939-134X .

PMID 30958024 .

^ a b c "Home – Educational Research Basics by Del Siegle" .

www.gifted.uconn.edu . 17 February 2015.

^ Nunnally, J.C. (1978).

Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.

^ Blanton, H., & Jaccard, J. (2006). Arbitrary metrics in psychology.

Archived 2006-05-10 at the Wayback Machine American Psychologist, 61 (1), 27–41.

^ "The Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing" .

apa.org .

^ "Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation" . Archived from the original on 15 October 2009 . Retrieved 28 June 2022 .

^ Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation. (1988).

The Personnel Evaluation Standards: How to Assess Systems for Evaluating Educators.

Archived 2005-12-12 at the Wayback Machine Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

^ Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation. (1994).

The Program Evaluation Standards, 2nd Edition.

Archived 2006-02-22 at the Wayback Machine Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.

^ Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation. (2003).

The Student Evaluation Standards: How to Improve Evaluations of Students.

Archived 2006-05-24 at the Wayback Machine Newbury Park, CA: Corwin Press.

^ [ E. Cabrera-Nguyen (2010).

"Author guidelines for reporting scale development and validation results in the Journal of the Society for Social Work and Research]" .

Academia.edu .

1 (2): 99– 103.

^ Tabachnick, B.G.; Fidell, L.S. (2001).

Using Multivariate Analysis . Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 978-0-321-05677-1 .

^ American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, & National Council on Measurement in Education. (1999) Standards for educational and psychological testing . Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.

^ Bandalos, Deborah L. (2018).

Measurement theory and applications for the social sciences . New York. p. 261.

ISBN 978-1-4625-3215-5 .

OCLC 1015955756 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Aleksandrowicz JW, Klasa K, Sobański JA, Stolarska D (2009).

"KON-2006 Neurotic Personality Questionnaire" (PDF) .

Archives of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy .

1 : 21– 22.

^ Hogan, Robert (2007).

Personality and the fate of organizations . Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . p. 28.

ISBN 978-0-8058-4142-8 .

OCLC 65400436 .

^ Cronbach, L. J. (1957). "The two disciplines of scientific psychology".

American Psychologist .

12 (11): 671– 684.

doi : 10.1037/h0043943 – via EBSCO.

^ Humphreys, L.G. (1987). "Psychometrics considerations in the evaluation of intraspecies differences in intelligence".

Behav Brain Sci .

10 (4): 668– 669.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x0005514x .

^ Eysenck, H.J. (1987). "The several meanings of intelligence".

Behav Brain Sci .

10 (4): 663.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x00055060 .

^ Locurto, C. & Scanlon, C (1987). "Individual differences and spatial learning factor in two strains of mice".

Behav Brain Sci .

112 : 344– 352.

^ King, James E & Figueredo, Aurelio Jose (1997). "The five-factor model plus dominance in chimpanzee personality".

Journal of Research in Personality .

31 (2): 257– 271.

doi : 10.1006/jrpe.1997.2179 .

^ J. Hernández-Orallo; D.L. Dowe; M.V. Hernández-Lloreda (2013).

"Universal Psychometrics: Measuring Cognitive Abilities in the Machine Kingdom" (PDF) .

Cognitive Systems Research .

27 : 50– 74.

doi : 10.1016/j.cogsys.2013.06.001 .

hdl : 10251/50244 .

S2CID 26440282 .

^ Hernández-Orallo, José (2017).

The Measure of All Minds: Evaluating Natural and Artificial Intelligence . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-15301-1 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Andrich, D. & Luo, G. (1993).

"A hyperbolic cosine model for unfolding dichotomous single-stimulus responses" (PDF) .

Applied Psychological Measurement .

17 (3): 253– 276.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1003.8107 .

doi : 10.1177/014662169301700307 .

S2CID 120745971 .

Michell, J. (1999).

Measurement in Psychology . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511490040 Rasch, G. (1960/1980).

Probabilistic models for some intelligence and attainment tests . Copenhagen, Danish Institute for Educational Research), expanded edition (1980) with foreword and afterword by B.D. Wright. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Reese, T.W. (1943). The application of the theory of physical measurement to the measurement of psychological magnitudes, with three experimental examples.

Psychological Monographs, 55 , 1–89.

doi : 10.1037/h0061367 Stevens, S. S. (1946). "On the theory of scales of measurement".

Science .

103 (2684): 677– 80.

Bibcode : 1946Sci...103..677S .

doi : 10.1126/science.103.2684.677 .

PMID 17750512 .

Thurstone, L.L. (1927). "A law of comparative judgement".

Psychological Review .

34 (4): 278– 286.

doi : 10.1037/h0070288 .

Thurstone, L.L. (1929). The Measurement of Psychological Value. In T.V. Smith and W.K. Wright (Eds.), Essays in Philosophy by Seventeen Doctors of Philosophy of the University of Chicago . Chicago: Open Court.

Thurstone, L.L. (1959).

The Measurement of Values . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

S.F. Blinkhorn (1997). "Past imperfect, future conditional: fifty years of test theory".

British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology .

50 (2): 175– 185.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-8317.1997.tb01139.x .

Sanford, David (18 November 2017).

"Cambridge just told me Big Data doesn't work yet" .

LinkedIn .

Further reading [ edit ] Robert F. DeVellis (2016).

Scale Development: Theory and Applications . SAGE Publications.

ISBN 978-1-5063-4158-3 .

Borsboom, Denny (2005).

Measuring the Mind: Conceptual Issues in Contemporary Psychometrics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-84463-5 .

Leslie A. Miller; Robert L. Lovler (2015).

Foundations of Psychological Testing: A Practical Approach . SAGE Publications.

ISBN 978-1-4833-6927-3 .

Roderick P. McDonald (2013).

Test Theory: A Unified Treatment . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-135-67530-1 .

Paul Kline (2000).

The Handbook of Psychological Testing . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-21158-1 .

Rush AJ Jr; First MB; Blacker D (2008).

Handbook of Psychiatric Measures . American Psychiatric Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-58562-218-4 .

OCLC 85885343 .

Ann C Silverlake (2016).

Comprehending Test Manuals: A Guide and Workbook . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-351-97086-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Psychometrics Look up psychometrics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Library resources about psychometrics Resources in your library APA Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing International Personality Item Pool Joint Committee on Standards for Educational Evaluation The Psychometrics Centre, University of Cambridge Psychometric Society and Psychometrika homepage London Psychometric Laboratory v t e Human intelligence topics Types Collective Emotional Intellectual Linguistic Multiple Social Spatial ( visuospatial ) Abilities , traits, and constructs Cognition Cognitive liberty Communication Creativity Fluid and crystallized intelligence g factor Intellect Intelligence quotient Knowledge Learning Memory Problem solving Reasoning Skill Thought ( abstraction ) Understanding Visual processing Models and theories Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory Fluid and crystallized intelligence Multiple-intelligences theory PASS theory Three-stratum theory Triarchic theory Areas of research Evolution of human intelligence Heritability of IQ Psychometrics Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex Outline of human intelligence / thought v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychometrics&oldid=1300122549 " Categories : Psychometrics Applied psychology Educational research Psychological testing Metrics Educational assessment and evaluation Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2010 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychometrics 43 languages Add topic

