Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Transcription 3 Translation 4 Replication 5 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 5.1 Clades 5.2 Proposed classifications 5.3 Prototypical rhabdoviruses 6 Taxonomy 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Rhabdoviridae 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rhabdovirus ) Family of viruses in the order Mononegavirales This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rhabdoviridae" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rhabdoviridae Vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus (VSV), the prototypical rhabdovirus Virus classification (unranked): Virus Realm: Riboviria Kingdom: Orthornavirae Phylum: Negarnaviricota Class: Monjiviricetes Order: Mononegavirales Family: Rhabdoviridae Genera See text Rhabdoviridae is a family of negative-strand RNA viruses in the order Mononegavirales .

[ 1 ] Vertebrates (including mammals and humans), invertebrates , plants , fungi and protozoans serve as natural hosts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Diseases associated with member viruses include rabies encephalitis caused by the rabies virus , and flu-like symptoms in humans caused by vesiculoviruses . The name is derived from Ancient Greek rhabdos , meaning rod, referring to the shape of the viral particles.

[ 5 ] The family has 62 genera, most assigned to four subfamilies.

[ 6 ] Structure [ edit ] The individual virus particles (virions) of rhabdoviruses  are composed of RNA, protein, carbohydrate and lipid. They have complex bacilliform or bullet-like shapes. All these viruses have structural similarities and have been classified as a single family.

[ 7 ] The virions are about 75 nm wide and 180 nm long.

[ 2 ] Rhabdoviruses are enveloped and have helical nucleocapsids and their genomes are linear, around 11–15 kb in length.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] Rhabdoviruses carry their genetic material in the form of negative-sense single-stranded RNA . They typically carry genes for five proteins: large protein (L), glycoprotein (G), nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), and matrix protein (M).

[ 8 ] The sequence of these protein genes from the 3 'end to the 5' end in the genome is N–P–M–G–L.

[ 9 ] Every rhabdoviruses encode these five proteins in their genomes. In addition to these proteins, many rhabdoviruses encode one or more proteins.

[ 10 ] The first four genes encode major structural proteins that participate in the structure of the virion envelope.

[ 9 ] The matrix protein (M) constitutes a layer between the virion envelope and the nucleocapsid core of the rhabdovirus.

[ 10 ] In addition to the functions about virus assembly, morphogenesis and budding off enveloped from the host plasma membrane, additional functions such as the regulation of RNA synthesis, affecting the balance of replication and transcription products was found, making reverse genetics experiments with rabies virus, a member of the family Rhabdoviridae.

[ 11 ] The large (L) protein has several enzymatic functions in viral RNA synthesis and processing.

[ 8 ] The L gene encodes this L protein, which contains multiple domains. In addition to RNA synthesis, it is thought to be involved in methyl capping and polyadenylation activity.

[ 9 ] P protein plays important and multiple roles during  transcription and replication of the RNA genome. The multifunctional P protein is encoded by the P gene. P protein acts as a non-catalytic cofactor of large protein polymerase. It is binding to N and L protein. P protein has two independent binding regions. By forming N-P complexes, it can keep the N protein in the form suitable for specific encapsulation. P protein interferes with the host's innate immune system through inhibition of the activities of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)  and signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), thus eliminating the cellular type 1 interferon pathway. Also, P protein acts as an antagonist against antiviral PML function.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Rhabdoviruses that infect vertebrates (especially mammals and fishes), plants, and insects are usually bullet-shaped.

[ 14 ] However, in contrast to paramyxoviruses , rhabdoviruses do not have hemagglutinating and neuraminidase activities.

[ 14 ] Transcription [ edit ] Transcription and replication of the vesicular stomatitis virus genome Transcriptase of rhabdovirus is composed of 1 L and 3 P proteins. Transcriptase components are always present in the complete virion to permit rhabdoviruses to begin transcription immediately after entry.

[ citation needed ] The rhabdovirus transcriptase proceeds in a 3' to 5' direction on the genome and the transcription terminates randomly at the end of protein sequences. For example, if a transcription finishes at the end of M sequence; leader RNA and N, P and M mRNAs are formed separately from each other.

[ citation needed ] Also, mRNAs accumulate according to the order of protein sequences on the genome, solving the logistics problem in the cell. For example, N protein is necessary in high quantities for the virus, as it coats the outside of the replicated genomes completely. Since the N protein sequence is located at the beginning of the genome (3' end) after the leader RNA sequence, mRNAs for N protein can always be produced and accumulate in high amounts with every termination of transcription. After the transcription processes, all of the mRNAs are capped at the 5' end and polyadenylated at the 3' end by L protein.

This transcription mechanism thus provides mRNAs according to the need of the viruses.

[ 10 ] : 173–184 Translation [ edit ] The virus proteins translated on free ribosomes but G protein is translated by the rough endoplasmic reticulum. This means G protein has a signal peptide on its mRNA's starting codes. Phosphoproteins (P) and glycoprotein (G) undergo post-translational modification. Trimers of P protein are formed after phosphorylation by kinase activity of L protein. The G protein is glycosylated in the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi complex.

[ 10 ] : 180 Replication [ edit ] Replication cycle of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) Viral replication is cytoplasmic. The replication cycle is the same for most rhabdoviruses. All components required for early transcription and the nucleocapsid are released to the cytoplasm of the infected cell after the first steps of binding, penetration and uncoating take place.

[ 9 ] Entry into the host cell is achieved by attachment of the viral G glycoproteins to host receptors, which mediates clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Replication follows the negative stranded RNA virus replication model. Negative stranded RNA virus transcription, using polymerase stuttering is the method of transcription. The virus exits the host cell by budding, and  tubule-guided viral movement. Transmission routes are zoonosis and bite.

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] Replication of many rhabdoviruses occurs in the cytoplasm , although several of the plant infecting viruses replicate in the nucleus.

[ 15 ] The rhabdovirus matrix (M) protein is very small (~20–25 kDa) however plays a number of  important roles during the replication cycle of the virus. These proteins of rhabdoviruses constitute major structural components of the virus and they are multifunctional proteins and required for virus maturation and viral budding process that also regulate the balance of virus RNA synthesis by shifting synthesis from transcription to replication.

[ 16 ] In order for replication, both the L and P protein must be expressed to regulate transcription .

[ 17 ] Phosphoprotein (P) also plays a crucial role during replication, as N-P complexes, rather than N alone, are necessary for appropriate and selective encapsidation of viral RNA. Therefore, replication is not possible  after infection until the primary transcription and translation produce enough N protein.

[ 18 ] Electron micrograph illustrating the VSV structure and assembly The L protein has  a lot of  enzymatic activity such as RNA replication, capping mRNAs phosphorylation of P. L protein gives feature in about replication in cytoplasm.

[ 17 ] Transcription results in five monocistronic mRNAs being produced because the intergenic sequences act as both termination and promoter sequences for adjacent genes . This type of transcription mechanism is explained by stop-start model (stuttering transcription). Owing to stop-start model, the large amounts of the structural proteins are produced. According to this model, the virus-associated RNA polymerase starts firstly the synthesis of leader RNA and then the five mRNA which will produce N, P, M, G, L proteins, respectively. After the leader RNA was produced, the polymerase enzyme reinitiates virion transcription on N gene and proceeds its synthesis until it ends 3′ end of the chain. Then, the synthesis of P mRNAs are made by same enzyme with new starter sinyal. These steps continue until the enzyme arrives the end of the L gene. During transcription process, the polymerase enzyme may leave the template at any point and then bound just at the 3′ end of the genome RNA to start mRNA synthesis again. This process will results concentration gradient of the amount of mRNA based on its place and its range from the 3′ end. In the circumstances, the amounts of mRNA species change and will be produced N>P>M>G>L proteins.

[ 19 ] During their synthesis the mRNAs are processed to introduce a 5' cap and a 3’ polyadenylated tail to each of the molecules. This structure is homologous to cellular mRNAs and can thus be translated by cellular ribosomes to produce both structural and non-structural proteins.

Genomic replication requires a source of newly synthesized N protein to encapsidate the RNA. This occurs during its synthesis and results in the production of a full-length anti-genomic copy. This in turn is used to produce more negative-sense genomic RNA. The viral polymerase is required for this process, but how the polymerase engages in both mRNA synthesis and genomic replication is not well understood.

Replication characteristically occurs in an inclusion body within the cytoplasm, from where they bud through various cytoplasmic membranes and the outer membrane of the cell. This process results in the acquisition of the M + G proteins, responsible for the characteristic bullet- shaped morphology of the virus .

Classification [ edit ] Clades [ edit ] These viruses fall into four groups based on the RNA polymerase gene.

[ 20 ] The basal clade appears to be novirhabdoviruses , which infect fish.

Cytorhabdoviruses and the nucleorhabdoviruses , which infect plants, are sister clades.

Lyssaviruses form a clade of their own which is more closely related to the land vertebrate and insect clades than to the plant viruses. The remaining viruses form a number of highly branched clades and infect arthropods and land vertebrates.

Proposed classifications [ edit ] An unofficial supergroup – "Dimarhabdovirus" – refers to the genera Ephemerovirus and Vesiculovirus .

[ 21 ] A number of other viruses that have not been classified into genera also belong to this taxon. This supergroup contains the genera with species that replicate in both vertebrate and invertebrate hosts and have biological cycles that involve transmission by haematophagous dipterans (bloodsucking flies).

Prototypical rhabdoviruses [ edit ] The prototypical and best studied rhabdovirus is vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus . It is a preferred model system to study the biology of rhabdoviruses, and mononegaviruses in general. The mammalian disease rabies is caused by lyssaviruses, of which several have been identified.

Rhabdoviruses are important pathogens of animals and plants. Rhabdoviruses are transmitted to hosts by arthropods, such as aphids, planthoppers, leafhoppers, black flies, sandflies, and mosquitoes.

In September 2012, researchers writing in the journal PLOS Pathogens described a novel species of rhabdovirus, called Bas-Congo virus (BASV), which was discovered in a blood sample from a patient who survived an illness that resembled hemorrhagic fever.

[ 20 ] No cases of BASV have been reported since its discovery and it is uncertain if BASV was the actual cause of the patient's illness.

[ 22 ] In 2015 two novel rhabdoviruses, Ekpoma virus 1 and Ekpoma virus 2, were discovered in samples of blood from two healthy women in southwestern Nigeria.  Ekpoma virus 1 and Ekpoma virus 2 appear to replicate well in humans (viral load ranged from ~45,000 - ~4.5 million RNA copies/mL plasma) but did not cause any observable symptoms of disease.

[ 23 ] Exposure to Ekpoma virus 2 appears to be widespread in certain parts of Nigeria where seroprevalence rates are close to 50%.

[ 23 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] In the Alpharhabdovirinae subfamily, the following genera are recognized: [ 6 ] Almendravirus Alphanemrhavirus Alphapaprhavirus Alpharicinrhavirus Alphathriprhavirus Amplylivirus Arurhavirus Barhavirus Betathriprhavirus Caligrhavirus Cetarhavirus Curiovirus Ephemerovirus Hapavirus Ledantevirus Lostrhavirus Lyssavirus Merhavirus Mousrhavirus Ohlsrhavirus Perhabdovirus Replylivirus Sawgrhavirus Scophrhavirus Sigmavirus Siniperhavirus Sprivivirus Sripuvirus Sunrhavirus Tibrovirus Tupavirus Uniorhavirus Vesiculovirus Zarhavirus The genera of the other subfamilies are listed hereafter (- virinae denotes subfamily and - virus denotes genus): [ 6 ] Betarhabdovirinae Alphacytorhabdovirus Alphagymnorhavirus Alphanucleorhabdovirus (currently; see nucleorhabdovirus ) Betacytorhabdovirus Betagymnorhavirus Betanucleorhabdovirus (currently; see nucleorhabdovirus ) Deltanucleorhabdovirus Dichorhavirus Gammacytorhabdovirus Gammanucleorhabdovirus (currently; see nucleorhabdovirus ) Trirhavirus Varicosavirus Deltarhabdovirinae Alphacrustrhavirus Alphadrosrhavirus Alphahymrhavirus Betahymrhavirus Betanemrhavirus Betapaprhavirus Betaricinrhavirus Gammahymrhavirus Gammaricinrhavirus Primrhavirus Stangrhavirus Gammarhabdovirinae Margarhavirus Novirhabdovirus The following genera are unassigned to a subfamily: [ 6 ] Alphaplatrhavirus Betaplatrhavirus Gammaplatrhavirus In addition to the above, there are a large number of rhabdo-like viruses that have not yet been officially classified by the ICTV .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Rabies References [ edit ] ^ Walker PJ, Blasdell KR, Calisher CH , Dietzgen RG, Kondo H, Kurath G, et al. (April 2018).

"ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Rhabdoviridae" .

The Journal of General Virology .

99 (4): 447– 448.

doi : 10.1099/jgv.0.001020 .

hdl : 10871/31776 .

PMID 29465028 .

^ a b c d "Viral Zone" . ExPASy . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ Bird, R.G.; McCaul, T.F. (March 1976). "The rhabdoviruses of Entamoeba histolytica and Entamoeba invadens".

Annals of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology .

70 (1): 81– 93.

doi : 10.1080/00034983.1976.11687098 .

PMID 178279 .

^ Fan Mu, Bo Li, Shufen Cheng, Jichun Jia, Daohong Jiang, Yanping Fu, Jiasen Cheng, Yang Lin, Tao Chen, Jiatao Xie (2021).

Nine viruses from eight lineages exhibiting new evolutionary modes that co-infect a hypovirulent phytopathogenic fungus . Plos Pathogens.

^ a b c d "Family: Rhabdoviridae | ICTV" .

www.ictv.global .

^ a b c d "Virus Taxonomy: 2024 Release" . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ Jackson, A. O.; Francki, R. I. B.; Zuidema, Douwe (1987). "Biology, Structure, and Replication of Plant Rhabdoviruses".

The Rhabdoviruses . pp.

427– 508.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-7032-1_10 .

ISBN 978-1-4684-7034-5 .

^ a b Ogino M, Ito N, Sugiyama M, Ogino T (May 2016).

"The Rabies Virus L Protein Catalyzes mRNA Capping with GDP Polyribonucleotidyltransferase Activity" .

Viruses .

8 (5): 144.

doi : 10.3390/v8050144 .

PMC 4885099 .

PMID 27213429 .

^ a b c d Assenberg, R.; Delmas, O.; Morin, B.; Graham, S.C.; De Lamballerie, X.; Laubert, C.; Coutard, B.; Grimes, J.M.; Neyts, J.; Owens, R.J.; Brandt, B.W.; Gorbalenya, A.; Tucker, P.; Stuart, D.I.; Canard, B.; Bourhy, H. (August 2010).

"Genomics and structure/function studies of Rhabdoviridae proteins involved in replication and transcription" (PDF) .

Antiviral Research .

87 (2): 149– 161.

doi : 10.1016/j.antiviral.2010.02.322 .

PMID 20188763 .

S2CID 8840157 .

^ a b c d Carter JB, Saunders VA (2007).

Virology: Principles and Applications . Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-470-02386-0 .

OCLC 124160564 .

^ Finke S, Conzelmann KK (November 2003).

"Dissociation of rabies virus matrix protein functions in regulation of viral RNA synthesis and virus assembly" .

Journal of Virology .

77 (22): 12074– 12082.

doi : 10.1128/JVI.77.22.12074-12082.2003 .

PMC 254266 .

PMID 14581544 .

^ Wang L, Wu H, Tao X, Li H, Rayner S, Liang G, Tang Q (January 2013).

"Genetic and evolutionary characterization of RABVs from China using the phosphoprotein gene" .

Virology Journal .

10 (1): 14.

doi : 10.1186/1743-422X-10-14 .

PMC 3548735 .

PMID 23294868 .

^ Okada K, Ito N, Yamaoka S, Masatani T, Ebihara H, Goto H, et al. (September 2016). Lyles DS (ed.).

"Roles of the Rabies Virus Phosphoprotein Isoforms in Pathogenesis" .

Journal of Virology .

90 (18): 8226– 37.

doi : 10.1128/JVI.00809-16 .

PMC 5008078 .

PMID 27384657 .

^ a b Nicholas H (2007).

Fundamentals of Molecular Virology . England: Wiley. pp.

175– 187.

^ "Genus: Alphanucleorhabdovirus - Rhabdoviridae - Negative-sense RNA Viruses - ICTV" .

talk.ictvonline.org . Archived from the original on 23 June 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2021 .

^ Graham SC, Assenberg R, Delmas O, Verma A, Gholami A, Talbi C, et al. (December 2008).

"Rhabdovirus matrix protein structures reveal a novel mode of self-association" .

PLOS Pathogens .

4 (12): e1000251.

doi : 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000251 .

PMC 2603668 .

PMID 19112510 .

^ a b Acheson NH (2011).

Fundamentals of Molecular Virology (2nd ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 978-0470900598 .

^ Finke S, Conzelmann KK (November 2003).

"Dissociation of rabies virus matrix protein functions in regulation of viral RNA synthesis and virus assembly" .

Journal of Virology .

77 (22): 12074– 82.

doi : 10.1128/JVI.77.22.12074-12082.2003 .

PMC 254266 .

PMID 14581544 .

^ Maclachlan NJ, Dubovi EJ, eds. (2011).

"Rhabdoviridae" .

Fenner's Veterinary Virology . pp.

327– 41.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-375158-4.00018-3 .

ISBN 978-0-12-375158-4 .

^ a b Grard G, Fair JN, Lee D, Slikas E, Steffen I, Muyembe JJ, et al. (September 2012).

"A novel rhabdovirus associated with acute hemorrhagic fever in central Africa" .

PLOS Pathogens .

8 (9): e1002924.

doi : 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002924 .

PMC 3460624 .

PMID 23028323 .

^ Bourhy H, Cowley JA, Larrous F, Holmes EC, Walker PJ (October 2005).

"Phylogenetic relationships among rhabdoviruses inferred using the L polymerase gene" .

The Journal of General Virology .

86 (Pt 10): 2849– 2858.

doi : 10.1099/vir.0.81128-0 .

PMID 16186241 .

^ Branco LM, Garry RF (3 December 2018).

"Bas-Congo virus - not an established pathogen" . Archived from the original on 30 January 2020 . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

^ a b Stremlau MH, Andersen KG, Folarin OA, Grove JN, Odia I, Ehiane PE, et al. (March 2015). Rupprecht CE (ed.).

"Discovery of novel rhabdoviruses in the blood of healthy individuals from West Africa" .

PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases .

9 (3): e0003631.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003631 .

PMC 4363514 .

PMID 25781465 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rose JK, Whitt MA (2001). "Rhabdoviridae: The viruses and their replication". In Knipe DM, Howley PM (eds.).

Field's Virology . Vol. 1 (4th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. pp.

1221– 44.

ISBN 978-0781718325 .

Wagner RR, ed. (1987).

The Rhabdoviruses . Plenum Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-42453-3 .

External links [ edit ] ICTV Online Report Rhabdoviridae Viralzone : Rhabdoviridae Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR): Rhabdoviridae " Rhabdoviridae " .

NCBI Taxonomy Browser . 11270.

v t e Microbiology : Virus History Introduction Social history of viruses Virology Components Capsid Viral envelope Viral protein Viral life cycle Viral entry Viral replication Viral shedding Viroplasm Virus latency Lytic cycle Lysogenic cycle Genetics Antigenic drift Antigenic shift Phenotype mixing Reassortment Viral evolution By host Animal virus Bacteriophage Virophage Human virome Mycovirus Plant virus Other Antiviral drug Giant virus Helper virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus Laboratory diagnosis of viral infections Marine viruses Neurotropic virus Oncovirus Satellites Viral disease Viral load Virus-like particle Virus classification Virus quantification Virome Virosphere Portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Zoonotic viral diseases (A80–B34, 042–079 ) Arthropod -borne Mosquito -borne Bunyavirales Arbovirus encephalitides : Batai virus BATV Bwamba Fever BWAV California encephalitis CEV Jamestown Canyon encephalitis La Crosse encephalitis LACV Tahyna virus TAHV Tete virus Viral hemorrhagic fevers : Bunyamwera fever BUNV Ngari virus NRIV Rift Valley fever RVFV Flaviviridae Arbovirus encephalitides : Japanese encephalitis JEV Australian encephalitis MVEV KUNV Saint Louis encephalitis SLEV Usutu virus USUV West Nile fever WNV Viral hemorrhagic fevers : Dengue fever DENV-1-4 Yellow fever YFV Zika fever ZIKV Togaviridae Arbovirus encephalitides : Eastern equine encephalomyelitis EEEV Western equine encephalomyelitis WEEV Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis VEEV Chikungunya CHIKV O'nyong'nyong fever ONNV Pogosta disease Sindbis virus Ross River fever RRV Semliki Forest virus Reoviridae Banna virus encephalitis Tick -borne Bunyavirales Viral hemorrhagic fevers : Crimean–Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHFV) Heartland virus Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome ( Huaiyangshan banyangvirus ) Tete virus Arbovirus encephalitides : Bhanja virus Flaviviridae Arbovirus encephalitides : Tick-borne encephalitis TBEV Powassan encephalitis POWV Viral hemorrhagic fevers : Omsk hemorrhagic fever OHFV Kyasanur Forest disease KFDV AHFV Langat virus LGTV Orthomyxoviridae Bourbon virus Reoviridae Colorado tick fever CTFV Kemerovo tickborne viral fever Sandfly -borne Bunyavirales Adria virus (ADRV) Oropouche fever Oropouche virus Pappataci fever Toscana virus Sandfly fever Naples virus Rhabdoviridae Chandipura virus Mammal -borne Rodent -borne Arenaviridae Viral hemorrhagic fevers : Lassa fever LASV Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever GTOV Argentine hemorrhagic fever JUNV Brazilian hemorrhagic fever SABV Bolivian hemorrhagic fever MACV LUJV CHPV Bunyavirales Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome DOBV HTNV PUUV SEOV AMRV THAIV Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome ANDV SNV Herpesviridae Murid gammaherpesvirus 4 Bat -borne Filoviridae Ebola virus disease BDBV SUDV TAFV ZEBOV Marburg virus disease MARV RAVV Rhabdoviridae Rabies ABLV MOKV DUVV LBV CHPV Paramyxoviridae Henipavirus encephalitis HeV NiV Coronaviridae MERS-CoV SARS-related coronavirus SARS-CoV SARS-CoV-2 Primate -borne Herpesviridae B virus Retroviridae Simian foamy virus HTLV-1 HTLV-2 Poxviridae Tanapox Yaba monkey tumor virus Multiple vectors Rhabdoviridae Rabies RABV Mokola virus Poxviridae Monkeypox v t e Baltimore ( virus classification ) DNA I: dsDNA viruses Adnaviria Zilligvirae Taleaviricota Tokiviricetes Ligamenvirales Lipothrixviridae Rudiviridae Primavirales Tristromaviridae Duplodnaviria Heunggongvirae Peploviricota Herviviricetes Herpesvirales Alloherpesviridae Herpesviridae Malacoherpesviridae Uroviricota Caudoviricetes Caudovirales Ackermannviridae Autographiviridae Chaseviridae Demerecviridae Drexlerviridae Guelinviridae Herelleviridae Myoviridae Podoviridae Rountreeviridae Salasmaviridae Schitoviridae Siphoviridae Zobellviridae Monodnaviria Shotokuvirae Cossaviricota Papovaviricetes Sepolyvirales Polyomaviridae Zurhausenvirales Papillomaviridae Varidnaviria Bamfordvirae Nucleocytoviricota Pokkesviricetes Asfuvirales Asfarviridae Chitovirales Poxviridae Megaviricetes Algavirales Phycodnaviridae Imitervirales Mimiviridae Pimascovirales Ascoviridae Iridoviridae Marseilleviridae Preplasmiviricota Maveriviricetes Priklausovirales Lavidaviridae Polintoviricetes Orthopolintovirales Adintoviridae Tectiliviricetes Belfryvirales Turriviridae Kalamavirales Tectiviridae Rowavirales Adenoviridae Vinavirales Corticoviridae Helvetiavirae Dividoviricota Laserviricetes Halopanivirales Matshushitaviridae Simuloviridae Sphaerolipoviridae Unassigned Naldaviricetes Lefavirales Baculoviridae Hytrosaviridae Nudiviridae Unassigned Nimaviridae Unassigned Families : Ampullaviridae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Thaspiviridae Genera : Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus II: ssDNA viruses Monodnaviria Loebvirae Hofneiviricota Faserviricetes Tubulavirales Inoviridae Paulinoviridae Plectroviridae Sangervirae Phixviricota Malgrandaviricetes Petitvirales Microviridae Shotokuvirae Commensaviricota Cardeaviricetes Sanitavirales Anelloviridae Cossaviricota Mouviricetes Polivirales Bidnaviridae Quintoviricetes Piccovirales Parvoviridae Cressdnaviricota Arfiviricetes Baphyvirales Bacilladnaviridae Cirlivirales Circoviridae Cremevirales Smacoviridae Mulpavirales Metaxyviridae Nanoviridae Recrevirales Redondoviridae Repensiviricetes Geplafuvirales Geminiviridae Genomoviridae Trapavirae Saleviricota Huolimaviricetes Haloruvirales Pleolipoviridae Varidnaviria Abedenavirae Produgelaviricota Ainoaviricetes Lautamovirales Finnlakeviridae Unassigned Families : Spiraviridae RNA III: dsRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Duplornaviricota Chrymotiviricetes Ghabrivirales Chrysoviridae Megabirnaviridae Quadriviridae Totiviridae Resentoviricetes Reovirales Reoviridae Vidaverviricetes Mindivirales Cystoviridae Pisuviricota Duplopiviricetes Durnavirales Amalgaviridae Curvulaviridae Hypoviridae Picobirnaviridae Partitiviridae Unassigned Families : Birnaviridae Polymycoviridae Genera : Botybirnavirus IV: (+)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Kitrinoviricota Alsuviricetes Hepelivirales Alphatetraviridae Benyviridae Hepeviridae Matonaviridae Martellivirales Bromoviridae Closteroviridae Endornaviridae Kitaviridae Mayoviridae Togaviridae Virgaviridae Tymovirales Alphaflexiviridae Betaflexiviridae Deltaflexiviridae Gammaflexiviridae Tymoviridae Flasuviricetes Amarillovirales Flaviviridae Magsaviricetes Nodamuvirales Nodaviridae Sinhaliviridae Tolucaviricetes Tolivirales Carmotetraviridae Luteoviridae Tombusviridae Lenarviricota Leviviricetes Norzivirales Atkinsviridae Duinviridae Fiersviridae Solspiviridae Timlovirales Blumeviridae Steitzviridae Amabiliviricetes Wolframvirales Narnaviridae Howeltoviricetes Cryppavirales Mitoviridae Miaviricetes Ourlivirales Botourmiaviridae Pisuviricota Pisoniviricetes Nidovirales Abyssoviridae Arteriviridae Cremegaviridae Coronaviridae Euroniviridae Gresnaviridae Medioniviridae Mesoniviridae Mononiviridae Nanghoshaviridae Nanhypoviridae Olifoviridae Roniviridae Tobaniviridae Picornavirales Picornaviridae Marnaviridae Solinviviridae Caliciviridae Iflaviridae Secoviridae Dicistroviridae Polycipiviridae Sobelivirales Alvernaviridae Barnaviridae Solemoviridae Stelpaviricetes Patatavirales Potyviridae Stellavirales Astroviridae Unassigned Families : Permutotetraviridae Sarthroviridae V: (–)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Negarnaviricota Chunqiuviricetes Muvirales Qinviridae Ellioviricetes Bunyavirales Cruliviridae Arenaviridae Fimoviridae Hantaviridae Leishbuviridae Mypoviridae Nairoviridae Peribunyaviridae Phasmaviridae Phenuiviridae Tospoviridae Wupedeviridae Insthoviricetes Articulavirales Amnoonviridae Orthomyxoviridae Milneviricetes Serpentovirales Aspiviridae Monjiviricetes Jingchuvirales Aliusviridae Chuviridae Crepuscuviridae Myriaviridae Natareviridae Mononegavirales Artoviridae Bornaviridae Filoviridae Lispiviridae Mymonaviridae Nyamiviridae Paramyxoviridae Pneumoviridae Rhabdoviridae Sunviridae Xinmoviridae Yunchangviricetes Goujianvirales Yueviridae Ambiviricota Suforviricetes Crytulvirales Dumbiviridae Quambiviridae Trimbiviridae Unambiviridae RT VI: ssRNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Ortervirales Belpaoviridae Metaviridae Pseudoviridae Retroviridae VII: dsDNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Blubervirales Hepadnaviridae Ortervirales Caulimoviridae Taxon identifiers Rhabdoviridae Wikidata : Q1356983 Wikispecies : Rhabdoviridae CoL : FMQ EoL : 8054 EPPO : 1RHAVF GBIF : 7758 IRMNG : 113831 NCBI : 11270 WoRMS : 600069 Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rhabdoviridae&oldid=1295803426 " Categories : Rhabdoviridae Viral plant pathogens and diseases Mononegavirales Virus families Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with 'species' microformats Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 23:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rhabdoviridae 22 languages Add topic

