Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical basis 2 Applications in environmental law Toggle Applications in environmental law subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Canada 2.3 European Union 2.4 France 2.5 Ghana 2.6 Sweden 2.7 United Kingdom 2.8 United States 2.8.1 Limitations of polluter pays principle 2.9 Zimbabwe 3 In international environmental law 4 Exception for excusable ignorance 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Polluter pays principle 22 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Principle in environmental law Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e In environmental law , the polluter pays principle is enacted to make the party responsible for producing pollution responsible for paying for the damage done to the natural environment . This principle has also been used to put the costs of pollution prevention on the polluter.

[ 1 ] It is regarded as a regional custom because of the strong support it has received in most Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and European Union countries, [ 2 ] and has a strong scientific basis in economics . It is a fundamental principle in US environmental law.

[ 3 ] Historical basis [ edit ] According to the French historian of the environment Jean-Baptiste Fressoz, financial compensation (not named "polluter pays principle" at that time) is already the regulation principle of pollution favoured by industrials in the nineteenth century.

[ 4 ] He wrote that: "This principle, which is now offered as a new solution, actually accompanied the process of industrialisation, and was intended by the manufacturers themselves." [ 4 ] In modern times, the continued adherence to the polluter pays principle is supported scientifically by economics. One condition that must be satisfied in order to maximise Pareto efficiency is the assignment of all costs of a decision, such as the harm resulting from a decision to pollute, to the agent making the decision, effectively removing all externalities .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Applications in environmental law [ edit ] An ecotax allows governments to better manage the pollution caused directly or indirectly by industry.

The polluter pays principle underpins environmental policy such as an ecotax , which, if enacted by government, deters and essentially reduces greenhouse gas emissions . This principle is based on the fact that as much as pollution is unavoidable, the person or industry that is responsible for the pollution must pay some money for the rehabilitation of the polluted environment.

[ 1 ] Australia [ edit ] The state of New South Wales in Australia has included the polluter pay principle with the other principles of ecologically sustainable development in the objectives of the Environment Protection Authority.

[ 7 ] Canada [ edit ] The Canadian Energy Regulator mandates that oil companies must pay for any environmental impacts from a spill. This mandate requires oil companies to pay for damages, regardless of whether or not the spill is their fault.

[ 8 ] European Union [ edit ] The polluter pays principle is set out in the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union [ 9 ] and Directive 2004/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage is based on this principle. The directive entered into force on 30 April 2004; member states were allowed three years to transpose the directive into their domestic law and by July 2010 all member states had completed this.

[ 2 ] France [ edit ] In France , the Charter for the Environment contains a formulation of the polluter pays principle (article 4): Everyone shall be required, in the conditions provided for by law, to contribute to the making good of any damage he or she may have caused to the environment.

[ 10 ] Ghana [ edit ] In Ghana , the polluter pays principle was adopted in 2011.

[ 11 ] Sweden [ edit ] The polluter pays principle is also known as extended producer responsibility (EPR). This is a concept that was probably first described by Thomas Lindhqvist for the Swedish government in 1990.

[ 12 ] EPR seeks to shift the responsibility of dealing with waste from governments (and thus, taxpayers and society at large) to the entities producing it. In effect, it internalised the cost of waste disposal into the cost of the product, theoretically meaning that the producers will improve the waste profile of their products, thus decreasing waste and increasing possibilities for reuse and recycling.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development defines extended producer responsibility as: a concept where manufacturers and importers of products should bear a significant degree of responsibility for the environmental impacts of their products throughout the product life-cycle, including upstream impacts inherent in the selection of materials for the products, impacts from manufacturers’ production process itself, and downstream impacts from the use and disposal of the products. Producers accept their responsibility when designing their products to minimise life-cycle environmental impacts, and when accepting legal, physical or socio-economic responsibility for environmental impacts that cannot be eliminated by design.

[ 13 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 established the operation of the polluter pays principle. This was further built upon by The Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) Regulations 2009 (for England) and the Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) (Wales) Regulations 2009 (for Wales).

[ 14 ] United States [ edit ] The principle is employed in all of the major US pollution control laws: Clean Air Act , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Clean Water Act , [ 17 ] Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (solid waste and hazardous waste management), [ 3 ] and Superfund (cleanup of abandoned waste sites).

[ 3 ] Some eco-taxes underpinned by the polluter pays principle include: the Gas Guzzler Tax for motor vehicles Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE), a "polluter pays" fine .

the Superfund law requires polluters to pay for cleanup of hazardous waste sites, when the polluters can be identified.

[ 18 ] Limitations of polluter pays principle [ edit ] The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has observed that the polluter pays principle has typically not been fully implemented in US laws and programs. For example, drinking water and sewage treatment services are subsidized and there are limited mechanisms in place to fully assess polluters for treatment costs.

[ 19 ] Zimbabwe [ edit ] The Zimbabwe Environmental Management Act of 2002 [ 20 ] [ full citation needed ] prohibits the discharge of pollutants into the environment. In line with the "Polluter Pays" principle, the Act requires a polluter to meet the cost of decontaminating the polluted environment.

[ 21 ] In international environmental law [ edit ] While it is not recognized as a binding principle in all sectors of international environmental law , [ 22 ] it is mentioned as principle 16 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of 1992.

[ 23 ] Exception for excusable ignorance [ edit ] The polluter pays principle (PPP) has been doubted in cases where no one recognized that a type of pollution posed any danger until after the pollution began.  An example occurs in the history of climate change science which shows that considerable carbon dioxide was emitted into the atmosphere by industrialized countries before there was scientific awareness or consensus that it could be dangerous.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Carbon tax Ecotax Environmental Principles and Policies Extended producer responsibility Externality Feebate Pigouvian tax Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays amendment in Florida Pollution control Pottery Barn rule Public good Severance tax References [ edit ] ^ a b OECD (2008).

The Polluter Pays Principle: Definition, Analysis, Implementation . Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

doi : 10.1787/9789264044845-en .

ISBN 9789264113374 .

^ a b European Commission, Environmental Liability , accessed 29 October 2017 ^ a b c "Waste, Chemical, and Cleanup Enforcement" . EPA. 2016-01-07.

^ a b (in French) Nic Ulmi, "Aux origines de la crise écologique" [The origins of the ecological crisis], Le temps , 18 October 2016 (page visited on 22 October 2016).

^ Ambec, Stefan; Ehlers, Lars (2014-12-24).

"Regulation via the Polluter-pays Principle" (PDF) .

The Economic Journal .

126 (523). Oxford University Press: 884– 906.

doi : 10.1111/ecoj.12184 .

S2CID 13875804 .

^ Callan, S. J.; Thomas, J. M. (2007). "Modelling the Market Process: A Review of the Basics".

Environmental Economics and Management: Theory, Politics and Applications (4th ed.). Mason, OH: Thompson Southwestern.

ISBN 978-0-324-32067-1 .

^ Protection of the Environment Administration Act 1991, section 6(2)(d)(i) [1] .

^ Government of Canada, Canada Energy Regulator (2023-03-14).

"CER – Emergency Management and the Polluter Pay Principle" .

www.cer-rec.gc.ca . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

^ Article 191(2) TFEU ^ Charter for the Environment , Constitutional Council (page visited on 28 August 2016).

^ Ghana Business News, Cabinet approves Polluter Pays Principle , 8 December 2011, accessed 29 October 2017 ^ The International Institute for Industrial Environmental Economics at Lund University, Sweden (2000).

"Extended Producer Responsibility in Cleaner Production" Archived 2014-05-13 at the Wayback Machine Doctoral Dissertation (2000) ^ Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Environment Directorate, Paris, France (2006).

"Extended Producer Responsibility." Project Fact Sheet.

^ The Environmental Damage Regulations: Preventing and Remedying Environmental Damage , accessed 29 October 2017 ^ Billings, Leon G. (2005-03-09).

"Cleaning America's Air: Progress and Challenges" . Bethany Beach, DE: Edmund S. Muskie Foundation. Speech at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville.

^ "Air Enforcement" . Washington, D.C.: US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2015-12-01.

^ "Water Enforcement" . EPA. 2015-12-14.

^ The Buck Stops Here: Polluters are Paying for Most Hazardous Waste Cleanups .

Superfund Today (Newsletter) (Report). EPA. June 1996. EPA-540-K-96/004.

^ Water and Wastewater Pricing: An Informational Overview (PDF) (Report). EPA. 2003. EPA-832-F-03-027.

^ Chapter 20:27 ^ The Herald (Harare), Polluter pays as environmental management principle , 18 May 2016, accessed 6 November 2017 ^ International Court of Justice.

"Advisory Opinion of 23 July 2025" (PDF) . Retrieved 25 July 2025 .

^ Nations, United.

"United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3-14 June 1992" .

United Nations . Retrieved 2023-04-02 .

^ García-Portela, Laura.  “ Moral Responsibility for Climate Change Loss and Damage: A Response to the Excusable Ignorance Objection ”, International Journal of Philosophy 1 (39):7-24 (2020).

Further reading [ edit ] International Law and Naval War: The Effect of Marine Safety and Pollution Conventions during International Armed Conflict , by Dr. Sonja Ann Jozef Boelaert-Suominen (December 2000).

Doswald-Beck, ICRC Review (1997), No. 316, 35–55; Greenwood, ibid., 65–75.

v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Industrial ecology Tools Agent-based model Cost–benefit analysis DPSIR Ecolabel Ecological footprint Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental impact assessment Environmental management system EIO-LCA Input–output model Integrated chain management ISO 14000 Life-cycle assessment Life-cycle cost analysis Material flow analysis MET Matrix Stakeholder analysis Concepts Circular economy Cradle-to-cradle design Dematerialization Eco-efficiency Eco-industrial development Eco-industrial park Ecological modernization Efficient energy use Exergy Extended producer responsibility Industrial metabolism Industrial symbiosis Polluter pays principle Precautionary principle Rebound effect Waste hierarchy Waste minimisation Waste valorization Related fields Cleaner production Design for environment Earth systems engineering and management Ecological economics Ecological modernization Environmental economics Green chemistry Sustainable development Urban ecology Urban metabolism v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars Portals : Environment Law Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polluter_pays_principle&oldid=1302451353 " Categories : Environmental economics Environmental law Environmental social science concepts Industrial ecology Pollution Waste management concepts Legal doctrines and principles Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2020 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 13:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polluter pays principle 22 languages Add topic

