Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Indian religions Toggle Indian religions subsection 1.1 Buddhism 1.2 Hinduism 2 Western philosophy 3 In arts and culture 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Impermanence 7 languages বাংলা བོད་ཡིག Español Bahasa Indonesia Kapampangan नेपाल भाषा Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical concept For other uses, see Impermanence (disambiguation) .

This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Buddhist painting displaying Impermanence Impermanence , also known as the philosophical problem of change , is a philosophical concept addressed in a variety of religions and philosophies . In Eastern philosophy it is notable for its role in the Buddhist three marks of existence . It is also an important element of Hinduism . In Western philosophy it is most famously known through its first appearance in Greek philosophy in the writings of Heraclitus and in his doctrine of panta rhei (everything flows). In Western philosophy the concept is also referred to as becoming .

Indian religions [ edit ] The Pali word for impermanence, anicca , is a compound word consisting of "a" meaning non-, and "nicca" meaning "constant, continuous, permanent".

[ 1 ] While 'nicca' is the concept of continuity and permanence, 'anicca' refers to its exact opposite; the absence of permanence and continuity. The term is synonymous with the Sanskrit term anitya (a + nitya).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The concept of impermanence is prominent in Buddhism, and it is also found in various schools of Hinduism and Jainism. The term also appears in the Rigveda .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Main article: Impermanence (Buddhism) According to Buddhism, living beings go through many births. Buddhism does not teach the existence of a permanent, immutable soul. The birth of one form from another is part of a process of continuous change.

[ citation needed ] Impermanence , called anicca (Pāli) or anitya (Sanskrit), appears extensively in the Pali Canon [ 1 ] as one of the essential doctrines of Buddhism .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The doctrine asserts that all of conditioned existence, without exception, is "transient, evanescent, inconstant".

[ 1 ] All temporal things, whether material or mental, are compounded objects in a continuous change of condition, subject to decline and destruction.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] All physical and mental events are not metaphysically real. They are not constant or permanent; they come into being and dissolve.

[ 7 ] Hinduism [ edit ] The term anitya (अनित्य), in the sense of impermanence of objects and life, appears in verse 1.2.10 of the Katha Upanishad , one of the Principal Upanishads of Hinduism.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] It asserts that material world is impermanent, but impermanent nature of things is an opportunity to obtain what is permanent ( nitya ) as the Hindu scripture presents its doctrine about Atman (Self).

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] [ 11 ] The term Anitya also appears in the Bhagavad Gita in a similar context.

[ 10 ] In Chapter 2 of the Bhagavad Gita , Krishna elucidates a profound spiritual truth to Arjuna , emphasizing the distinction between the eternal nature of the atman (soul) and the transient, perishable nature of the material world.

Krishna conveys that while the body is subject to decay and death, the soul remains undying and unchanging. This teaching serves as a foundational philosophy in Hinduism , encouraging detachment from material concerns and an understanding of the true, eternal self. This insight is pivotal for Arjuna, as it reorients his perspective from the battlefield's immediate concerns to the broader, spiritual dimensions of existence, urging him to perform his duty without attachment to the outcomes.

[ 12 ] Buddhism and Hinduism share the doctrine of Anicca or Anitya , that is "nothing lasts, everything is in constant state of change"; however, they disagree on the Anatta doctrine, that is whether Self exists or not.

[ 7 ] Even in the details of their respective impermanence theories, state Frank Hoffman and Deegalle Mahinda, Buddhist and Hindu traditions differ.

[ 13 ] Change associated with Anicca and associated attachments produces sorrow or Dukkha asserts Buddhism and therefore need to be discarded for liberation ( nibbana ), while Hinduism asserts that not all change and attachments lead to Dukkha and some change – mental or physical or self-knowledge – leads to happiness and therefore need to be sought for liberation ( moksha ).

[ 13 ] The Nicca (permanent) in Buddhism is anatta (non-soul), the Nitya in Hinduism is atman (Self).

[ 10 ] Western philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Impermanence first appears in Greek philosophy in the writings of Heraclitus and his doctrine of panta rhei (everything flows). Heraclitus was famous for his insistence on ever-present change as being the fundamental essence of the universe, as stated in the famous saying, "No man ever steps in the same river twice".

[ 14 ] This is commonly considered to be a key contribution in the development of the philosophical concept of becoming , as contrasted with "being", and has sometimes been seen in a dialectical relationship with Parmenides ' statement that "whatever is, is, and what is not cannot be", the latter being understood as a key contribution in the development of the philosophical concept of being . For this reason, Parmenides and Heraclitus are commonly considered to be two of the founders of ontology . Scholars have generally believed that either Parmenides was responding to Heraclitus, or Heraclitus to Parmenides, though opinion on who was responding to whom has varied over the course of the 20th and 21st centuries.

[ 15 ] Heraclitus' position was complemented by his stark commitment to a unity of opposites in the world, stating that "the path up and down are one and the same". Through these doctrines Heraclitus characterized all existing entities by pairs of contrary properties, whereby no entity may ever occupy a single state at a single time. This, along with his cryptic utterance that "all entities come to be in accordance with this Logos " (literally, "word", "reason", or "account") has been the subject of numerous interpretations.

Impermanence was widely but not universally accepted among subsequent Greek philosophers.

Democritus ' theory of atoms entailed that assemblages of atoms were impermanent.

[ 16 ] Pyrrho declared that everything was astathmēta (unstable), and anepikrita (unfixed).

[ 17 ] Plutarch commented on impermanence saying "And if the nature which is measured is subject to the same conditions as the time which measures it, this nature itself has no permanence, nor "being," but is becoming and perishing according to its relation to time.

[ 18 ] The Stoic philosopher, Marcus Aurelius ' Meditations contains many comments about impermanence, such as “Bear in mind that everything that exists is already fraying at the edges, and in transition, subject to fragmentation and to rot.” (10.18) [ 19 ] Plato rejected impermanence, arguing against Heraclitus: [ 20 ] How can that be a real thing which is never in the same state? ... for at the moment that the observer approaches, then they become other ... so that you cannot get any further in knowing their nature or state .... but if that which knows and that which is known exist ever ... then I do not think they can resemble a process or flux ....

Several famous Roman Latin sayings are about impermanence, including Omnia mutantur , Sic transit gloria mundi , and Tempora mutantur .

In arts and culture [ edit ] Akio Jissoji 's Buddhist auteur film Mujo (also known as This Transient Life ) owes its title to the doctrine of Impermanence.

Impermanence is the title of a novella written by Daniel Frisano.

"Impermanence" is the title of the 7th track on For Those That Wish to Exist by Architects .

See also [ edit ] Reality in Buddhism Hōjōki Mono no aware The Tale of the Heike Wabi-sabi Philosophy of space and time Process philosophy Temporality Vanitas References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Thomas William Rhys Davids; William Stede (1921).

Pali-English Dictionary . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 355, Article on Nicca .

ISBN 978-81-208-1144-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Robert E. Buswell Jr.; Donald S. Lopez Jr. (2013).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton University Press. pp.

47– 48, Article on Anitya .

ISBN 978-1-4008-4805-8 .

^ A. C. Paranjpe (2006).

Self and Identity in Modern Psychology and Indian Thought . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 172.

ISBN 978-0-306-47151-3 .

^ Martin G. Wiltshire (1990).

Ascetic Figures Before and in Early Buddhism: The Emergence of Gautama as the Buddha . Walter de Gruyter. pp. 136 note 14.

ISBN 978-3-11-009896-9 .

^ Richard Gombrich (2006).

Theravada Buddhism . Routledge. p. 47.

ISBN 978-1-134-90352-8 .

, Quote: "All phenomenal existence [in Buddhism] is said to have three interlocking characteristics: impermanence, suffering and lack of soul or essence." ^ Robert E. Buswell Jr.; Donald S. Lopez Jr. (2013).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton University Press. pp.

42– 43, 47, 581.

ISBN 978-1-4008-4805-8 .

^ a b Ray Billington (2002).

Understanding Eastern Philosophy . Routledge. pp.

56– 59.

ISBN 978-1-134-79348-8 .

^ Katha Upanishad 1.2.10 , Wikisource; Quote: जानाम्यहं शेवधिरित्यनित्यं न ह्यध्रुवैः प्राप्यते हि ध्रुवं तत् । ततो मया नाचिकेतश्चितोऽग्निः अनित्यै र्द्रव्यैः प्राप्तवानस्मि नित्यम् ॥ १०॥ ^ a b Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814684 , page 283 with footnote 1 ^ a b c Richard Francis Gombrich; Cristina Anna Scherrer-Schaub (2008).

Buddhist Studies . Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

209– 210.

ISBN 978-81-208-3248-0 .

^ Max Muller (1884).

The Upanishads . Oxford University Press (Reprinted Dover Press, 2012). p. 9, verse 1.2.10.

ISBN 978-0-486-15711-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Easwaran, Eknath, ed. (2007).

The Bhagavad Gita . The classics of Indian spirituality (2nd ed.). Tomales, CA: Nilgiri Press. pp. 83, 84, and 86.

ISBN 978-1-58638-019-9 .

^ a b Frank Hoffman; Deegalle Mahinda (2013).

Pali Buddhism . Routledge. pp.

162– 165.

ISBN 978-1-136-78553-5 .

^ This is how Plato puts Heraclitus' doctrine. See Cratylus , 402a.

^ John Palmer (2016).

Parmenides .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ "Democritus" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2016.

^ Beckwith, Christopher I. (2015).

Greek Buddha: Pyrrho's Encounter with Early Buddhism in Central Asia (PDF) .

Princeton University Press . pp.

22– 23.

ISBN 9781400866328 .

^ Plutarch, On the “E” at Delphi ^ Marcus Aurelius on impermanence phillipwells.com April 2015 Archived 31 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cratylus Paragraph 440 sections c-d.

Sources [ edit ] Anōmadassi Thero, Alawwe (November 2019).

"The Three Characteristics of Existence To be realised through Wisdom" .

anomadassi.lk (Booklet). Translated by Jayawardena, Anura. Renaketuwagala Aranya Senasana Bharaya, Ettapolawatta, Wademada, Ovilikanda, Matale, Sri Lanka . Retrieved 1 January 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Impermanence .

Look up impermanence in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Impermanence by Alawwe Anōmadassi Thero The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux (1935) by Satkari Mookerjee All About Change by Thanissaro Bhikkhu Three marks of existence by Nyanaponika Thera Time and Temporality: A Buddhist Approach , Kenneth K. Inada (1974), Philosophy East and West v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal Authority control databases : National Germany Japan NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐plpw9
Cached time: 20250814220136
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.727 seconds
Real time usage: 0.900 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2209/1000000
Revision size: 15283/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 120615/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1816/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 97382/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19100965/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  727.022      1 -total
 25.67%  186.632      1 Template:Reflist
 21.34%  155.128      1 Template:Buddhism_topics
 21.05%  153.070      1 Template:Navbox
 20.93%  152.148     14 Template:Cite_book
 14.64%  106.428      1 Template:IAST
 14.47%  105.221      1 Template:Transliteration
 13.94%  101.379      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
  9.66%   70.205      1 Template:Short_description
  8.23%   59.853      1 Template:Disputed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:297755:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220136 and revision id 1305141559. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Impermanence&oldid=1305141559 " Categories : Buddhist philosophical concepts Change Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Metaphysical properties Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in the philosophy of science Hindu philosophical concepts Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Accuracy disputes from April 2022 All accuracy disputes Use dmy dates from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter CS1 maint: url-status This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 08:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Impermanence 7 languages Add topic

