Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophical argument 2 Influence 3 Writing 4 References Toggle the table of contents On Practice 6 languages Català Español 한국어 日本語 Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1937 philosophical work by Mao Zedong This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "On Practice" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "On Practice" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series about Mao Zedong Personal Early life Former Residence Death and state funeral Memorial Hall Ideology Maoism Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Leadership Tenure Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit Works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship On the Ten Major Relationships Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Legacy Cult of personality Chairman Mao en route to Anyuan Portraits overlooking Tiananmen 1989 vandalism incident Statues Young Fuzhou Chengdu Long Live the Victory North Park Commune inspection v t e Part of a series on Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous revolution theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Deng Xiaoping Theory Naxalism People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Salim Rubaya Ali Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill George Jackson İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965—1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black Power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Purba Banglar Sarbahara Party Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Maoist Communist Party of China Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National Democracy Movement Naxalite Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e On Practice ( simplified Chinese : 实践论 ; traditional Chinese : 實踐論 ; pinyin : Shíjiànlùn ) is one of Mao Zedong's most important philosophical works. Along with On Contradiction , this essay is a part of lectures Mao gave in 1937. It expresses Mao's support for Marxism and attempts to establish a distinctly Chinese brand of communist philosophy .

[ 1 ] On Practice argues that people must apply knowledge to practice in reality in order to test its truthfulness.

[ 2 ] : 38 At the time it was written, the Chinese Communist Party had just endured the Long March and their nationalist foes were still at large. Plus, China was facing a tremendous Japanese threat. Mao hoped to establish himself as the leader of China's communist party in order to unite China and vanquish the Japanese.

On Practice was written as a part of this mission, for it gave Mao a more legitimate claim to lead by creating the basis for his communist philosophy, Maoism .

[ 1 ] Philosophical argument [ edit ] On Practice expands on Mao's criticism of dogmatism in his 1930 essay, Oppose Book Worship .

[ 3 ] : 96–97 The text begins with Mao's emphasis on practice over theory, and states, "Marxists hold that man's social practice alone is the criterion of the truth of his knowledge of the external world." [ 3 ] : 96 In this view, a person must "discover the truth through practice, and again through practice verify and develop the truth." [ 3 ] : 96–97 On Practice states that the masses, as owners of the means of production , should engage in material production.

[ 4 ] : 9–10 According to the text, "man's knowledge depends mainly on his activity in human production".

[ 4 ] : 11 Through participation in material production, people develop their understanding of class relationships, social relations, and human relationships.

[ 4 ] : 11–12 Thus, according to Mao, practical participation in social environments or production are the only reliable mechanism for developing useful knowledge.

[ 5 ] : 59 According to Mao, logical knowledge results from the process of perceiving, cognizing, and conceptualizing.

[ 6 ] : 4–5 During the stage of perception individuals spend time interacting with the subject of their enquiry, and they merely absorb the impressions their senses are giving them.  This stage allows people to become familiar with the matter they are interested in, for as they gather impressions individuals begin to recognize the essential elements of their subject. For instance, an individual observing trees comes to understand that trees do not always bear leaves. They realize birds use some trees as their home. Additionally, useful impressions can be derived from indirect experiences of a phenomenon. A person has to perceive physical things before understanding their "essence and internal relations".

[ 4 ] : 12 A dialectical process leads from perceptual knowledge to rational knowledge.

[ 4 ] : 4 According to Mao, an indirect experience is just a direct experience of some other person's impressions.

[ 6 ] : 9 Therefore, indirect impressions still gather genuine information about a subject. Impressions eventually lead to the second step toward rational knowledge, cognition. At this point, individuals establish some general notions about their subject using the essential aspects that were impressed upon them. From there individuals begin conceptualizing; they use their reason to make judgments with the general notions their impressions supplied. These judgments are pieces of logical knowledge. They can be as mundane as judging that many trees lose their leaves during the winter, and as significant as Mao's example, the Chinese Communist Party can defeat their Japanese opposition.

[ 6 ] : 5 All logical knowledge must be put to practice in order to substantiate its truth-value. Logical knowledge requires this testing because of its circumstantial founding.  Impressions, the origin of logical knowledge, are based upon the circumstances someone experiences. Circumstances change. Therefore, logical knowledge is subject to error. However, by putting their logically founded judgments into practice an individual can address the errors in their ideas. Practice does this by presenting individuals with new impressions, for practice involves interacting with the phenomenon being examined. These new impressions are used in the same way the older ones were. They inform judgments.  The only difference is that these judgments are about the truth-value of the original logical knowledge.

True knowledge leads to the successful completion of an objective, and is derived from the continual amendment of logical knowledge. A piece of logical knowledge usually undergoes many changes before it can be called true knowledge, for the circumstances surrounding a certain objective can always change. These changes conjure new impressions that disprove older judgments. For instance, a married couple will have to adjust their plan to buy a house according to the strength of the housing market. The fiscal requirements for buying the house will change with the market, so the couple's plan will have to adhere to those changes. However, once the couple understands the fiscal requirements and their financial means are able, they can buy the house. In the same way all logical knowledge can become true knowledge. Said simply, for this to happen an individual must cognize the correct circumstances. This reliance on circumstances is exactly why practice is such an essential element of knowledge, for through practice an individual's ideas are constantly accounting for more circumstances while testing the assumptions of prior knowledge. Therefore, they can eventually encounter the circumstances that can catalyze true knowledge.

According to Mao, rationalists and empiricists do not follow the real path to knowledge, and he challenges these dissenters inability to recognize the proper use of practice.

[ 6 ] : 12 Rationalists do not recognize that interacting with reality is essential to understanding it. Without sensory impressions and tests how can you be sure a theory corresponds to reality? A rationalist might say because the theory makes sense. However, it makes sense that a bird walking across the street prefers walking to flying. The only way to reveal the true reason for the creature walking, a broken wing, is by observing it. An empiricist understands the importance of observing phenomenon. Mao thinks, they know that practice is important, but they do not know what to do with the information they have gathered from practice. Therefore, they cannot extract the essence of their impressions and therefore, cannot make useful judgments. Dialectical-materialism combines the perception empiricists hold dear with the cognition rationalists rely on, and as a result is the proper philosophy for attaining knowledge. Knowledge that the Chinese and all the peoples of the world can use to progress communism.

[ 6 ] : 20 Influence [ edit ] On Practice, along with Mao's On Contradiction , elevated his reputation as a Marxist theoretician.

[ 2 ] : 38 Both works became widely read in the USSR after Mao was celebrated in the Eastern Bloc for China's intervention in the Korean War .

[ 2 ] : 39 On Practice laid the theoretical foundation for Mao's subsequent slogan, " seek truth from facts ." [ 2 ] : 38 The primacy of practice discussed in the text serves as the theoretical basis for the mass line , a practice summarized by the slogan, "from the masses, to the masses." [ 3 ] : 97 In April 1960, Petroleum Minister Yu Qiuli stated that On Practice (along with On Contradiction ) would be the ideological core of the campaign to develop the Daqing oil field in northeast China .

[ 7 ] : 150 Yu's efforts to mobilize workers in Daqing focused on ideological motivation rather than material incentives.

[ 8 ] : 52–53 The Ministry of the Petroleum Industry shipped thousands of copies by plane so that every Daqing oil worker would have copies and for work units to each set up their own study groups.

[ 7 ] : 150 The successful completion of Daqing despite harsh weather conditions and supply limitations became a model held up by the Communist Party as an example during subsequent industrialization campaigns.

[ 8 ] : 52–54 Writing [ edit ] Like On Contradiction , On Practice was written by Mao during the Yan'an Period.

[ 9 ] : 31 On Practice was first delivered as a speech in July 1937.

[ 10 ] : 43 References [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: On Practice ^ a b Philip Short, Mao, A Life (Great Britain: Hodder Headline, 1999), 355.

^ a b c d Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise . New Haven: Yale University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv3006z6k .

ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6 .

JSTOR j.ctv3006z6k .

OCLC 1348572572 .

S2CID 253067190 .

^ a b c d Opper, Marc (2020).

People's Wars in China, Malaya, and Vietnam . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

doi : 10.3998/mpub.11413902 .

ISBN 978-0-472-90125-8 .

JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.11413902 .

^ a b c d e Altehenger, Jennifer; Ho, Denise Y., eds. (2022).

Material Contradictions in Mao's China . Seattle: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 978-0-295-75085-9 .

^ Simpson, Tim (2023).

Betting on Macau: Casino Capitalism and China's Consumer Revolution . Globalization and Community series. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-1-5179-0031-1 .

^ a b c d e Mao Zedong, On Practice, On the Relation Between Knowledge and Practice, Between Knowing and Doing (1937).

^ a b Hou, Li (2021).

Building for Oil: Daqing and the Formation of the Chinese Socialist State .

Harvard-Yenching Institute monograph series. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Asia Center .

ISBN 978-0-674-26022-1 .

^ a b Meyskens, Covell F. (2020).

Mao's Third Front: The Militarization of Cold War China . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781108784788 .

ISBN 978-1-108-78478-8 .

OCLC 1145096137 .

S2CID 218936313 .

^ Hammond, Ken (2023).

China's Revolution and the Quest for a Socialist Future . New York, NY: 1804 Books.

ISBN 9781736850084 .

^ Riojas, Carlos (2019). "Contradiction". In Sorace, Christian; Franceschini, Ivan; Loubere, Nicholas (eds.).

Afterlives of Chinese Communism: Political Concepts from Mao to Xi . Acton, Australia: Australian National University Press .

ISBN 9781760462499 .

v t e Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (1943–1976) Chairman of the Central Military Commission (1954–1976) History and politics Overviews Early life Rule as Chinese leader Cult of personality Death and state funeral Chairman Mao Memorial Hall Chronology Chinese Civil War Long March Chinese Soviet Republic Second Sino-Japanese War Second United Front Yan'an Rectification Movement Yan'an Forum 7th National Congress of the Communist Party Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China Land Reform Movement Korean War People's Volunteer Army Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1954 Constitution Bandung Conference 8th National Congress of the Communist Party Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Two Bombs, One Satellite Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Sino-Soviet split Socialist Education Movement Vietnam War Cultural Revolution Cleansing the Class Ranks Chairman Mao badge Four Olds Gang of Four Red August Red Guards 9th National Congress of the Communist Party Abolition of the presidency Lin Biao incident 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China 10th National Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Maoism Capitalist roader Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line New Democracy Newborn socialist things One Divides into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Three Worlds Theory Works Political works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Ten Major Relationships Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Family Mao Zemin (brother) Mao Zetan (brother) Mao Zejian (cousin) Luo Yixiu (first wife) Yang Kaihui (second wife) Mao Anying (son) Mao Anqing (son) Mao Anlong (son) Yang Yuehua (daughter) Li Min (daughter) Jiang Qing (fourth wife) Li Na (daughter) Mao Xinyu (grandson) Kong Dongmei (granddaughter) Mao Yuanxin (nephew) Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_Practice&oldid=1282908844 " Categories : 1937 essays Contemporary philosophical literature Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Works by Mao Zedong Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from April 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from April 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 09:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On Practice 6 languages Add topic

