Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Notable tornadoes 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Multiple-vortex tornado 5 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tornado comprising multiple vortices A multiple-vortex tornado outside Dallas, Texas , on April 2, 1957.

A multiple-vortex tornado (often shortened to multi-vortex tornado ) is a tornado that contains several vortices (called subvortices or suction vortices) revolving around, inside of, and as part of the main vortex . The only times multiple vortices may be visible are when the tornado is first forming or when condensation and debris are balanced such that subvortices are apparent without being obscured. They can add over 100 mph to the ground-relative wind in a tornado circulation and are responsible for most cases where narrow arcs of extreme destruction lie right next to weak damage within tornado paths.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Suction vortices, also known as suction spots, are substructures found in many tornadoes, though they are not always easily visible. These vortices typically occur at the base of the tornado, where it makes contact with the ground. Sub-vortices tend to form after vortex breakdown reaches the surface, resulting from the interaction of cyclonically incoming and rising air. Although multi-vortex structures are common in tornadoes, they are not unique to them and can occur in other circulations, such as dust devils. This is a natural result of vortex dynamics in physics. Multi-vortex tornadoes should not be confused with cyclically tornadic supercells . Supercells are large, rotating thunderstorms that can produce multiple, distinct tornadoes, often referred to as tornado families . These tornadoes may form at different times or exist simultaneously but are separate from one another.

[ citation needed ] A phenomenon similar to multiple vortices is the satellite tornado . Unlike the multiple-vortex tornado, where smaller vortices form inside the main tornado, a satellite tornado develops outside the main tornado's circulation. It forms through a different mechanism, typically as a result of interactions with the parent storm's environment. Despite appearing close to the primary tornado, satellite tornadoes are independent and can have their own rotation.

[ 1 ] In rare instances, multi-vortex tornadoes may display their strength through the uncommon method of "horizontal vorticies" which involves tornadoes appearing to "bend" the multiple vorticies included inside of the tornado, resulting in a tornado appearing to have thin lines stretching out of them. Two particularly famous examples of tornadoes that had horizontal vorticies include the 2011 Tuscaloosa EF4.

and the 1999 Bridge Creek-Moore F5 tornadoes.

Notable tornadoes [ edit ] The largest tornado ever documented was a multiple-vortex tornado. It struck El Reno, Oklahoma, on May 31, 2013 , as a rain-wrapped tornado, taking the lives of tornado researcher Tim Samaras , his son Paul, and their TWISTEX colleague, Carl Young . This storm also took the life of local amateur chaser, Richard Henderson.

[ 2 ] It had a maximum width of 2.6 miles (4.2 km) and a maximum recorded windspeed of at least 313 miles per hour (504 km/h). However, because of a lack of intense property damage, the tornado achieved a rating of EF3 on the Enhanced Fujita scale .

[ 3 ] Nevertheless, the El Reno tornado is one of the three strongest tornadoes ever recorded in terms of maximum wind speeds, the next being the 2024 Greenfield EF4 tornado , reaching a measured windspeed of possibly up to 318 miles per hour (512 km/h), the last being the 1999 Bridge Creek–Moore tornado which doppler weather radar measured 321 miles per hour (517 km/h) mph. The Greenfield tornado also displayed multiple vortices.

The 2011 Tuscaloosa tornado in CCTV footage. Note that this image does not display horizontal vortices, however the right side of the tornado does appear to have a visible representation of a suction vortex.

The 1997 Jarrell tornado was another example of a multiple-vortex tornado. The infamous “Dead Man Walking” photo of it was at a juvenile stage of sub-vortices development. The 2011 Cullman–Arab tornado is also famous for footage of it "walking" while in its multi-vortex stage, as well as the 2013 El Reno tornado , which also had footage of it "walking" while multi-vortex.

See also [ edit ] Tornadoes portal Tornadogenesis References [ edit ] ^ a b Elite Spotter Workshop crh.noaa.gov Archived 8 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Clay, Nolan (3 June 2013).

"Oklahoma storms: Amateur storm chaser took photo of tornado that killed him" .

The Oklahoman . Archived from the original on 9 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2013 .

^ Jeff Snyder; H. B. Bluestein (2014).

"Some Considerations for the Use of High-Resolution Mobile Radar Data in Tornado Intensity Determination" .

Weather Forecast .

29 (4): 799– 827.

Bibcode : 2014WtFor..29..799S .

doi : 10.1175/WAF-D-14-00026.1 .

S2CID 122669043 .

External links [ edit ] Multiple Vortex Tornado at the Online Tornado FAQ v t e Tornadoes Outline of tornadoes Overview Glossary of tornado terminology Tornado outbreak Science Intensity Fujita scale Enhanced Fujita scale International Fujita scale TORRO scale Tornado damage ( Cycloidal marks · Tornado damage survey ) Disagreements on the intensity of tornadoes F4, EF4, and IF4 tornadoes ( 1950–1959 · 1960–1969 · 2000–2009 · 2010–2019 · 2020–present ) F5, EF5 and IF5 tornadoes ( EF5 drought ) Composition Tornadogenesis Supercell Mesocyclone ( vertical draft ) Wall cloud Funnel cloud Multiple-vortex structure Rear flank downdraft Radar observation Weather radar ( WSR-57 · WSR-74 · NEXRAD · Advanced Technology Demonstrator ) Mobile radar observation of tornadoes ( Doppler on Wheels · RaXPol ) Convective storm detection Hook echo Tornado vortex signature Tornado debris signature Bounded weak echo region Descending reflectivity core Important individuals Ted Fujita John Park Finley Thomas P. Grazulis Timothy P. Marshall Joshua Wurman Karen Kosiba Robin Tanamachi Broadcast meteorology Weather presenter The Weather Channel Gary England James Spann Ryan Hall, Y'all Storm chasing Storm chasing Reed Timmer ( SRV Dominator ) TWISTEX ( Tony Laubach · Tim Samaras · Carl Young ) Tornado Intercept Vehicle Research History of research Case studies (2020–present) Satellite tornado Debris fallout List of meteorology institutions ( National Weather Service · European Severe Storms Laboratory · TORRO · AccuWeather ) Forecasting Numerical weather prediction ( Rapid Refresh · North American Mesoscale Model · European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts · Warn-on-Forecast ) Tornado watch Tornado warning Impact-based warning ( Particularly dangerous situation · Tornado emergency · List of tornado emergencies ) History Important storms 1764 ( Woldegk tornado ) 1814 ( Burning of Washington ) 1896 ( St. Louis tornado ) 1925 ( Tri-state tornado ) 1948 ( Tinker Air Force Base tornadoes ) 1953 ( Waco tornado · Flint–Beecher tornado ) 1965 ( Palm Sunday outbreak ) 1974 ( Super Outbreak · Xenia tornado ) 1989 ( Daulatpur–Saturia tornado ) 1990 ( Plainfield tornado ) 1997 ( Jarrell tornado ) 1999 ( Bridge Creek–Moore tornado ) 2007 ( Greensburg tornado ) 2011 ( Super Outbreak · Tuscaloosa–Birmingham tornado · Joplin tornado ) 2013 ( Moore tornado · El Reno tornado ) 2021 ( Western Kentucky tornado ) 2024 ( Greenfield tornado ) Miscellaneous Tornado myths ( Overpass myth ) Tornadoes by year Tornado records Lists of tornadoes and tornado outbreaks In media Twister Twisters Greensburg The Twister: Caught in the Storm Atomic Twister Sharknado Night of the Twisters (film) Related phenomena Thunderstorm ( Lightning · Downburst · Graupel · Hail ) Mesoscale convective system ( Derecho · Squall line · Bow echo ) Mesovortex ( Cyclone · Tropical cyclone ) Whirlwind ( Landspout · Waterspout · Dust devil · Gustnado · Steam devil · Fire whirl ) Tornadoes portal Category v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Multiple-vortex_tornado&oldid=1304686053 " Category : Tornado Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 14:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Multiple-vortex tornado 5 languages Add topic

