Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Drafting 3 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 3.1 Preamble 3.2 Principles 4 Reaction Toggle Reaction subsection 4.1 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Earth Charter 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Interlingua Italiano മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United Nations document The Earth Charter is an international declaration of fundamental values and principles considered useful by its supporters for building a just, sustainable, and peaceful global society in the 21st century. Created by a global consultation process, and endorsed by organizations representing millions of people, the Charter "seeks to inspire in all peoples a sense of global interdependence and shared responsibility for the well-being of the human family, the greater community of life, and future generations ." [ 1 ] It calls upon humanity to help create a global partnership at a critical juncture in history. The Earth Charter's vision proposes that environmental protection , human rights , equitable human development , and peace are interdependent and indivisible. The Charter attempts to provide a new framework for thinking about and addressing these issues. The Earth Charter Initiative organization exists to promote the Charter.

History [ edit ] The idea of the Earth Charter originated in 1987, by Maurice Strong and Mikhail Gorbachev as members of The Club of Rome , when the United Nations World Commission on Environment and Development called for a new charter to guide the transition to sustainable development . In 1992, the need for a charter was urged by then- Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali at the Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit , but the time for such a declaration was not believed to be right. The Rio Declaration became the statement of the achievable consensus at that time. In 1994, Strong (Chairman of the Earth Summit) and Gorbachev, working through organizations they each founded (the Earth Council and Green Cross International respectively), restarted the Earth Charter as a civil society initiative, with the help of the government of the Netherlands .

[ 2 ] Strong died in November 2015.

[ 2 ] "The Ark of Hope [ 3 ] was created for a celebration of the Earth Charter held at Shelburne Farms, Vermont on September 9, 2001." [ 3 ] Drafting [ edit ] The drafting of the text was done during a six-year worldwide consultation process (1994–2000), overseen by the independent Earth Charter Commission, which was convened by Strong and Gorbachev with the purpose of developing a global consensus on values and principles for a sustainable future. The Commission continues to serve as the steward of the Earth Charter text.

One of the members of the Earth Charter Commission and Steering Committee was Steven Clark Rockefeller , who, among other things is professor emeritus of Religion at Middlebury College and an advisory trustee of the Rockefeller Brothers Fund .

[ 4 ] According to a 2001 interview with Rockefeller, [ 5 ] he "chaired the Earth Charter international drafting committee". Other members included Amadou Toumani Touré (Mali), Princess Basma bint Talal (Jordan), Mohamed Sahnoun (Algeria), A. T. Ariyaratne (Sri Lanka), Wakako Hironaka (Japan), Erna Witoelar (Indonesia), Ruud Lubbers (The Netherlands), Federico Mayor (Spain), Mercedes Sosa (Argentina), Leonardo Boff (Brazil), Yolanda Kakabadse (Ecuador), Shridath Ramphal (Guyana), Elizabeth May (Canada), Severn Cullis-Suzuki (Canada), and others.

[ 6 ] The final text of the Earth Charter was approved at a meeting of the Earth Charter Commission at the UNESCO headquarters in Paris in March 2000. The official launch was on 29 June 2000 in a ceremony at The Peace Palace in The Hague , Netherlands.

Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands attended the ceremony.

Contents [ edit ] The approximately 2,400 word document is divided into sections (called pillars), which have 16 main principles containing 61 supporting principles.

[ 7 ] The document opens with a preamble and ends with a conclusion entitled "The Way Forward".

Preamble [ edit ] We stand at a critical moment in Earth's history, a time when humanity must choose its future. As the world becomes increasingly interdependent and fragile, the future at once holds great peril and great promise. To move forward we must recognize that in the midst of a magnificent diversity of cultures and life forms we are one human family and one Earth community with a common destiny. We must join together to bring forth a sustainable global society founded on respect for nature, universal human rights, economic justice, and a culture of peace. Towards this end, it is imperative that we, the peoples of Earth, declare our responsibility to one another, to the greater community of life, and to future generations.

[ 8 ] Principles [ edit ] The four pillars and sixteen principles of the Earth Charter are: [ 8 ] I. Respect and Care for the Community of Life Respect Earth and life in all its diversity.

Care for the community of life with understanding, compassion and love.

Build democratic societies that are just, participatory, sustainable and peaceful.

Secure Earth's bounty and beauty for present and future generations.

II. Ecological Integrity Protect and restore the integrity of Earth's ecological systems, with special concern for biological diversity and the natural processes that sustain life.

Prevent harm as the best method of environmental protection and, when knowledge is limited, apply a precautionary approach.

Adopt patterns of production, consumption and reproduction that safeguard Earth's regenerative capacities, human rights and community well-being.

Advance the study of ecological sustainability and promote the open exchange and wide application of the knowledge acquired.

III. Social and Economic Justice Eradicate poverty as an ethical, social and environmental imperative.

Ensure that economic activities and institutions at all levels promote human development in an equitable and sustainable manner.

Affirm gender equality and equity as prerequisites to sustainable development and ensure universal access to education, health care and economic opportunity.

Uphold the right of all, without discrimination, to a natural and social environment supportive of human dignity, bodily health and spiritual well-being, with special attention to the rights of indigenous peoples and minorities.

IV. Democracy, Nonviolence, and Peace Strengthen democratic institutions at all levels, and provide transparency and accountability in governance, inclusive participation in decision-making, and access to justice.

Integrate into formal education and lifelong learning the knowledge, values and skills needed for a sustainable way of life.

Treat all living beings with respect and consideration.

Promote a culture of tolerance, nonviolence and peace.

Reaction [ edit ] The Charter has been formally endorsed by organizations such as the UNESCO , [ 9 ] over 250 universities around the world, [ 10 ] the World Conservation Union of IUCN, the Indian National Capital Territory of Delhi , [ 11 ] the 2001 U.S. Conference of Mayors , [ 12 ] and dozens of youth organizations.

[ 13 ] Various religious groups from a wide range of religions support the Earth Charter. The Soka Gakkai International , representing more than 12 million Buddhists worldwide, has supported the Earth Charter since its inception.

[ 14 ] The Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations representing over 1000 Unitarian Universalist congregations in the United States supports the measure.

[ 15 ] The official body of the Baháʼí Faith religion reacted by saying "While not officially endorsing the Earth Charter, the Baháʼí International Community considers the effort toward drafting it and activities in support of its essential objectives to be highly commendable, and it will continue to participate in related activities, such as conferences, forums and the like." [ 16 ] The World Pantheist Movement, which supports a naturalistic view of religion, endorses the plan.

[ 17 ] The Leadership Conference of Women Religious , a Catholic organization in the United States approved the measure in 2004.

[ 18 ] The Episcopal Diocese of Newark (New Jersey), an Episcopalian Christian organization, endorsed the Earth Charter in 2009.

[ 19 ] In May 1992, more than 650 representatives of indigenous peoples adopted their own 109-point Indigenous Peoples Earth Charter.

[ 20 ] Representatives of indigenous peoples also participated in the Earth Charter consultations in 1996.

[ 21 ] In 2000, the Russian Association of the Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON), representing 31 indigenous peoples living in Siberia and far eastern Russia, formally endorsed the Earth Charter.

[ 22 ] Mayor Hsu of Tainan , a city of 750,000 in Taiwan , endorsed the charter in 2007.

[ 23 ] The cities of Corvallis (Oregon), Berkeley (California), Pickering (Canada) and 21 towns in Vermont have endorsed the measure.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Nine other towns in Vermont rejected measures endorsing the Earth Charter.

[ 27 ] Engineers Without Borders , an international association whose mission is to help its member groups assist poor communities in their respective countries and around the world, also endorses the Earth Charter.

[ 28 ] The Green Party of Botswana supports the plan.

[ 29 ] The African Conservation Foundation describes the Earth Charter movement as a "partner".

[ 30 ] In the UK, Bournemouth Borough Council endorsed the Charter in 2008.

[ citation needed ] Earth Charter International, the organization responsible for promoting the Charter, states in its literature that the Earth Charter is respectful and inclusive of all religious traditions. They say that the Charter itself makes no statements to support claims of intent to supplant any of the world's religions or to create a world government. ECI asserts that the Charter is a statement of common ethical values towards sustainability, that recognizes humanity's shared responsibility to the Earth and to each other.

[ 31 ] Criticism [ edit ] The Charter has received opposition from several groups. For example, in the United States , members of religious groups, such as the Religious Right have objected to the document on the grounds that it is secular , and espouses socialism , even though it does not; "From time to time critics of the Earth Charter express a concern that it promotes
socialism. This reflects a misunderstanding of the nature and purpose of the document.
The Earth Charter highlights the importance of social and economic justice, but it does
not advocate socialism as a political and economic strategy for achieving it." [ 32 ] In addition, some conservatives [ who?

] cite an informal comment by Mikhail Gorbachev that the document is "a kind of Ten Commandments "; and point to the fact that at the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg , South Africa , a copy of the document was placed symbolically in an "Ark of Hope" [ 3 ] — an independent project by the American artist Sally Linder.

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Earth Day World Oceans Day World Water Day Universal Declaration of Human Rights University for Peace References [ edit ] ^ Earth Charter Initiative: "What is the Earth Charter?" .

Archived 2010-07-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Maurice Strong: "History of the Earth Charter" Archived 2009-11-17 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b c "Welcome-Ark of Hope" .

www.arkofhope.org . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ "Steven C. Rockefeller" .

earthcharter.org . Archived from the original on 2018-05-19 . Retrieved 2018-05-31 .

^ Schwarz, Sherry (2001).

"Charting a New Course: An Interview with Steven Rockefeller" .

abroadview.org . Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 17 April 2018 .

^ "Commission" .

earthcharter.org . Archived from the original on 2018-05-06 . Retrieved 2018-05-31 .

^ Nigel Dower, University of Aberdeen (2004): "The Earth Charter as a Global Ethic" Archived 2011-07-24 at the Wayback Machine , p. 4.

^ a b Earth Charter Initiative: "Text of the Earth Charter" Archived 2010-04-26 at the Wayback Machine .

^ United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization: "Records of the General Conference" , 32nd Session, Vol. 1, p.35 ^ Earth Charter Initiative (March 26, 2009): "Universities that have endorsed the Earth Charter" Archived 2011-07-24 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "One million saplings to be planted by 2010" , The Hindu , Apr 21, 2007 ^ "Adopted Resolutions: Energy and Environment, Endorsement of Earth Charter" Archived 2009-04-27 at the Wayback Machine , 69th Annual Conference of U.S. Mayors, June 22–26, 2001 ^ Earth Charter Initiative (March 26, 2009): "Youth Organizations that have endorsed the Earth Charter" Archived 2011-06-26 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "SGI and the Earth Charter" , SGI Resources , May 3, 2000 ^ "Endorse the Earth Charter, 2002 Action of Immediate Witness" Archived 2009-03-11 at the Wayback Machine , Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations ^ "Baháʼís participate in interreligious dialogue on faith and ecology" , Baháʼí World News Service, September 6, 2001 ^ "World Pantheist Movement’s Help Centre" , World Pantheist Movement website, retrieved March 9, 2010.

^ Leadership Conference of Women Religious (August 24, 2004): "2004 Resolutions" Archived 2008-05-17 at the Wayback Machine (press release) ^ Diocese of Newark (January 31, 2009).

"135th Annual Convention Resolutions" (PDF) . p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-10-21.

^ Brechin, Steven R., ed. (2003).

Contested nature: promoting international biodiversity with social justice in the twenty-first century . Albany: State University of New York Press . p.

29 .

ISBN 0791457753 .

OCLC 51330533 .

^ Schulthess, Beatriz (1996).

"Participation of Indigenous Peoples in the Earth Charter Consultations" .

earthcharter.org . Retrieved 2018-05-31 .

^ RAIPON (2015).

"Endorsement of the Russian Association of the Indigenous Peoples of the North (RAIPON)" .

earthcharter.org . Retrieved 2018-05-31 .

^ "Mayor Hsu endorsed the Earth Charter with 15 Miss Globalcities" [ permanent dead link ] , Tainan City Government news bulltetin, January 19, 2007 ^ "Council passes Earth Charter" , Rebecca Barrett, Corvallis Gazette-Times , April 17, 2006 ^ "Resolution 61,007-NS" Archived 2008-11-21 at the Wayback Machine , Berkeley City Council, March 27, 2001 ^ "Committee of the Whole Meeting Minutes" Archived 2007-11-06 at the Wayback Machine , City of Pickering, Canada, July 22, 2002 ^ "Earth Charter Supported in Middlebury Meeting" [ permanent dead link ] , middleburycampus.com , March 13, 2002 ^ one page organization summary Archived 2009-02-19 at the Wayback Machine , Engineers Without Borders — International, 2009 ^ greenpartyofbotswanna.com Archived 2016-02-05 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved February 25, 2009.

^ Partnerships Archived 2008-05-14 at the Wayback Machine , African Conservation Foundation. Retrieved February 25, 2009.

^ Earth Charter Initiative. September 2008: The Earth Charter Initiative Handbook Archived 2010-12-14 at the Wayback Machine , p. 47.

^ " "Does the Earth Charter Support Socialism?" - 2009" .

Earth Charter . Retrieved 2020-10-21 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Earth Charter .

Official website Earth Charter Community Network Text of the Earth Charter Earth Charter Future-Actions & Perspectives of an Earth Child v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Earth_Charter&oldid=1301714974 " Categories : International sustainable development United Nations documents 2000 in the United Nations 2000 in the environment Global policy organizations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2009 Pages using div col with small parameter This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 08:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Earth Charter 23 languages Add topic

