Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 Renaming and move 1.3 Rebranding and campus expansion 2 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 2.1 Degrees 2.1.1 Joint and concurrent degrees 2.2 HKS courses 2.3 International collaboration 3 Rankings 4 Student organizations 5 Centers 6 Controversies 7 Awards 8 Notable faculty 9 Notable alumni Toggle Notable alumni subsection 9.1 Government and politics 9.1.1 Heads of government and state 9.1.2 Government administrators and officials 9.1.3 Elected federal officials 9.1.4 Elected state and municipal officials 9.2 Academia 9.3 Arts 9.4 Business 9.5 Media 9.6 Military 9.7 Non-profit organizations 9.8 Science 9.9 Spies 9.10 Royalty 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Kennedy School 22 languages العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′17″N 71°07′19″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37139°N 71.12194°W ﻿ / 42.37139; -71.12194 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public policy school of Harvard University Harvard Kennedy School Coat of arms Motto Ask what you can do Type Private nonprofit public policy school Established 1936 ; 89 years ago ( 1936 ) Parent institution Harvard University Endowment $1.7 billion (2021) [ 1 ] Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Academic staff 250 [ 2 ] Postgraduates 1,100 [ 2 ] Location Cambridge , Massachusetts , U.S.

42°22′17″N 71°07′19″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37139°N 71.12194°W ﻿ / 42.37139; -71.12194 Campus Urban Website hks.harvard.edu The John F. Kennedy School of Government , commonly referred to as Harvard Kennedy School ( HKS ), is the school of public policy of Harvard University , a private university in Cambridge, Massachusetts .

Harvard Kennedy School offers master's degrees in public policy , public administration , and international development , four doctoral degrees , and various executive education programs. It conducts research in subjects relating to politics , government , international affairs , and economics . As of 2021, [update] HKS has an endowment of $1.7 billion.

[ 3 ] It is a member of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA), a global consortium of schools that trains leaders in international affairs.

[ 4 ] The primary campus of Harvard Kennedy School is on John F. Kennedy Street in Cambridge. The main buildings overlook the Charles River and are southwest of Harvard Yard and Harvard Square , on the site of a former MBTA Red Line train yard. The School is adjacent to the public riverfront John F. Kennedy Memorial Park.

Harvard Kennedy School alumni include 21 heads of state or government from around the world. Alumni also include cabinet officials, military leaders, heads of central banks , and legislators .

History [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School buildings The Littauer Center at Harvard University , the original home of Harvard Kennedy School from 1936 to 1978 The new Littauer Center, built 1978 Belfer Building Founding [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School was founded as the Harvard Graduate School of Public Administration in 1936 with a $2 million gift (equivalent to roughly $43 million as of 2023) from Lucius Littauer , an 1878 Harvard College alumnus, businessman, former U.S. Congressman, and the first coach of the Harvard Crimson football team.

[ 5 ] Harvard Kennedy School's shield was designed to express the national purpose of the school and was modeled after the U.S. shield .

[ 6 ] The School drew its initial faculty from Harvard's existing government and economics departments, and welcomed its first students in 1937.

The School's original home was in the Littauer Center, north of Harvard Yard , which is now home to Harvard University 's Economics Department. The first students at the Graduate School were called Littauer Fellows, participating in a one-year course listing which later developed into the school's mid-career Master in Public Administration program.

[ 7 ] In the 1960s, the School began to develop its current public policy degree and course curriculum associated with its Master in Public Policy program.

Renaming and move [ edit ] In 1966, three years following the assassination of U.S. president and 1940 Harvard College alumnus John F. Kennedy , the school was renamed in his honor.

[ nb 1 ] In 1966, concurrent with the school's renaming, [ 8 ] the Harvard Institute of Politics was created with Neustadt as its founding director.

[ 10 ] Harvard Institute of Politics has been housed on the school campus since 1978, and today sponsors and hosts a series of programs, speeches and study groups for Harvard undergraduates and graduate students. Along with major Harvard Kennedy School events, the Institute of Politics holds the John F. Kennedy Jr. Forum, named in honor of John F. Kennedy Jr.

, in Harvard Kennedy School's Littauer Building.

[ citation needed ] By 1978, the faculty, including presidential scholar and adviser Richard Neustadt , a foreign policy scholar and later dean of the School, Graham Allison , Richard Zeckhauser , and others consolidated the school's programs and research centers at the present Harvard Kennedy School campus. The first new building opened on the southern half of the former Eliot Shops site in October 1978.

[ 11 ] Under the terms of Littauer's original grant, the current campus also features a building called Littauer.

[ citation needed ] Rebranding and campus expansion [ edit ] In late 2007, the Kennedy School of Government announced that while its official name was not being altered, it was rebranding itself as Harvard Kennedy School effective Fall 2008.

[ 12 ] The goal was to make clearer the school's connection with Harvard.

[ 13 ] It was also thought that the new branding would reduce confusion with other entities named after Kennedy, including the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.

and the Kennedy Library in Boston .

[ 12 ] The rebranding had the support of John F. Kennedy's brother, U.S. Senator Edward M. Kennedy , and Caroline Kennedy , the former president's daughter.

[ 12 ] In 2012, Harvard Kennedy School announced a $500 million fundraising campaign, $120 million of which was to be used to significantly expand the Harvard Kennedy School campus, adding 91,000 square feet of space including six new classrooms, a new kitchen, and dining facility, offices and meeting spaces, a new student lounge and study space, more collaboration and active learning spaces, and a redesigned central courtyard. Groundbreaking commenced on May 7, 2015, and the project was completed in late 2017. The new Harvard Kennedy School campus opened in December 2017.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] From 2004 to 2015, Harvard Kennedy School's dean was David T. Ellwood , a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services official in the Clinton administration .

[ 16 ] In 2015, Douglas Elmendorf , a former director of the U.S.

Congressional Budget Office , was named both dean of the Harvard Kennedy School and the school's Don K. Price Professor of Public Policy.

[ 17 ] Elmendorf announced in September 2023 that he would step down as dean at the end of the academic year 2023/2024.

[ 18 ] Jeremy M. Weinstein was named dean effective July 1, 2024.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Jeremy was a political scientist at Stanford University who previously served as chief of staff to the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, Weeks Footbridge crossing the Charles River at sunset with Harvard Business School on the left and Harvard Kennedy School on the right Academics [ edit ] Degrees [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School offers four master's degree programs.

[ 21 ] The two-year Master in Public Policy (MPP) program focuses on policy analysis , economics , management , ethics, statistics and negotiations in the public sector.

[ 22 ] There are three separate Master in Public Administration (MPA) programs: a one-year Mid-Career Program (MC/MPA) intended for professionals who are more than seven years removed from their college graduation; a two-year MPA program intended for professionals who have an additional graduate degree and are more recently out of school; and a two-year international development track (MPA/ID) focused on development studies with a strong emphasis on economics and quantitative analysis .

Members of the mid-career MPA class also include Mason Fellows, who are public and private executives from developing countries. Mason Fellows typically constitute about 50 percent of the incoming class of Mid-Career MPA candidates. The Mason cohort is the most diverse at Harvard in terms of nationalities and ethnicities represented. It is named after Edward Sagendorph Mason , the former Harvard professor who, from 1947 to 1958, was dean of Harvard's Graduate School of Public Administration, now known as Harvard Kennedy School.

In addition to the master's programs, Harvard Kennedy School administers three doctoral programs.

[ 23 ] Ph.D.

degrees are awarded in public policy , in social policy in conjunction with Harvard's departments of government and sociology , and in health policy in conjunction with FAS and the Harvard School of Public Health .

Joint and concurrent degrees [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School has a number of joint and concurrent degree programs within Harvard and with other leading universities, which allow students to receive multiple degrees in a reduced period of time. Joint and current students spend at least one year in residence in Cambridge taking courses. Harvard Kennedy School joint degree programs are run with Harvard Business School , Harvard Law School , and Harvard Graduate School of Design , and concurrent programs are offered with Harvard Divinity School and Harvard Medical School .

Beyond Harvard, HKS has concurrent degree arrangements with other law, business, and medical schools, including the Stanford Graduate School of Business , the MIT Sloan School of Management , the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College , The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania , Columbia Law School , Duke University School of Law , Georgetown University Law Center , New York University School of Law , Northwestern University School of Law , Stanford Law School , University of California, Berkeley School of Law , University of Michigan Law School , University of Pennsylvania Law School , Yale Law School , and UCSF School of Medicine .

[ 24 ] Abroad, Harvard Kennedy School offers a dual degree with the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] HKS courses [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School maintains six academic divisions each headed by a faculty chair. In addition to offerings in the Harvard Kennedy School course listing, students are eligible to cross-register for courses at the other graduate and professional schools at Harvard and at MIT Sloan School of Management , Fletcher School at Tufts University , and the MIT School of Architecture and Planning . MPP coursework is focused on one of five areas, called a Policy Area of Concentration (PAC), [ 27 ] and includes a year-long research seminar in their second year, which includes a master's thesis called a Policy Analysis Exercise.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] International collaboration [ edit ] The university is an active member of the University of the Arctic .

[ 30 ] UArctic is an international cooperative network based in the Circumpolar Arctic region, consisting of more than 200 universities, colleges, and other organizations with an interest in promoting education and research in the Arctic region.

[ 31 ] Rankings [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School has routinely ranked as the best, or among the best, of the world's public policy graduate schools.

U.S. News & World Report ranks it the best graduate school for social policy, the best for health policy, and second best for public policy analysis.

[ 32 ] In 2015 rankings, Kennedy School is ranked first in the subcategory of health policy and second in the category of public policy analysis and social policy.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Kennedy's School's foreign affairs programs have consistently ranked at the top or near the top of Foreign Policy magazine's Inside the Ivory Tower survey, which lists the world's top twenty academic international relations programs at the undergraduate, Master's, and Ph.D. levels.

[ 35 ] In 2012, for example, the survey ranked Kennedy School first overall for doctoral and undergraduate programs and third overall in the Master's category.

[ 36 ] Student organizations [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School's women's rowing team at Weld Boathouse in the Head of the Charles Regatta rowing race on Charles River in 2006 Harvard Kennedy School maintains a range of student activities, including interest-driven student caucuses, Kennedy School Student Government, known as KSSG, student-edited policy journals, including Harvard Journal of Hispanic Policy , Kennedy School Review , [ 37 ] the Journal of Middle Eastern Politics and Policy , [ 38 ] a student newspaper, The Citizen , and a number of student athletic groups.

Students can join the Harvard Graduate Council , which is the centralized student government for the twelve graduate and professional schools of Harvard University . The Harvard Graduate Council is responsible for advocating student concerns to central administrators, including the president of Harvard University , provost, deans of students, and deans for the nearly 15,000 graduate and professional students across the twelve schools, organizing large university-wide initiatives and events, administering and providing funding for university-wide student groups, [ 39 ] [ 40 ] and representing the Harvard graduate student population to other universities and external organizations.

[ 41 ] Harvard Graduate Council is known for spearheading the "One Harvard" movement, which aims to bring all of Harvard's graduate schools together through closer collaboration and social interaction.

[ 42 ] Centers [ edit ] Harvard Kennedy School is home to 14 centers, including: [ 43 ] [ 15 ] Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation [ 44 ] Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs [ 45 ] Bloomberg Center for Cities at Harvard University [ 46 ] Carr Center for Human Rights Policy [ 47 ] Center for International Development [ 48 ] Center for Public Leadership [ 49 ] Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics [ 50 ] Institute of Politics [ 51 ] Joint Center for Housing Studies [ 52 ] Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy [ 53 ] Mossavar Rahmani Center for Business and Government [ 54 ] Rappaport Institute for Greater Boston [ 55 ] Taubman Center for State and Local Government [ 56 ] Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy [ 57 ] Women and Public Policy Program [ 58 ] The majority of centers offer research and academic fellowships through which fellows can engage in research projects, lead study groups into specific topics and share their experiences with industry and government with the student body.

Controversies [ edit ] Under Dean Elmendorf, the school has tried to focus its engagement across the political spectrum, which has caused controversy at times. The school came under criticism for offering a fellowship to Chelsea Manning on September 13, 2017.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] It then publicly rescinded the offer on September 15, 2017, after CIA director Mike Pompeo canceled a speaking engagement at Harvard and sent a letter condemning the university for awarding the fellowship.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] An investigative report in 2021 by student group Fossil Fuel Divest Harvard found that many of the centers' climate initiatives were funded in part by fossil fuel companies, and that some of the centers had allegedly taken several steps to cover up that fact.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] The Kennedy School's Carr Center for Human Rights Policy in 2022 invited Kenneth Roth , former executive director of Human Rights Watch , a leading global human rights organizations, to join it as a senior fellow. The Kennedy School eventually rescinded the invitation to Roth because Human Rights Watch's 2021 investigation of Israel 's treatment of Palestinians concluded that it met the threshold for the " crime of apartheid ".

[ 64 ] After condemnation by faculty, students, the American Civil Liberties Union and others, the dean of the school reversed this decision.

[ 65 ] Awards [ edit ] The Robert F. Kennedy Award for Excellence in Public Service is awarded to "a graduating student whose commitment, activities, and contributions to public service are extraordinary". Several other awards are also awarded on Class Day annually at the end of May.

[ 66 ] Notable faculty [ edit ] Graham Allison Alan A. Altshuler Jacinda Ardern Christopher N. Avery Mary Jo Bane David J. Barron Jacqueline Bhabha Linda Bilmes Robert Blendon Derek Bok George Borjas Matthew Bunn R. Nicholas Burns Felipe Calderón Albert Carnesale Ashton Carter Erica Chenoweth William C. Clark Richard Clarke Susan P. Crawford David Cutler David Deming Michael Dukakis David Ellwood Jeffrey Frankel Jason Furman Marshall Ganz David Gergen Edward Glaeser Robert R. Glauber Stephen Goldsmith Ricardo Hausmann J. Bryan Hehir Ronald Heifetz John P. Holdren Swanee Hunt Michael Ignatieff Sheila Jasanoff Christopher Jencks Alex Jones Dale Jorgenson Juliette Kayyem Alexander Keyssar Alexandra Killewald Robert Z. Lawrence Jennifer Lerner Tarek Masoud Rana Mitter Joseph Newhouse Pippa Norris Joseph Nye Meghan O'Sullivan George Papandreou [ 67 ] Roger B. Porter Michael Porter Samantha Power Lant Pritchett Robert Putnam Carmen M. Reinhart Mathias Risse Leni Robredo Dani Rodrik Todd Rogers (behavioral scientist) Kevin Rudd John Ruggie Juan Manuel Santos Frederic M. Scherer Bruce Schneier Leslie Rogne Schumacher Jeffrey L. Seglin Sarah Sewall Kathryn Sikkink Lawrence Summers Dennis Frank Thompson Stephen Walt Shirley Williams, Baroness Williams of Crosby John P. White William Julius Wilson Richard Zeckhauser Dorothy Zinberg Jonathan Zittrain Robert Zoellick Notable alumni [ edit ] See also: Category:Harvard Kennedy School alumni Harvard Kennedy School has over 63,000 alumni, many of whom have gone on to notable careers around the world in government, business, public policy, and other fields. Its alumni include 20 heads of state and dozens of leaders of government department and agencies, non-profit public policy organizations, the military, thought leadership and advocacy, academia, and other fields: [ 2 ] Government and politics [ edit ] Heads of government and state [ edit ] Felipe Calderón (MPA '00), former president of Mexico Miguel de la Madrid (MPA '65), former president of Mexico Carlos Salinas de Gortari (MPA '73, PhD '76), former president of Mexico Tsakhiagiin Elbegdorj (MPA '02), former president and prime minister of Mongolia Luvsannamsrain Oyun-Erdene (MPA ‘15), former prime minister of Mongolia Abdiweli Gaas (MPA '99), former prime minister of Somalia John Haglelgam (MPA '93), former president of the Federated States of Micronesia Lee Hsien Loong (MPA '80), former prime minister of Singapore Daniel Noboa (MCMPA '20), current president of Ecuador Tharman Shanmugaratnam (MPA '89), current president of Singapore José María Figueres Olsen (MPA '91), former president of Costa Rica and former World Economic Forum CEO Maia Sandu (MPA '10), current president and former prime minister of Moldova Juan Manuel Santos (MPA '81), former president of Colombia and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Ellen Johnson Sirleaf (MPA '71), former president of Liberia and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Frederick Sumaye (MPA '07), former prime minister of Tanzania Tshering Tobgay (MPA '04), former prime minister and current leader of People's Democratic Party in Bhutan Pierre Trudeau (MA '45), former prime minister of Canada Donald Tsang (MPA '82), former Chief Executive of Hong Kong Morgan Tsvangirai ('02), former prime minister of Zimbabwe Eduardo Rodríguez Veltzé (MPA '88), former president of Bolivia Jamil Mahuad Witt (MPA '89), former president of Ecuador Lawrence Wong (MPA '04), prime minister of Singapore Government administrators and officials [ edit ] Rizwan Ahmed (MPA), former Maritime Secretary of Pakistan [ 68 ] Sartaj Aziz (MNA), served in several Ministerial positions in Pakistan [ 69 ] Tariq Bajwa (MPA), former Finance Secretary of Pakistan [ 70 ] Nisrin Barwari (MPA '99), former Minister of Municipalities and Public Works of Iraq Gankhuurai Battungalag , Director General of the Department for Europe of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Mongolia Charles Blanchard (MPP '85), former General Counsel of the Army and General Counsel of the Air Force [ 71 ] J. Richard Blankenship (MPA '08), former U.S. ambassador to The Bahamas André Boisclair (MPA '05), former leader of Parti Québécois and former Minister of Citizenship and Immigration of Quebec , Canada Nick Boles (MPP '89), former Member of Parliament for Grantham and Stamford and former director of Policy Exchange in the United Kingdom Emilia Boncodin (MPA '86), former Secretary of Budget and Management for the Philippines [ 72 ] Anna Escobedo Cabral (MPA '90), former Treasurer of the United States Piper Campbell (MPA '99), former U.S. ambassador to Mongolia and Chargé d'affaires ad interim at the U.S. Mission to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Rajkumar Chellaraj (MPA '86), former U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Administration Frank Chikane (MPA '95), member, African National Congress and advisor to President of South Africa Aneesh Chopra (MPP '97), former U.S. Chief Technology Officer Albert Chua (MPA '00), former Permanent Representative of Singapore to the United Nations Henry Cisneros (MPA '73), former U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Mark Daly (MPA, '11), member, Ireland 's Seanad Éireann Božidar Đelić (MPA '91), former deputy prime minister of Serbia and Minister of Finance of Serbia Stephen Donnelly (MPA '08), Ireland Minister of Health and member, Teachta Dála , representing Wicklow Shaun Donovan (MPA '95), former U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and Office of Management and Budget director Theodore L. Eliot Jr.

(MPA '56), former U.S. ambassador to Afghanistan Robert S. Gelbard (MPA '79), former U.S. ambassador to Indonesia and Bolivia Héctor Gramajo (MPA '95), former Defense Minister of Guatemala Yoshimasa Hayashi (MPA '94), Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan Liu He (MPA '95), Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China Teo Chee Hean (MPA '86), Coordinating Minister for National Security for Singapore [ 73 ] Pete Hegseth (MPP '13), current United States Secretary of Defense Keith Hennessey (MPP '94), former National Economic Council director Rafael Hui (MPA '83), former Chief Secretary for Administration of Hong Kong Muhammad Ibrahim (MPA '93), former Central Bank of Malaysia governor Natalie Jaresko (MPP '89), former Ukrainian Minister of Finance Vuk Jeremić (MPA '03), former president of the United Nations General Assembly and former Minister of Foreign Affairs for Serbia Ajay Narayan Jha , former Indian Administrative Service officer, former Expenditure Secretary , and former Finance Secretary of India [ 74 ] Mitzi Johnson (MPA '13), former Speaker of the Vermont House of Representatives Daniel J. Jones , lead investigator for U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee report on CIA Torture Phillip Jones (MPA '21), Politician, Mayor of Newport News, Virginia [ 75 ] Lim Hng Kiang (MPA '85), former Minister for Trade and Industry of Singapore Ban Ki-moon (MPA '84), former Secretary-General of the United Nations and former Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Korea Raymond Kelly (MPA '84), New York City Police Commissioner Rajive Kumar (MPA), Indian Administrative Service officer and former Chief Secretary of Government of Uttar Pradesh in India [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Andrew Leigh (PhD '04), Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury for Australia and former Australian House of Representatives member Pita Limjaroenrat (MPP), former Member of the House of Representatives (Thailand) Nabiel Makarim (MPA '84), former Minister of Environment and Forestry for Indonesia Mark McClellan (MPA '91), former U.S.

Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration Yam Ah Mee (MPA '91), chief executive director, People's Association in Singapore Sanjay Mitra (MPA), IAS officer and former Defence Secretary of India [ 78 ] [ 79 ] Nripendra Misra (MPA), former IAS officer and Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister of India [ 80 ] Toshimitsu Motegi (MPP '83), Secretary-General of Liberal Democratic Party and former Minister of Foreign Affairs for Japan George Muñoz (MPP '78), former Assistant Secretary and CFO of the U.S. Department of Treasury and former president and CEO of OPIC Andrew Natsios (MPA '79), former U.S. Agency for International Development administrator and U.S. Special Envoy to Sudan Amon Nikoi (MPA '56), former Minister for Finance and Economic Planning , Bank of Ghana governor, and Permanent Representative of Ghana to the United Nations Patrick Nip (MPA '01), former Secretary for the Civil Service of Hong Kong Christine Nixon (MPA '85), former chief police commissioner for Victoria , Australia Herbert S. Okun (MPA '59), former U.S. Ambassador to East Germany and former U.S. Deputy Ambassador to the United Nations Nóirín O'Sullivan (Exec '07), former national police commissioner for Ireland Marcus Peacock (MPP '86), former Deputy Administrator, U.S.

Environmental Protection Agency Brune Poirson , Secretary of State of France Angelo Reyes (MPA '90), Secretary of Energy of the Philippines and former Secretary of National Defense of the Philippines Jesse Robredo (MPA '99), Secretary of Interior and Local Government of the Philippines Henry Rotich (MPA '), Cabinet Secretary for National Treasury of Kenya Pete Rouse (MPA '77), former White House Chief of Staff Nasir Ahmad el-Rufai , Executive Governor of Kaduna State in Nigeria, former Minister of FCT, and Director General of Bureau of Public Enterprises of Nigeria T. N. Seshan (MPA '68), former IAS officer and former Chief Election Commissioner and Cabinet Secretary of India Yasuhisa Shiozaki (MPA '82), former Chief Cabinet Secretary of Japan Corazon Soliman (MPA '98), former Secretary of the Department of Social Welfare and Development of the Philippines T. S. R. Subramanian (MPA), former Indian Administrative Service officer and Cabinet Secretary of India Sardar Ahmad Nawaz Sukhera (MPA), Commerce Secretary of Pakistan [ 81 ] Nancy Sutley (MPP '86), White House Council on Environmental Quality director Syahrir (MPA '80, PhD '83), economic adviser, Republic of Indonesia 's Council of Presidential Advisors Mark E. Talisman (1972), U.S. congressional aide and lobbyist William B. Taylor Jr.

(MPP '77), U.S. ambassador to Ukraine Conrad Tillard (born 1964), Baptist minister, radio host, author, civil rights activist, and politician John Tsang (MPA '82), Financial Secretary of Hong Kong Paul Volcker (MA '51, GSPA), former chairman of the U.S.

Federal Reserve and U.S. presidential economic advisor [ 82 ] Solomon Areda Waktolla (MPA '13 and LLM'14), Judge at United Nations Dispute Tribunal , Judge of the Administrative Tribunal of the African Development Bank . Former Deputy chief justice of the Federal Supreme Court of Ethiopia and member of Permanent Court of Arbitration at Hague Netherlands Yin Yong (MPA), mayor of Beijing Agus Harimurti Yudhoyono (MPA), Minister of Agrarian Affairs and Spatial Planning of Indonesia Adolfo Aguilar Zínser (MPA '78), former national security adviser and ambassador to the United Nations for Mexico Elected federal officials [ edit ] Doug Bereuter (MPA '73), former U.S. Congressman for Nebraska's 1st congressional district Brendan Boyle (MPP '05), U.S. Congressman for Pennsylvania's 2nd congressional district Katherine Clark (MPA '97), U.S. Representative, Massachusetts's 5th congressional district Gerry Connolly (MPA '79), U.S. Congressman, Virginia's 11th congressional district Dan Crenshaw (MPA '17), U.S. Congressman, Texas's 2nd congressional district John Fetterman (MPP '99) – U.S. Senator from Pennsylvania and former Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania Alan Grayson (MPP '83), former U.S. Congressman, Florida's 8th congressional district Katherine Harris (MPA '97), former Congresswoman, Florida's 13th congressional district and former Secretary of State of Florida Brian Higgins (MPA '96), U.S. Congressman, New York's 26th congressional district Steve Horn (MPA '55), former U.S. Congressman, California's 38th congressional district James Langevin (MPA '94), former U.S. Congressman, Rhode Island's 2nd congressional district Stephen Lynch (MPA '99), U.S. Congressman, Massachusetts's 8th congressional district Dan Maffei (MPP '95), former U.S. Congressman, New York's 24th congressional district Jim Moody (MPA '67), former U.S. Congressman, Wisconsin's 5th congressional district Larry Pressler (MPA '66), former U.S. Senator from South Dakota William Proxmire (MPA '48), former U.S. Senator from Wisconsin Jack Reed (MPP '73), U.S. Senator from Rhode Island Joe Sestak (MPA '80, PhD '84), former U.S. Congressman, Pennsylvania's 7th congressional district Rob Simmons (MPA '79), former U.S. Congressman, Connecticut's 2nd congressional district Ralf Stegner (MPA '89), former leader of the Social Democratic Party in Germany Peter G. Torkildsen (MPA '90), former U.S. Congressman, Massachusetts's 6th congressional district and former chair of Massachusetts Republican Party Robert Torricelli (MPA '80), former U.S. Senator from New Jersey Chris Van Hollen (MPP '85), U.S. Senator from Maryland Elected state and municipal officials [ edit ] Jeffrey Amestoy (MPA), Chief Justice of the Vermont Supreme Court and Vermont Attorney General . As Chief Justice, authored the opinion in Baker v. Vermont , 744 A.2d 864 (Vt. 1999), which held that the state's denial of marriage rights to same-sex couples violated the Vermont Constitution .

Bob Anthony (MPA), Oklahoma Corporation Commission member [ 83 ] Robert Castelli (MPA '96), former member, New York State Assembly Jacqueline Y. Collins (MPA '01), member, Illinois Senate , representing the 16th district Joseph Curtatone (MPA '11), former mayor, Somerville, Massachusetts Fernando Martín García (MPP '74), former New Hampshire State Representative Marilinda Garcia (MPA '10), member of the New Hampshire House of Representatives Paul Heroux , (MPA '11), Bristol County, Massachusetts sheriff, former Attleboro, Massachusetts mayor, and former Massachusetts State Representative Mark Levine (MPP '95), Manhattan borough president and former New York City Councilman Elias Mudzuri (MPA ), former mayor of Harare , Zimbabwe Charles A. Murphy , (MPA '02), member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives and Massachusetts House Ways and Means Committee chairman [ 84 ] Naheed Nenshi (MPP '98), former mayor of Calgary , Alberta Barry T. Smitherman (MPA), member of the Texas Railroad Commission [ 85 ] Kevin White (MA '57, GSPA), former Mayor of Boston Anthony A. Williams (MPP '87), former Mayor of Washington, D.C.

Anthony Winza Probowo (MPA'2024), former Jakarta Regional House of Representatives member Academia [ edit ] William Alonso (MPP '56), economist, former director of Harvard Center for Population Studies Bernadette Atuahene (MPA '02), property law scholar, James E. Jones Chair at the University of Wisconsin Law School Lawrence S. Bacow (MPP '76, PhD '76), former Harvard University president, former Tufts University president, former MIT chancellor Steve Charnovitz (MPP '83), international law professor, George Washington University Law School Ronald A. Heifetz (MPA '83), co-founder, Center for Public Leadership , and public leadership lecturer at Harvard Kennedy School Steve Horn (MPA '55), former president of California State University, Long Beach Ira Jackson (MPA '86), dean, Peter F. Drucker and Masatoshi Ito Graduate School of Management at Claremont Graduate University Garry Jenkins (MPP '98), legal scholar, president, Bates College Nancy Koehn (MPP), author, historian, and Harvard Business School business history professor Mark Lilla (MPP '80), professor of humanities, Columbia University Bruce Ovbiagele (Exec Public Leadership, '18; Exec Non-profit Leadership, '19), professor of neurology, associate dean, and healthcare system leader at University of California, San Francisco [ 86 ] Hollis Robbins (MPP '90), dean of humanities, University of Utah Mark Schuster (MPP '88), dean and founding CEO, Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine Steven Tepper (MPP '96), sociologist, president, Hamilton College Stephen Joel Trachtenberg (MPA '66), former president , George Washington University William E. Trueheart (MPA '73), former president, Bryant University Jonathan Zittrain (MPA '95), professor of international law, Harvard Law School and co-founder of Harvard's Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society Arts [ edit ] Will Butler (MPA '17), musician and former member of Arcade Fire Ashley Judd (MPA '10), actress and activist Hill Harper (MPA '92), actor and author Mary Lambeth Moore (MPP), writer and podcaster Thor Steingraber (MPA '09), opera director Damian Woetzel (MPA '07), former principal dancer, New York City Ballet Business [ edit ] Rune Bjerke (MPA '97), CEO, DNB ASA Gregory C. Carr (MPP '86), founder, Boston Technology Leonard S. Coleman Jr.

(MPA '75), former president of the National League Benjamin Fernandes (Exec. Ed'17), Tanzanian entrepreneur Debra L. Lee (MPP '80), President and CEO, Black Entertainment Television Daniel Mudd (MPA '86), former president and CEO of U.S.

Fannie Mae Carolina Müller-Möhl (Woman's Leadership Board), businesswoman, philanthropist and women's rights activist Hilda Ochoa-Brillembourg (MPA '71), founder, president, and CEO of Strategic Investment Group Greg Rosenbaum (MPP '77), CEO, Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc.

Peter Sands (MPA '88), Group CEO, Standard Chartered Klaus Schwab (MPA '67), founder and executive chairman, World Economic Forum Faryar Shirzad (MPP '89), managing director, Goldman Sachs , former U.S. Deputy National Security Advisor Chris Voss , adjunct professor at McDonough School of Business Media [ edit ] Malik Siraj Akbar (MPA, '16), editor-in-chief of The Baloch Hal , exiled Pakistani journalist Kevin Corke (MPA '04), White House Correspondent, Fox News Komla Dumor (MPA,'03), television news presenter, BBC World News and Africa Business Report Justin Fox (born 1964), financial journalist, commentator, and writer [ 87 ] Caroline Glick (MPP '00), deputy managing editor, The Jerusalem Post Wajahat Saeed Khan , Pakistani journalist for Dunya News and NBC News Mark A. R. Kleiman (MPP, PhD '85), author Kaj Larsen (MPP '07), former U.S. Navy SEAL , journalist for Vice News Dambisa Moyo (MPA '07), economist and author Bill O'Reilly (MPA '96), political commentator Andrew Sullivan (MPA, PhD '90), journalist, The Atlantic Military [ edit ] John C. Acton (Exec '05) – retired United States Coast Guard rear admiral who serves as the Director of Operations Coordination for DHS [ 88 ] John R. Allen Jr.

(Exec '85) – retired United States Air Force brigadier general and highly decorated command pilot William J. Begert (Exec '95) – served as commander, Pacific Air Forces , and Air Component Commander for the Commander, United States Pacific Command Franklin J. Blaisdell (Exec) – U.S. Air Force Major General [ citation needed ] Sally Brice-O'Hara (MPA '93) – 27th Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard [ 89 ] Dan Crenshaw (MPA '17) – medically retired United States Navy SEAL Lieutenant Commander Peter V. Neffenger (MPA '95) – 29th Vice Commandant of the United States Coast Guard and former Administrator of the Transportation Security Administration [ 90 ] Michael E. Fortney (Exec '11) – U.S. Air Force Brigadier General Jeffrey Fowler (MPA '90) – United States Navy, Vice Admiral; Superintendent, United States Naval Academy John C. Harvey (MPA '88) – United States Navy, Admiral; Commander, U.S. Fleet Forces Command Muhammad Haszaimi (Exec '16) – Royal Brunei Armed Forces Commander Robert C. Hinson (Exec) – U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General [ citation needed ] William E. Ingram Jr.

(Exec '02) – U.S. Army Lieutenant General and Director of the Army National Guard Richard C. Johnston (Exec) – U.S. Air Force Brigadier General [ citation needed ] Andrew F. Krepinevich Jr.

(MPA '80) – United States Army, Lt. Col.; author of The Army and Vietnam Rick Linnehan (MPA '09) – astronaut Christopher Loria (MPA '04) – astronaut Robert W. Parker (Exec '91) – U.S. Air Force Major General Timothy S. Sullivan (Exec) – U.S. Coast Guard Rear Admiral [ citation needed ] Guy C. Swan III (MPA '86) – U.S. Army Major General, Commanding General of the Military District of Washington Jack Weinstein (Exec '06) – U.S. Air Force Major General Non-profit organizations [ edit ] Ramaswami Balasubramaniam (MPA'10) – Founder and president, Swami Vivekananda Youth Movement Lester R. Brown (MPA '62) – founder and president of the Earth Policy Institute Rick Doblin (PhD '01) – Founder and executive director, Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) Robert Kagan (MPP '91) – co-founder, Project for a New American Century Nancy LeaMond (MPP '74) – Executive vice president, AARP Giovanna Negretti (MPA '05) – co-founder and executive director of ¿Oiste?

Ayisha Osori – former CEO, Nigerian Women's Trust Fund Orondaam Otto — founder, Slum2School Africa Michelle Rhee (MPP '97) – founder of The New Teacher Project ; Chancellor of the Washington, D.C. public school system Bryan Stevenson (MPP '85) – founder and executive director of the Equal Justice Initiative , and author of Just Mercy Science [ edit ] Susan C. Gardner , Environment scientist [ 91 ] Spies [ edit ] Donald Heathfield (real name: Andrey Bezrukov) (MPA '00) – KGB and SVR operative until his disclosure in the United States in 2010 Royalty [ edit ] Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant [ 92 ] (Currently attending until 2026, future Queen of the Belgians) - Heir to the Belgian throne after her father and current ruler Philippe of Belgium See also [ edit ] List of memorials to John F. Kennedy Public policy school Notes [ edit ] ^ The full name of the upon the change was the John Fitzgerald Kennedy School of Government.

[ 8 ] It was subsequently usually referred to as the John F. Kennedy School of Government or, in shorter form, as the Kennedy School of Government.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ As of 2021.

"2019 Harvard financial report" (PDF) .

^ a b c "Number and Facts" . Harvard Kennedy School. Harvard University. n.d . Retrieved February 8, 2019 .

^ "2019 Harvard financial report" (PDF) .

^ "Member Directory" .

Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs . March 11, 2016 . Retrieved March 29, 2020 .

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – History" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Sequence 14248 (Page 283): Harvard University. Harvard Library bulletin. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Library. Harvard University Library PDS" .

pds.lib.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on August 6, 2017 . Retrieved January 22, 2016 .

^ "Littauer School Serves as Center for Social Sciences | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved May 28, 2024 .

^ a b "Harvard School Gets New Name" .

Corpus Christi Caller . Associated Press. September 20, 1966. p. 4C – via Newspapers.com.

^ See for instance the title of, and usages within, the history The John F. Kennedy School of Government: The First Fifty Years (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1986).

^ Kumar, Martha Joynt. "Richard Elliott Neustadt, 1919–2003: a tribute," Presidential Studies Quarterly, March 1, 2004, pg. 1 ^ Campbell, Robert (October 15, 1978).

"Something old, something new, something borrowed" .

Boston Globe – via Newspapers.com.

^ a b c Colby, Edward B. (December 6, 2007).

"Kennedy School to rebrand itself" .

The Patriot Ledger . Quincy, Massachusetts.

^ Gavel, Doug (December 13, 2007).

"Kennedy School Web site asks what you can do" .

The Harvard University Gazette . Archived from the original on December 17, 2007.

^ Ward, Lucas (December 8, 2017).

"Kennedy School Completes Campus Renovations" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved January 9, 2019 .

^ a b "HKS Campus Map & Directory" , Harvаrd Kennedy School (Namesakes on the map include David Rubenstein , Leslie Wexner , Alfred Taubman , Lucius Nathan Littauer , Robert A. Belfer , Batia & Idan Ofer , Malcolm H. Wiener , Joan Shorenstein , etc.) ^ "Harvard Kennedy School – David Ellwood" . Harvard Kennedy School. July 1, 2004 . Retrieved November 4, 2015 .

^ "Elmendorf to lead Kennedy School" .

Harvard Gazette . June 11, 2015 . Retrieved November 4, 2015 .

^ "Douglas Elmendorf to step down as dean of Harvard Kennedy School" . September 7, 2023.

.

^ "Jeremy Weinstein Will Serve as Next Harvard Kennedy School Dean, Garber Confirms" . April 30, 2024.

^ "Jeremy M. Weinstein named dean of Harvard Kennedy School" . April 29, 2024.

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – Office of Admissions" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Master in Public Policy | Harvard Kennedy School" .

www.hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved October 2, 2017 .

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – Doctoral Programs" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved March 24, 2023 .

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – Joint & Concurrent Degrees" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Dual Master with Harvard Kennedy School | IHEID" .

www.graduateinstitute.ch . Retrieved August 28, 2023 .

^ "Dual Degree" .

www.hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved August 28, 2023 .

^ "Curriculum" .

^ "HKS Course Listing" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Policy Analysis Exercise" .

^ "Members" .

UArctic . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ "About Us" .

UArctic - University of the Arctic . Retrieved March 6, 2025 .

^ "U.S. News and World Report re-issues grad school rankings – The Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan" .

fordschool.umich.edu .

^ "Harvard University | Best Public Affairs School | US News" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2016 . Retrieved May 4, 2016 .

^ "Rankings – Public Affairs – Graduate Schools – Education – US News" . Archived from the original on January 1, 2011 . Retrieved May 25, 2011 .

^ Avey; et al. (January–February 2012).

"Ivory Tower" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved February 6, 2012 .

^ "TRIP Around the World: Teaching, Research, and Policy Views of International Relations Faculty in 20 Countries" .

Institute for the Theory and Practice of International Relations . College of William & Mary . Retrieved February 6, 2012 .

^ "Kennedy School Review" .

Kennedy School Review .

^ "Journal of Middle Eastern Politics and Policy" .

Journal of Middle Eastern Politics and Policy . Archived from the original on April 18, 2015.

^ "USG « Harvard Graduate Student Government" . Hgc.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ Khanna, Saira.

"University-Wide Groups Approved | News | The Harvard Crimson" . The Crimson . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Harvard at a Glance | Harvard University" . Harvard.edu. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "There's only one Harvard" .

harvard.edu . September 10, 2013 . Retrieved November 11, 2016 .

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – Centers" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Harvard – Ash Center for Democratic Governance and Innovation" . Ash.harvard.edu . Retrieved May 25, 2023 .

^ "Harvard – Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" . Belfercenter.org . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Bloomberg Center for Cities at Harvard University" .

Bloomberg Center for Cities . March 21, 2023 . Retrieved January 4, 2025 .

^ "Carr Center for Human Rights Policy | John F. Kennedy School of Government | Harvard University" . Hks.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ Harvard Kennedy School.

"Harvard Kennedy School – Center for International Development" .

^ "Center for Public Leadership – Harvard Kennedy School" . Hks.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on September 26, 2010 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Edmond J. Safra Foundation Center for Ethics : Home" . Ethics.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Harvard University Institute of Politics" . Iop.harvard.edu. April 29, 2014 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Harvard University's Joint Center for Housing Studies – Home Page" . Jchs.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Shorenstein Center home page" . Shorensteincenter.org. June 17, 2014 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Mossavar-Rahmani Center for Business & Government" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Rappaport Institute of Greater Boston" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "The Taubman Center" . Hks.harvard.edu. April 3, 2014 . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Harvard Kennedy School – Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Women and Public Policy Program" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ Stack, Liam (September 13, 2017).

"Sean Spicer and Chelsea Manning Join Harvard as Visiting Fellows" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 4, 2020 .

^ a b Seelye, Katharine Q. (September 15, 2017).

"With Chelsea Manning Invitation, Harvard Got a Discussion It Didn't Want" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 4, 2020 .

^ Haag, Matthew; Bromwich, Jonah Engel (September 14, 2017).

"Harvard Disinvites Chelsea Manning, and the Feeling Is Mutual" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 4, 2020 .

^ Hudson, Marc (2020), "Enacted Inertia: Australian Fossil Fuel Incumbents' Strategies to Undermine Challengers" , The Palgrave Handbook of Managing Fossil Fuels and Energy Transitions , Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

195– 222, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-28076-5_8 , ISBN 978-3-030-28075-8 , S2CID 211786959 , retrieved November 23, 2021 ^ Fossil Fuel Divest Harvard.

"Beyond the Endowment" (PDF) .

^ The Nation, 5 Jan. 2023 "Why the Godfather of Human Rights Is Not Welcome at Harvard: Kenneth Roth, Who Ran Human Rights Watch for 29 Years, Was Denied a Fellowship at The Kennedy School. The Reason? Israel" ^ McGreal, Chris (January 20, 2023).

"Harvard reverses decision on role for Israel critic after outcry" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ "Class Day Awards" .

Harvard Kennedy School . May 2020 . Retrieved August 13, 2022 .

^ Contact: Esten Perez (July 10, 2012).

"Harvard Kennedy School" . Hks.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2014 .

^ "Rizwan new secretary maritime affairs" . Nation.com.pk. April 2, 2019 . Retrieved April 2, 2019 .

^ "Dailytimes | Sartaj unveils FATA reforms package" .

dailytimes.com.pk . August 25, 2016 . Retrieved August 28, 2016 .

^ "Tariq Bajwa Appointed As the New SBP Governor" .

www.propakistani.pk . July 7, 2017.

^ "Nominations Before the Senate Armed Services Committee, First Session, 111th Congress" . GPO . Retrieved December 25, 2014 .

^ "Paper Crane #16" . Paper Crane Project . Retrieved December 25, 2014 .

^ "Cabinet Appointments Mr TEO Chee Hean" . Singapore Cabinet Office . Retrieved December 11, 2014 .

^ "Ajay Narayan Jha – Executive Record Sheet" .

Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India . Retrieved January 21, 2018 .

^ White, April (October 11, 2023).

"Soldier On" .

Harvard Business School . Retrieved December 21, 2023 .

^ "Gradation list of Uttar Pradesh Cadre IAS officers – 2016" (PDF) .

Department of Appointment and Personnel, Government of Uttar Pradesh . p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 21, 2016 . Retrieved August 15, 2017 .

^ "Rajive Kumar – Executive Record Sheet" .

Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India . Retrieved January 14, 2018 .

^ "Sanjay Mitra – Executive Sheet" .

Department of Personnel and Training, Government of India . Retrieved January 10, 2018 .

^ "Sanjay Mitra Takes Over as the New Defence Secretary" .

Press Information Bureau of India . May 25, 2017. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018 . Retrieved January 10, 2018 .

^ Dhoot, Vikas; Mankotia, Anandita Singh (May 27, 2014).

"Former telecom regulator Nripendra Misra appointed principal secretary to Narendra Modi" .

The Economic Times .

New Delhi .

OCLC 61311680 . Retrieved August 7, 2018 .

^ "Sui Northern Gas Pipelines Limited – Official Website" . www.sngpl.com.pk.

^ "Paul A. Volcker" . Federal Reserve Bank of New York . Retrieved September 16, 2018 .

^ "Anthony wins a sixth term as a Corporation Commissioner" .

Oklahoman.com . November 7, 2018 . Retrieved March 4, 2020 .

^ "charles 'charley' a. murphy's biography" . Project Vote Smart . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

^ "Houston native takes over Railroad Commission" , Associated Press in Houston Chronicle , February 28, 2012.

^ "Honoree committed to preventing strokes around the globe" .

www.heart.org . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ "Justin Fox" .

CUNY TV .

^ "Department of Homeland Security Leadership structure" . Retrieved February 24, 2010 .

^ "Uncharted Waters" . Harvard Kennedy School . Retrieved December 25, 2014 .

^ "President Obama Announces his Intent to Nominate Peter V. Neffenger to lead the Transportation Security Administration" . April 28, 2015.

^ Programme, United Nations Environment (December 3, 2018).

"Susan Gardner" .

UNEP . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ "Princess Elisabeth, Duchess of Brabant" .

The Belgian Monarchy . Retrieved November 18, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harvard Kennedy School .

Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e The Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs Member schools North America American University American University School of International Service Boston University Pardee School of Global Studies Carleton University Norman Paterson School of International Affairs Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University Duke University Sanford School of Public Policy Florida International University Steven J. Green School of International and Public Affairs George Washington University Elliott School of International Affairs Georgetown University Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service Georgia Institute of Technology Sam Nunn School of International Affairs [ 1 ] Harvard University John F. Kennedy School of Government [ 2 ] Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies Pennsylvania State University Penn State School of International Affairs [ 3 ] Princeton University Princeton School of Public and International Affairs Stanford University Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies Syracuse University Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs Texas A&M University The Bush School of Government and Public Service Tufts University The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy University of California, San Diego UC San Diego School of Global Policy and Strategy University of Denver Josef Korbel School of International Studies University of Maryland, College Park University of Maryland School of Public Policy University of Michigan Ford School of Public Policy University of Minnesota Humphrey School of Public Affairs University of Pittsburgh University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International Affairs University of Southern California USC Master of Public Diplomacy program The University of Texas at Austin Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs University of Toronto Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy University of Washington Henry M. Jackson School of International Studies Yale University Yale Jackson School of Global Affairs [ 4 ] Europe Geneva Graduate Institute Hertie School Stockholm School of Economics University of St. Gallen Master International Affairs and Governance program Sciences Po Paris School of International Affairs IE University School of Politics, Economics, and Global Affairs Moscow State Institute of International Relations Saint Petersburg State University School of International Relations Asia Yonsei University Graduate School of International Studies Seoul National University Graduate School of International Studies Korea University Graduate School of International Studies National University of Singapore Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy Ritsumeikan University Graduate School of International Relations National Chengchi University College of International Affairs South America Africa Oceania University of Queensland Affiliate member schools North America Arizona State University Thunderbird School of Global Management Balsille School of International Affairs University of Waterloo Wilfrid Laurier University Centre for International Governance Innovation Baruch College Marxe School of Public and International Affairs Brandeis University The Heller School for Social Policy and Management Carnegie Mellon University Institute for Politics and Strategy DePaul University International Studies Program Fordham University Graduate Program in International Political Economy and Development George Mason University Schar School of Policy and Government New York University Wagner Graduate School of Public Service North Carolina State University School of Public and International Affairs Pepperdine University School of Public Policy San Francisco State University Department of International Relations Seton Hall University School of Diplomacy and International Relations University of Georgia University of Georgia School of Public and International Affairs University of Miami Master of Arts in International Administration program University of Oregon Department of International Studies Middlebury College Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey College of William & Mary South America Universidad Austral Escuela de Política, Gobierno y Relaciones Internacionales Universidad Externado de Colombia Europe University of Trento School of International Studies Diplomatic Academy of Vienna - Vienna School of International Studies Prague University of Economics and Business Jan Masaryk Centre for International Studies Institut Barcelona d'Estudis Internacionals - IBEI Barcelona Centre for International Affairs Pompeu Fabra University University of Barcelona Autonomous University of Barcelona Polytechnic University of Catalonia Open University of Catalonia University of Geneva Africa Al Akhawayn University Asia ADA University School of Public and International Affairs Waseda University Graduate School of Asia-Pacific Studies Utsunomiya University Graduate School of International Studies International University of Japan Graduate School of International Relations Nanyang Technological University S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies Fudan University School of International Relations and Public Affairs Oceania Monash University Master of International Relations program University of Sydney ^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs | Sam Nunn School of International Affairs" .

inta.gatech.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2023 .

^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA) Online Graduate School Fair" .

Harvard FAS | Mignone Center for Career Success . July 12, 2023 . Retrieved July 16, 2023 .

^ "APSIA Member – Penn State School of International Affairs" .

www.sia.psu.edu . Retrieved July 16, 2023 .

^ "Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA)" .

Office of Career Strategy – Yale University . June 7, 2023 . Retrieved July 16, 2023 .

v t e John F. Kennedy 35th President of the United States (1961–1963) U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953–1960) U.S. Representative for MA–11 (1947–1953) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inauguration Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Presidential pardons Presidential limousine Presidential yacht Resolute desk Situation Room Foreign policy Alliance for Progress Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Flexible response Kennedy Doctrine Peace Corps Trade Expansion Act Migration and Refugee Assistance Act USAID Vietnam War Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion Cuban Project Cuban Missile Crisis ExComm Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis Moscow–Washington hotline Vienna summit New Frontier Communications Satellite Act Community Mental Health Act Equal Pay Act Executive Order 11110 Federal affirmative action Federal housing segregation ban Fifty-mile hikes Food for Peace Pilot Food Stamp Program Presidential Medal of Freedom Space policy Status of Women (Presidential Commission) University of Alabama integration Voter Education Project All-Channel Receiver Act Oil Pollution Act of 1961 Revenue Act of 1962 Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act of 1961 Wetlands Loan Act Presidential speeches Inaugural address American University speech " We choose to go to the Moon " Report to the American People on Civil Rights " Ich bin ein Berliner " " A rising tide lifts all boats " Remarks at Amherst College on the Arts State of the Union Address 1961 1962 1963 Elections U.S. House of Representatives elections: 1946 1948 1950 U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1952 1958 1960 presidential primaries 1960 presidential campaign Democratic National Conventions: 1956 1960 U.S. presidential election 1960 debates Personal life Birthplace and childhood home Kennedy Compound Hickory Hill La Querida Wexford Navy service: PT-109 Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Arthur Evans PT-59 Castle Hot Springs Hammersmith Farm Coretta Scott King phone call " Happy Birthday, Mr. President " John F. Kennedy document hoax Books Why England Slept (1940) Profiles in Courage (1956) A Nation of Immigrants (1958) Death Assassination timeline media coverage reactions in popular culture State funeral Riderless horse attending dignitaries Gravesite and Eternal Flame Legacy Bibliography John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Profile in Courage Award Twenty-fourth Amendment Civil Rights Act of 1964 Apollo 11 Moon landing Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Kennedy Space Center Kennedy Round U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development VISTA Cultural depictions films Kennedy half dollar U.S. postage stamps U.S. five cent stamp Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences Operation Sail Memorials, namesakes Harvard Kennedy School Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts John F. Kennedy Federal Building (Boston) John F. Kennedy International Airport Boston statue Brooklyn bust Dallas memorial Hyannis memorial London bust Nashua bust Portland memorial Runnymede memorial John F. Kennedy Arboretum John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School John F. Kennedy University (defunct) John F. Kennedy Stadium Kennedy Expressway Mount Kennedy MV John F. Kennedy USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67) USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79) Yad Kennedy Love Park Family Jacqueline Bouvier (wife) Caroline Kennedy (daughter) John F. Kennedy Jr.

(son) Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son) Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter) Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter) Jack Schlossberg (grandson) Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(father) Rose Fitzgerald (mother) Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.

(brother) Rosemary Kennedy (sister) Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister) Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister) Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister) Robert F. Kennedy (brother) Jean Kennedy Smith (sister) Ted Kennedy (brother) P. J. Kennedy (grandfather) John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather) Pushinka (dog) Billie and Debbie (hamsters) Sardar (horse) ← Dwight D. Eisenhower Lyndon B. Johnson → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Spain Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pkj79
Cached time: 20250817164004
Cache expiry: 1236001
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.338 seconds
Real time usage: 1.574 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9578/1000000
Revision size: 70278/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 363585/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12212/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 359750/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.758/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10964864/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1209.934      1 -total
 46.92%  567.744      3 Template:Reflist
 36.56%  442.298     81 Template:Cite_web
 19.16%  231.814      8 Template:Navbox
 11.62%  140.548      1 Template:Harvard_University
 10.39%  125.726      1 Template:Infobox_university
  9.60%  116.174      1 Template:Infobox
  5.63%   68.110      6 Template:Citation_needed
  5.45%   65.909      1 Template:Short_description
  4.77%   57.709      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:360816:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817164004 and revision id 1302324312. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Kennedy_School&oldid=1302324312 " Categories : Harvard Kennedy School 1936 establishments in Massachusetts 1966 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard University schools Monuments and memorials to John F. Kennedy in the United States Public administration schools in the United States Public policy schools Schools of international relations in the United States Universities and colleges established in 1936 University subdivisions in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2017 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Kennedy School 22 languages Add topic

