Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 ICDPs under WWF 2 Various names of ICDPs 3 Characteristics of ICDPs 4 ICDP assumptions 5 Critiques of ICDPs Toggle Critiques of ICDPs subsection 5.1 Integrated conservation and development practices in Madagascar 6 Examples of ICDPs 7 Related books 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Integrated Conservation and Development Project 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of biodiversity conservation project This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( January 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Integrated Conservation and Development Projects (ICDPs) are biodiversity conservation projects with rural development components. It is an approach that aspires to combine social development with conservation goals.

[ 1 ] These projects look to deal with biodiversity conservation objectives through the use of socio-economic investment tools. The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) first introduced ICDPs in the mid-1980s. They wanted to attend to some of the problems associated with the "fines and fences" (non-participatory) approach to conservation.

[ 2 ] ICDPs under WWF [ edit ] The Wildlands & Human Needs Program was initiated in 1985 by WWF, and incorporated 19 ICDPs in 12 countries in Africa and South America. They wanted to improve the quality of life of rural people through projects that integrated the management of natural resources with economic development. Today, there are around 300 ICDPs.

[ 1 ] Various names of ICDPs [ edit ] ICDPs have many different names, like "People-Centered Conservation and Development", "Eco-development", "grassroots conservation", community-based natural resource management (CBNRM), and community wildlife management (CWM), all of which were created by the conservation organizations, rather than the indigenous people.

[ 3 ] Characteristics of ICDPs [ edit ] Biodiversity conservation is the primary goal, but ICDPs also like to deal with the social and economic requirements of communities who might threaten biodiversity. They wish to improve the relationships between state-managed protected areas and their neighbors, but do not inevitably seek to delegate ownership of protected area resources to local communities. They usually receive funding from external sources and are externally motivated and initiated by conservation organizations and development agencies. ICDPs are normally linked to a protected area, usually a national park .

[ 1 ] ICDPs, through benefit sharing, are believed to discourage poaching and promote economic development. ICDPs try to benefit indigenous populations in several ways: through the transfer of money from tourism, the creation of jobs, and the stimulation of productivity in agriculture .

[ 3 ] ICDP assumptions [ edit ] ICDPs make many assumptions during their project implementations, each of which may prove true or false. They are: [ 1 ] Diversified local livelihood options will reduce human pressures on biodiversity , leading to improved conservation.

Local people and their livelihood practices comprise the most important threat to the biodiversity resources of the area in question.

ICDPs offer sustainable alternatives to traditional approaches of protected areas management.

Critiques of ICDPs [ edit ] Conservation organizations do not necessarily understand the social and economic arenas they are trying to work in. They are the ones to start the ICDPs, rather than the rural people, and have little experience working with communities. They are also unwilling to bear or support legal battles over land and are not willing to strengthen rural organizations because they find it to be "too political".

[ 1 ] However, WWF claims that ICDPs strengthen local organizations and "broker new land-use agreements between governments and communities, and helping communities challenge encroachment upon their natural resources, ICDPs involve local communities to improve livelihoods and conservation".

[ 4 ] Agroforestry and organic gardening projects do not work as well, because it is difficult for indigenous peoples to market what is grown.

[ 5 ] Minority ethnic groups and women are many times not accounted for in the redistribution of costs and benefits. There are many limitations on participation by women, so many feel there are not equal opportunities for all people within the community.

External effects like a growing market demand for forest and wildlife products, demographic pressures and vested interests like illegal logging , mineral extraction and ranching often go disregarded by ICDPs. In addition, community-based conservation projects are often found to be divergent to the goals of biodiversity conservation, and should be based more on biological sciences. As stated by Katrina Brandon with, "Not all things can be preserved through use".

[ 3 ] Another problem is that some of the ICDPs that are funded internationally may not be financially or economically sustainable once their external funding has been exhausted.

Integrated conservation and development practices in Madagascar [ edit ] The ICDP in Madagascar has unintentionally led to environmental sustainability and degradation simultaneously. The organization relies on the cheap and local labor of select individuals to enforce their conservation practices among the communities near the forests. Problems occur due to the disparity in wages and lack of communication between the local conservation agents and the government. The conservation agents are placed in the difficult position of doing their duties as workers for the ICDP and their duties as members of the community. On one hand, the conservation agents are required to monitor the forests, and prevent peasants and other locals from farming portions of the land, which can become violent and dangerous. These encounters between the hired locals and the rest of the community causes friction between them, and run the risk of being shunned.

[ 6 ] The local agents are also aware of the wage gap between them and the external officials who work for the ICDP. The high paying jobs are universally given to foreign workers who come into the community while the low paying, harder working jobs are given to the local conservation agents. This recognition has led many local conservation agents to turn a blind eye to illegal logging and unapproved agricultural practices by other peasants. These interactions lead to further destruction of the environment which contradicts the motives and goals of the ICDP.

Additionally, the arrival of another conservation organization, ANGAP, has also discouraged locals from continuing their conservation work and are beginning to quit their jobs despite the economic ramifications. These labor tensions surrounding conservation help are rarely discussed as Western authorities continually emphasize the successes while diminishing any failures. This is to continue the ideology that all conservation endeavors are inherently beneficial to everyone involved. However, the Malagasy people are aware of these fallacies, and many feel that these conservation organizations are profiteering land for personal gain. Ideas like these continue to cause hesitation among local communities to participate with organizations such as the ICDP.

[ 6 ] The ICDP, however, has introduced many conservation activities encouraging participation among local communities. Tools such as lesson plans, trainings, and increasing communications between themselves and the local community have occurred in order to ease tensions and build a better relationship. The Malagasy people hope this will encourage the ICDP to allow them to take over some of the labor given to foreign workers. By replacing these kinds of positions, the locals will achieve better compensation for their work which will ultimately strengthen relationships.

[ 6 ] Examples of ICDPs [ edit ] Annapurna Conservation Area Project, Nepal Bwindi Impenetrable Forest, Uganda Lake Mburo National Park, Uganda Amboro National Park, Bolivia Yancheng Coastal Zone Biosphere Reserve, China Crater Mountain Wildlife Management Area, Papua New Guinea Mount Elgon, Uganda Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Tanzanla Kilim Ijum, Cameroon Ostional Wildlife Refuge, Costa Rica Projects funded by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) For ICDPs to be successful, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), systems need to be institutionalized, and unnecessary data collection avoided.

Related books [ edit ] In the Dust of Kilimanjaro - David Western Indonesia - World Bank Investing in Biodiversity - Michael Wells See also [ edit ] Conservation International World Wildlife Fund The Nature Conservancy Ford Foundation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Hughes, Ross; Flintan, Fiona (2001).

Integrating Conservation and Development Experience: A Review and Bibliography of the ICDP Literature (PDF) . Chelmsford: Simmons Printers.

ISBN 1-899825-77-0 . Retrieved January 5, 2024 .

^ Ndiaye, Abdoulaye (2001).

"A Practitioner's View of Conservation and Development in Africa: Integrated Management and the Djoudj National Park in Senegal" .

Africa Today .

48 (1): 101– 109.

doi : 10.1353/at.2001.0017 .

ISSN 1527-1978 .

^ a b c "Sharing the best in global development research for policy and practice" .

Eldis . 2016-07-07 . Retrieved 2024-01-02 .

^ "WWF welcomes new national park in Madagascar" .

wwf.panda.org . Retrieved 2024-01-05 .

^ Marcus and Kull.

"Setting the Stage: The Politics of Madagascar's Environmental Efforts" .

African Studies Quarterly . Archived from the original on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 15 November 2013 .

^ a b c Sodikoff, Genese (2009-11-17).

"The Low-Wage Conservationist: Biodiversity and Perversities of Value in Madagascar" .

American Anthropologist .

111 (4): 443– 455.

doi : 10.1111/j.1548-1433.2009.01154.x .

ISSN 0002-7294 .

External links [ edit ] Case Studies: http://app.iucn.org/congress/documents/kmcd/reports/Changqing%20Yu%20-%20Pingwu.pdf [ permanent dead link ] http://webh01.ua.ac.be/crc/great_apes_cameroon.html [ permanent dead link ] https://web.archive.org/web/20110725050327/http://bcnet.org/text/projects.htm http://www.worldwildlife.org/bsp/publications/asia/mapping/mapping.pdf v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integrated_Conservation_and_Development_Project&oldid=1306578407 " Categories : Conservation projects Rural development World Wide Fund for Nature International development Sustainable development Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from January 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 14:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Integrated Conservation and Development Project 1 language Add topic

