Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Indigenous maps 2 Earliest European maps 3 Modern maps 4 References 5 Sources 6 Further reading 7 See also Toggle the table of contents Cartography of Africa 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of the cartography of Africa Map of Africa from Sebastian Münster 's Cosmographia (1554) 1700 map of Africa by Guillaume Delisle 1885 map of Africa by John Bartholomew , showing the situation on the eve of the European scramble for Africa Indigenous maps [ edit ] Whereas most known early maps of Africa were prepared in the framework of the colonial enterprise, some indigenous maps have been recently uncovered, particularly in West Africa and Ethiopia.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Earliest European maps [ edit ] The earliest cartographic depictions of Africa are found in early world maps .
In classical antiquity , Africa (also Libya ) was assumed to cover the quarter of the globe south of the Mediterranean , an arrangement that was adhered to in medieval T and O maps .

The only part of Africa well known in antiquity was  the coast of North Africa , described in Greek periplus from the 6th century BC.

Hellenistic era geographers defined Ancient Egypt as part of Asia , taking the boundary of Asia and Egypt to lie at the Catabathmus Magnus (the escarpment of Akabah el-Kebir in western Egypt).

Ptolemy's world map (2nd century) shows a reasonable awareness of the general topography of North Africa , but is unaware of anything south of the equator . The limit of Ptolemy's knowledge in the west is Cape Spartel (35° 48′ N); while he does assume that the coast eventually retreats in a "Great Gulf of the Western Ocean", this is not likely based on any knowledge of the Gulf of Guinea .

[ 3 ] In the east, Ptolemy is aware of the Red Sea ( Sinus Arabicus ) and the protrusion of the Horn of Africa , describing the gulf south of the Horn of Africa as Sinus Barbaricus .

Modern maps [ edit ] With the European exploration of Africa from the 15th century, maps of Africa became more precise.
The Fra Mauro map of 1459 shows a more detailed picture of Africa as a continent, including the Cape of Diab at its southernmost point, reflecting an expedition of 1420.

Sebastian Münster 's Cosmographia (1545) labels the Cape of Good Hope , reached by Bartolomeu Dias in 1488,  as caput bonae spei . The interior of Africa was not mapped in any detail before the second half of the 19th century.

References [ edit ] ^ Nyssen et al. 2020 .

^ Smidt 2003 , pp. 688–691.

^ Eric Anderson Walker, The Cambridge history of the British Empire , Volume 7, Part 1, 1963, p. 66 Sources [ edit ] Nyssen, Jan; Asfaha, Tesfaalem Ghebreyohannes; Meaza, Hailemariam; Dondeyne, S. (2020).

"Exploration of a medieval African map (Aksum, Ethiopia) - How do historical maps fit with topography?" .

Phillippe de Maeyer: liber amicorum . Wachtebeke, Belgium: University Press. pp.

165– 178.

Smidt, W. (2003). "Cartography".

Encyclopaedia Aethiopica . Vol. 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. pp.

688– 691.

Further reading [ edit ] Ettinger, Nathalie; Huxley, Elspeth (1973).

Africa and Asia: mapping two continents . London: Aldus Books.

ISBN 0490002935 .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cartography of Africa .

History of Cartography Old World v t e Cartography topics History Early world maps Medieval Islamic cartography Early modern Iberian cartography Early modern Netherlandish cartography By area By continent Africa Asia Europe Latin America By country China France India Israel Jamaica New Zealand Palestine Sri Lanka Switzerland Ukraine United States By city Dublin Jerusalem New York York Individual maps Ancient age Ptolemy's world map Soleto Map (Sec. V BC) Middle age Tabula Rogeriana (1154) Catalan Atlas (1375) Early Modern age Map of Juan de la Cosa (1500) Cantino planisphere (1502) Cosmographia (Sebastian Münster) (1544) Contemporary age Cassini map See also Compass rose Points of the compass Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartography_of_Africa&oldid=1238689065 " Categories : Geography of Africa Cartography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2024, at 05:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cartography of Africa 1 language Add topic

