Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Geology 3 Hydrology 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Native Americans 4.2 European arrival and settlement 4.2.1 Spanish explorers 4.2.2 American exploration 4.2.3 Settlers in and near the canyon 4.2.4 Federal protection: National monument and park 5 Weather Toggle Weather subsection 5.1 Air quality 6 Climate change 7 Biology and ecology Toggle Biology and ecology subsection 7.1 Plants 7.2 Animals 7.3 Life zones and communities 7.3.1 Lower Sonoran 7.3.2 Upper Sonoran and Transition 7.3.3 Canadian and Hudsonian 8 Tourism Toggle Tourism subsection 8.1 Activities 9 Fatalities 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Grand Canyon 110 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Patois Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°18′N 112°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.3°N 112.75°W ﻿ / 36.3; -112.75 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Steep-sided canyon in Arizona, US This article is about the canyon in the southwestern United States. For other Grand Canyons, see Grand Canyon (disambiguation) .

Grand Canyon The Colorado River flowing through the Grand Canyon in Arizona Grand Canyon Location within Arizona Show map of Arizona Grand Canyon Location within the United States Show map of the United States Grand Canyon Location within North America Show map of North America Floor elevation Approx. 2,600 ft (800 m) Length 277 mi (446 km) Width 4 to 18 mi (6.4 to 29.0 km) Geology Age 5–6 million years [ 1 ] Geography Location Arizona Country United States Coordinates 36°18′N 112°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.3°N 112.75°W ﻿ / 36.3; -112.75 Rivers Colorado River The Grand Canyon [ a ] is a steep-sided canyon carved by the Colorado River in Arizona , United States. The Grand Canyon is 277 miles (446 km) long, up to 18 miles (29 km) wide and attains a depth of over a mile (6,093 feet or 1,857 meters).

[ 6 ] : 902 The canyon and adjacent rim are contained within Grand Canyon National Park , the Kaibab National Forest , Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument , the Hualapai Indian Reservation , the Havasupai Indian Reservation and the Navajo Nation . President Theodore Roosevelt was a major proponent of the preservation of the Grand Canyon area and visited it on numerous occasions to hunt and enjoy the scenery.

Nearly two billion years of Earth's geological history have been exposed as the Colorado River and its tributaries cut their channels through layer after layer of rock while the Colorado Plateau was uplifted .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] While some aspects about the history of incision of the canyon are debated by geologists, [ 7 ] [ 9 ] several recent studies support the hypothesis that the Colorado River established its course through the area about 5 to 6 million years ago.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Since that time, the Colorado River has driven the down-cutting of the tributaries and retreat of the cliffs, simultaneously deepening and widening the canyon.

For thousands of years, the area has been continuously inhabited by Native Americans, who built settlements within the canyon and its many caves. The Pueblo people considered the Grand Canyon a holy site, and made pilgrimages to it.

[ 12 ] The first European known to have viewed the Grand Canyon was García López de Cárdenas from Spain, who arrived in 1540.

[ 13 ] Geography Image of the Grand Canyon and surrounding area taken from the International Space Station The Grand Canyon from an airplane, with the Colorado River visible Grand Canyon, Arizona, Nevada, Lake Powell to Lake Mead , June 27, 2017, Sentinel-2 true-color satellite image. Scale 1:450,000.

The Grand Canyon is a river valley in the Colorado Plateau that exposes uplifted Proterozoic and Paleozoic strata , [ 14 ] and it is also one of the six distinct physiographic sections of the Colorado Plateau province.

[ 15 ] Even though it is not the deepest canyon on land in the world ( Kali Gandaki Gorge in Nepal is much deeper [ 16 ] ), the Grand Canyon is known for its visually overwhelming size and its intricate and colorful landscape. Geologically, it is significant because of the thick sequence of ancient rocks that are well preserved and exposed in the walls of the canyon. These rock layers record much of the early geologic history of the North American continent.

[ 7 ] Uplift associated with mountain formation later moved these sediments thousands of feet upward and created the Colorado Plateau. The higher elevation has also resulted in greater precipitation in the Colorado River drainage area, but not enough to change the Grand Canyon area from being semi-arid.

[ 17 ] The uplift of the Colorado Plateau is uneven, and the Kaibab Plateau that the Grand Canyon bisects is over one thousand feet (300 m) higher at the North Rim than at the South Rim. Almost all runoff from the North Rim (which also gets more rain and snow) flows toward the Grand Canyon, while much of the runoff on the plateau behind the South Rim flows away from the canyon (following the general tilt).

[ 7 ] The result is deeper and longer tributary washes and canyons on the north side and shorter and steeper side canyons on the south side.

[ 6 ] : 406 Temperatures on the North Rim are generally lower than those on the South Rim because of the greater elevation (averaging 8,000 feet or 2,400 meters above sea level).

[ 18 ] Heavy rains are common on both rims during the summer months. Access to the North Rim via the primary route leading to the canyon ( State Route 67 ) is limited during the winter season due to road closures.

[ 19 ] Geology Main article: Geology of the Grand Canyon area Diagram showing the placement, age and thickness of the rock units exposed in the Grand Canyon Rockfalls in recent times, along with other mass wasting , have further widened the canyon The Grand Canyon is part of the Colorado River basin, which has developed over the past 70 million years.

[ 7 ] [ 20 ] For more than 150 years, scientists have gathered data, proposed new ideas, and debated sometimes contentious theories about the geologic origins of the Grand Canyon and the Colorado River. Formation of the Grand Canyon and the Colorado River may involve a complex history in which multiple factors and geologic processes have interacted over time and in different locations.

[ 14 ] In the most recent round of "old river" vs. "young river" controversy, researchers have challenged estimates that had placed the age of the canyon at 5–6 million years. The research has aroused considerable controversy because it suggests a substantial departure from prior widely supported scientific consensus.

[ 7 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] In a 2008 study, Victor Polyak examined caves near the Grand Canyon and placed their origins about 17 million years ago. The study, which was published in the journal Science in 2008, used uranium-lead dating to analyze calcite deposits found on the walls of nine caves throughout the canyon.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] In another 2008 study, Rebecca Flowers reported on apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronometry results suggesting that parts of the Grand Canyon had reached a depth near to the modern depth around 20 million years ago.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In a subsequent study published in the journal Science in 2012, she suggested that the western part of the Grand Canyon could be as old as 70 million years.

[ 28 ] [ 26 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] The emerging scientific consensus is that the canyon is made up of multiple segments which formed at different times and eventually connected to become the waterway now traversed by the Colorado River. Of the three central segments, the "Hurricane" was formed 50–70 million years ago, and the "Eastern Grand Canyon" was cut 15–25 million years ago. In contrast, the "Marble Canyon" and "Westernmost Grand Canyon" segments at the ends of the canyon were carved in the last five to six million years.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The major geologic exposures in the Grand Canyon range in age from the two-billion-year-old Vishnu Schist at the bottom of the Inner Gorge to the 270-million-year-old Kaibab Limestone on the Rim. Within that there is a gap, the Great Unconformity , between 1.75 billion and 1.25 billion years ago for which no deposits are present.

[ 7 ] Then, between 1.25 billion and 730 million years ago, intermittent sediments began to form the Grand Canyon Supergroup .

[ 7 ] Many of the formations were deposited in warm shallow seas, near-shore environments (such as beaches), and swamps as the seashore repeatedly advanced and retreated over the edge of a proto-North America. Major exceptions include the Permian Coconino Sandstone , which contains abundant geological evidence of aeolian sand dune deposition. Several parts of the Supai Group also were deposited in non-marine environments.

The great depth of the Grand Canyon and especially the height of its strata (most of which formed below sea level) can be attributed to 5,000–10,000 feet (1,500–3,000 m) of uplift of the Colorado Plateau, starting about 65 million years ago (during the Laramide orogeny ). This uplift has steepened the stream gradient of the Colorado River and its tributaries, which in turn has increased their speed and thus their ability to cut through rock (see the elevation summary of the Colorado River for present conditions).

Weather conditions during the ice ages also increased the amount of water in the Colorado River drainage system. The ancestral Colorado River responded by cutting its channel faster and deeper.

The base level and course of the Colorado River (or its ancestral equivalent) changed 5.3 million years ago when the Gulf of California opened and lowered the river's base level (its lowest point). This increased the rate of erosion and cut nearly all of the Grand Canyon's current depth by 1.2 million years ago. The terraced walls of the canyon were created by differential erosion .

[ 33 ] Between 100,000 and 3 million years ago, volcanic activity deposited ash and lava over the area, which at times completely obstructed the river. These volcanic rocks are the youngest in the canyon.

Hydrology Ribbon Falls, near the North Kaibab Trail , represents ground water reaching the surface Groundwater flow in the Grand Canyon region is an active area of study.

Groundwater forms when rain soaks down into the earth and reaches the water table . The composition of the earth in a given area determines its permeability , the ease with which water flows through it. Sand is more permeable than clay. Less permeable rock layers composed of clay can block the passage of water and are known as aquitards . More permeable areas of rock that hold and transport groundwater underground are known as aquifers . An area of water bounded by two aquitards is called a confined aquifer, while water below the surface and above an aquitard is called an unconfined aquifer.

[ 34 ] The different geologic levels of the Grand Canyon have created two major aquifers where groundwater collects. The higher C-aquifer is an unconfined aquifer. It collects groundwater that seeps through the Kaibab and Toroweap Formations into the Coconino Sandstone. Below it, the Permian Hermit Formation and Supai Group provide a dense barrier. Groundwater from the C-acquifer can flow laterally, appearing as seeps along the canyon walls at the base of the Coconino Sandstone but can also descend vertically through fault zones to recharge the underlying confined R-aquifer. The R-aquifer, also known as the Red Wall Muav aquifer, is a karst aquifer. It involves an area of substantial fracturing through the Redwall Limestone, Temple Butte Formation and Cambrian Muav Limestone of the Tonto Group. Five individual systems flow through the R-aquifer and compose the regional groundwater-flow system which drains into the Grand Canyon: Kaibab, Uinkaret-Kanab, Marble-Shinumo, Cataract, and Blue Spring.

[ 35 ] The flow of groundwater in the Grand Canyon region is influenced in multiple ways by geologic faults and folds . Discharge from the R-aquifer appears as springs and seeps in both the Grand Canyon and tributary canyons. Springs discharge to the Grand Canyon in areas of lower Paleozoic carbonates, and are associated with geologic faults and fractures. Fractures are believed to provide dominant pathways both for vertical circulation in the Paleozoic section, and for lateral collection and transport of water to springs deep in the canyons. The largest springs discharge from the R-aquifer. A smaller number of springs discharge at lower rates from the C-aquifer. Much of the water that could potentially recharge the aquifers is likely released as springs rather than reaching the aquifers.

[ 35 ] Studies of the chemical composition of groundwater at sites across the Grand Canyon region indicate that groundwater contains a fraction of modern water (post-1950), and that many springs have a mix of modern water and older groundwater. Estimated mean ages for South Rim groundwater range from 6 years old (San Francisco Peaks) to nearly 20,000 years old (Bar Four well, Blue Spring). Groundwater age in the South Rim groundwater system also correlates to longitude, with age increasing from east to west from Red Canyon to Boucher springs. Surprisingly, the Canyon Mine Observation well is more similar to Redwall-Muav aquifer wells (R-aquifer) than to the Coconino C-aquifer. This suggests the possibility of a hydrologic connection or similar recharge sources for that hydrologic position. Old groundwater from Havasupai well may have a similar source to the Havasu Spring upwelling from the Redwall-Muav aquifer. Sites with younger estimated mean ages tend to be associated with the unconfined Coconino aquifer. They may recharge quickly as a result of snowmelt, run-off and local precipitation. It is likely that the deeper confined R-aquifer relies primarily on snowmelt from the San Francisco Peaks to recharge.

[ 36 ] Other research has tried to relate groundwater flow paths to possible levels of risk for contamination and identify vulnerability regions for the underlying aquifers. Almost half of the Kaibab plateau's surface was associated with high to very high vulnerability of the unconfined Coconino aquifer (C-aquifer), while about a fifth of the Kaibab Plateau was estimated to be an area of high vulnerability for the Redwall-Muav aquifer (R-aquifer).

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] History Main article: History of the Grand Canyon area Ancestral Puebloan granaries at Nankoweap Creek Native Americans The Ancestral Puebloans were a Native American culture centered on the present-day Four Corners area of the United States. They were the first people known to live in the Grand Canyon area. The cultural group has often been referred to in archaeology as the Anasazi, although the term is not preferred by the modern Puebloan peoples .

[ 39 ] The word "Anasazi" is Navajo for "enemy ancestors" or "alien ancestors".

[ 40 ] Archaeologists still debate when this distinct culture emerged. The current consensus, based on terminology defined by the Pecos Classification , suggests their emergence was around 1200 BCE during the Basketmaker II Era . Beginning with the earliest explorations and excavations, researchers have believed that the Ancestral Puebloans are ancestors of the modern Pueblo peoples .

[ 41 ] In addition to the Ancestral Puebloans, a number of distinct cultures have inhabited the Grand Canyon area. The Cohonina lived to the west of the Grand Canyon, between 500 and 1200 CE .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] The Cohonina were ancestors of the Yuman , Havasupai , and Hualapai peoples who inhabit the area today.

[ 44 ] The Sinagua were a cultural group occupying an area to the southeast of the Grand Canyon, between the Little Colorado River and the Salt River , between approximately 500 and 1425 CE . The Sinagua may have been ancestors of several Hopi clans.

By the time of the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century, newer cultures had evolved. The Hualapai inhabit a 100-mile (160 km) stretch along the pine-clad southern side of the Grand Canyon. The Havasupai have been living in the area near Cataract Canyon since the beginning of the 13th century, occupying an area the size of Delaware .

[ 45 ] The Southern Paiutes live in what is now southern Utah and northern Arizona. The Navajo , or Diné, live in a wide area stretching from the San Francisco Peaks eastwards towards the Four Corners. Archaeological and linguistic evidence suggests the Navajo descended from the Athabaskan people near Great Slave Lake , Canada, who migrated after the 11th century.

[ 46 ] In the mythology of some Third Mesa Hopi communities, the Grand Canyon was the location humankind arose out of the Third World from a sipapu .

[ 47 ] European arrival and settlement Spanish explorers La conquista del Colorado (2017), by Augusto Ferrer-Dalmau , depicts Francisco Vázquez de Coronado 's 1540–1542 expedition.

García López de Cárdenas can be seen overlooking the Grand Canyon.

In September 1540, under orders from the conquistador Francisco Vázquez de Coronado to search for the fabled Seven Cities of Cibola , Captain García López de Cárdenas , along with Hopi guides and a small group of Spanish soldiers, traveled to the south rim of the Grand Canyon between Desert View and Moran Point. Pablo de Melgrossa, Juan Galeras, and a third soldier descended some one third of the way into the canyon until they were forced to return because of lack of water. In their report, they noted that some of the rocks in the canyon were "bigger than the great tower of Seville, Giralda ".

[ 48 ] It is speculated that their Hopi guides likely knew routes to the canyon floor, but may have been reluctant to lead the Spanish to the river. No Europeans visited the canyon again for more than two hundred years.

Fathers Francisco Atanasio Domínguez and Silvestre Vélez de Escalante were two Spanish priests who, with a group of Spanish soldiers, explored southern Utah and traveled along the north rim of the canyon in Glen and Marble Canyons in search of a route from Santa Fe to California in 1776. They eventually found a crossing, formerly known as the "Crossing of the Fathers", that today lies under Lake Powell .

Also in 1776, Fray Francisco Garces, a Franciscan missionary, spent a week near Havasupai unsuccessfully attempting to convert a band of Native Americans to Christianity. He described the canyon as "profound".

[ 48 ] American exploration James Ohio Pattie, along with a group of American trappers and mountain men, may have been the next European to reach the canyon, in 1826.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Jacob Hamblin , a Mormon missionary, was sent by Brigham Young in the 1850s to locate suitable river crossing sites in the canyon. Building good relations with local Hualapai and white settlers, he reached the Crossing of the Fathers , [ 51 ] crossed the location that would become Lees Ferry on a raft in 1858 [ 52 ] and Pearce Ferry (later operated by, and named for, Harrison Pearce ).

[ 53 ] He also acted as an advisor to John Wesley Powell , before his second expedition to the Grand Canyon, serving as a diplomat between Powell and the local native tribes to ensure the safety of his party.

[ 52 ] William Bell 's photograph of the Grand Canyon, taken in 1872 as part of the Wheeler expedition In 1857, Edward Fitzgerald Beale was superintendent of an expedition to survey a wagon road along the 35th parallel from Fort Defiance, Arizona to the Colorado River. He led a small party of men in search of water on the Coconino Plateau near the canyon's south rim. On September 19, near present-day National Canyon, they came upon what May Humphreys Stacey described in his journal as "a wonderful canyon; four thousand feet deep. Everybody in the party admitted that he never before saw anything to match or equal this astonishing natural curiosity." [ 54 ] Also in 1857, the U.S.

War Department asked Lieutenant Joseph Ives to lead an expedition to assess the feasibility of an up-river navigation from the Gulf of California. On December 31, 1857, Ives embarked from the mouth of the Colorado in the stern wheeler steamboat Explorer . His party reached the lower end of Black Canyon on March 8, 1858, then continued on by rowboat past the mouth of the Virgin River after the Explorer struck a rock.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Ives led his party east into the canyon – they may have been the first Europeans to travel the Diamond Creek drainage.

[ 57 ] In his "Report Upon the Colorado River of the West" to the Senate in 1861 Ives states that "The marvellous story of Cardinas , that had formed for so long a time the only record concerning this rather mythical locality, was rather magnified than detracted from by the accounts of one or two trappers, who professed to have seen the cañon".

[ 58 ] Noon rest in Marble Canyon , second Powell Expedition, 1872 According to the San Francisco Herald , in a series of articles run in 1853, Captain Joseph R. Walker in January 1851 with his nephew James T. Walker and six men, traveled up the Colorado River to a point where it joined the Virgin River and continued east into Arizona, traveling along the Grand Canyon and making short exploratory side trips along the way. Walker is reported to have said he wanted to visit the "Moqui" (Hopi) Indians. who he had met briefly before and found exceptionally interesting.

[ 59 ] In 1858, John Strong Newberry became probably the first geologist to visit the Grand Canyon.

[ 60 ] In 1869, Major John Wesley Powell set out to explore the Colorado River and the Grand Canyon in the first expedition down the canyon. Powell ordered a shipwright to build four reinforced Whitewall rowboats from Chicago and had them shipped west on the newly completed Continental railroad.

[ 61 ] He hired nine men, including his brother Walter, and collected provisions for ten months. They set out from Green River, Wyoming , on May 24.

[ 62 ] On June 7, they lost one of their boats, 1/3 of their food, and other badly needed supplies: as a result the team eventually had to subsist on starvation rations.

[ 63 ] Passing through (or portaging around) a series of dangerous rapids, the group passed down the Green River , reaching its confluence with the Colorado River, near present-day Moab, Utah , on July 17. Continuing on down the Colorado River, the party encountered more rapids and falls.

[ 64 ] On August 28, 1869, faced with what some felt to be impassable rapids, three men left the expedition on foot in an attempt to reach a settlement 75 miles (121 km) away. Ironically, the remaining members went safely through the rapids on August 29, 1869, while Seneca Howland, Oramel Howland, and William H. Dunn were murdered.

[ 63 ] The area through which the three men traveled was marked by tensions between farming and hunting Shivwits and incoming Mormon settlers. Which group was responsible for killing the three men has been hotly debated.

[ 65 ] Powell himself visited the area the following year, and was told (through a Mormon interpreter) that the Shivwits had mistakenly killed the men, believing them to be prospectors who had murdered an Indian woman. He chose to smoke a peace pipe with them.

[ 63 ] [ 66 ] Powell went on to become the first Director of the U.S. Bureau of Ethnology of the Smithsonian Institution (1879–1902) and the second Director of the US Geological Survey (1881–1894).

[ 67 ] He was the first to use the term "Grand Canyon", in 1871; previously it had been called the "Big Canyon".

[ 68 ] In 1889, Frank M. Brown wanted to build a railroad along the Colorado River to carry coal. He, his chief engineer Robert Brewster Stanton , and 14 others started to explore the Grand Canyon in poorly designed cedar wood boats, with no life preservers. Brown drowned in an accident near Marble Canyon : Stanton made new boats and proceeded to explore the Colorado all of the way to the Gulf of California .

[ 69 ] The Grand Canyon became an official national monument in 1908 and a national park in 1919.

[ 70 ] Settlers in and near the canyon David Rust, c.

1910 Miners: "Captain" John Hance , [ 71 ] William W. Bass, [ 72 ] Louis Boucher "The Hermit", [ 73 ] Seth Tanner , [ 74 ] Charles Spencer, [ 75 ] D.W. "James" Mooney [ 76 ] Lees Ferry: John Doyle Lee , Emma Lee French (17th of John Lee's 19 wives), [ 77 ] James Simpson Emmett [ 78 ] Phantom Ranch: David Rust, [ 79 ] Mary Colter [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Grand Canyon Village: Ralph H. Cameron , [ 82 ] Emery & Ellsworth Kolb [ 83 ] Federal protection: National monument and park Railway Station and El Tovar Hotel , Facing WNW, Grand Canyon Village . 1994 photo, HAER Fred Harvey postcard, The Towering Cliffs above Hermit Camp U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Grand Canyon in 1903. An avid outdoorsman and staunch conservationist, Roosevelt established the Grand Canyon Game Preserve on November 28, 1906. Livestock grazing was reduced, but predators such as mountain lions, eagles, and wolves were eradicated. Roosevelt along with other members of his conservation group, the Boone and Crockett Club helped form the National Parks Association , which in turn lobbied for the Antiquities Act of 1906 which gave Roosevelt the power to create national monuments. Once the act was passed, Roosevelt immediately added adjacent national forest lands and redesignated the preserve a U.S. National Monument on January 11, 1908.

[ 84 ] Opponents such as land and mining claim holders blocked efforts to reclassify the monument as a U.S. National Park for 11 years. Grand Canyon National Park was finally established as the 17th U.S. National Park by an Act of Congress signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on February 26, 1919.

[ 42 ] The federal government administrators who manage park resources face many challenges. These include issues related to the recent reintroduction into the wild of the highly endangered California condor , air tour overflight noise levels, water rights [ 85 ] and management disputes, and forest fire management.

The canyon's ecosystem was permanently changed after the construction of the Glen Canyon Dam in 1963. Average flood levels dropped from 85,000 to 8,000 cubic ft/sec. In the absence of natural flooding, sandbars and beaches eroded and invasive species began to displace native species. Federal officials started releasing floods in the Grand Canyon in hopes of restoring its ecosystem beginning with 1996, 2004, and 2008.

[ 7 ] [ 86 ] In 2018, the Department of Interior started experimenting with “adaptive management” of the Glen Canyon Dam, using a High-Flow Experiment (HFE) water release to shift volumes of sand and monitoring effects such as the dispersal of invasive tamarisk seeds.

[ 87 ] However, as of 2022, extreme drought has caused water levels in Lake Powell to drop so much that a planned release of water has been delayed, to ensure that the Glen Canyon Dam can continue to generate hydropower .

[ 88 ] There are numerous mining claims in the area around the Grand Canyon Weather Weather in the Grand Canyon varies according to elevation. The forested rims are high enough to receive winter snowfall, but along the Colorado River in the Inner Gorge, temperatures are similar to those found in Tucson and other low elevation desert locations in Arizona. Conditions in the Grand Canyon region are generally dry, but substantial precipitation occurs twice annually, during seasonal pattern shifts in winter (when Pacific storms usually deliver widespread, moderate rain and high-elevation snow to the region from the west) and in late summer (due to the North American Monsoon , which delivers waves of moisture from the southeast, causing dramatic, localized thunderstorms fueled by the heat of the day).

[ 89 ] Average annual precipitation on the South Rim is less than 16 inches (41 cm), with 60 inches (150 cm) of snow; the higher North Rim usually receives 27 inches (69 cm) of moisture, with a typical snowfall of 144 inches (370 cm); and Phantom Ranch, far below the canyon's rims along the Colorado River at 2,500 feet (760 m) gets just 8 inches (200 mm) of rain, and snow is a rarity.

Grand Canyon covered with snow Temperatures vary wildly throughout the year, with summer highs within the Inner Gorge commonly exceeding 100 °F (38 °C) and winter minimum temperatures sometimes falling below zero degrees Fahrenheit (−18 °C) along the canyon's rims.

[ 89 ] Visitors are often surprised by these potentially extreme conditions, and this, along with the high altitude of the canyon's rims, can lead to unpleasant side effects such as dehydration , sunburn , and hypothermia .

Weather conditions can greatly affect hiking and canyon exploration, and visitors should obtain accurate forecasts because of hazards posed by exposure to extreme temperatures, winter storms and late summer monsoons. While the park service posts weather information at gates and visitor centers, this is a rough approximation only, and should not be relied upon for trip planning. For accurate weather in the canyon, hikers should consult the National Weather Service 's NOAA weather radio or the official National Weather Service website.

[ 90 ] The National Weather Service has had a cooperative station on the South Rim since 1903. The record high temperature on the South Rim was 105 °F (41 °C) on June 26, 1974, and the record low temperature was −20 °F (−29 °C) on January 1, 1919, February 1, 1985, and December 23, 1990.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Air quality Smoke from prescribed fires on the South Rim, as seen from Yavapai Point, April 2007.

[ 94 ] As of 1999 [update] the Grand Canyon area had some of the cleanest air in the United States.

[ 95 ] : p.5-2 [ 96 ] However, air quality in the area can be affected by air pollution from coal-fired power plants, mining, oil and gas, vehicles, and urban and industrial pollution from nearby states, California and Mexico.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] Events such as forest fires and dust storms in the Southwest can have a considerable impact.

[ 100 ] Differences in visibility tend to be seasonal: best during the winter and poorest during the summer.

[ 101 ] Winter cold fronts tend to carry clean, crisp air from the northwest, a less populated area. However they can also carry pollution from nearby mines and power plants. The average visibility during the winter is 160 miles, with the potential to reach 210 miles under ideal conditions. In the summer, prevailing winds from the southwest carry pollution from major urban and industrial centers, and visibility on average is only 100 miles. Within the canyon itself, smog can be trapped.

[ 102 ] Air quality and visibility in the canyon are affected mainly by sulfates, soils, and organics. The sulfates largely result from urban emissions in southern California, borne on the prevailing westerly winds throughout much of the year, and emissions from Arizona's copper smelter region, borne on southerly or southeasterly winds during the monsoon . Airborne soils originate with windy conditions and road dust . Organic particles result from vehicle emissions, long-range transport from urban areas, and forest fires, as well as from VOCs emitted by vegetation in the surrounding forests. Nitrates, carried in from urban areas, stationary sources, and vehicle emissions; as well as black carbon from forest fires and vehicle emissions, also contribute to a lesser extent.

[ 96 ] [ 103 ] : 26, 49–51 A number of actions have been taken to preserve and further improve air quality and visibility at the canyon.
In 1990, amendments to the Clean Air Act established the Grand Canyon Visibility Transport Commission (GCVTC) to advise the US EPA on strategies for protecting visual air quality on the Colorado Plateau . The GCVTC released its final report in 1996 and initiated the Western Regional Air Partnership (WRAP), a partnership of state, tribal and federal agencies to help coordinate the implementation of the commission's recommendations.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] In 1999, the Regional Haze Rule established a goal of restoring visibility in national parks and wilderness areas (Class 1 areas), such as the Grand Canyon, to natural background levels by 2064. Subsequent revisions to the rule provide specific requirements for making reasonable progress toward that goal.

[ 106 ] Natural fog sometimes fills the canyon, during temperature inversions In the early 1990s, studies indicated that emissions of SO 2 , a sulfate precursor, from the Navajo Generating Station affected visibility in the canyon, mainly in the winter.

[ 107 ] : p.C-2, C-6 As a result, scrubbers were added to the plant's three units in 1997 through 1999 to reduce SO2 emissions by 90% on an annual average.

[ 108 ] Before and after observations showed a wintertime decrease of 33% for particulate sulfur (Sp), improving visibility.

[ 109 ] The plant also installed low-NO x SOFA burners in 2009–2011, reducing emissions of NO x , a nitrate precursor, by 40% [ 110 ] The plant shut down completely in 2019.

[ 99 ] Emissions from the Mohave Generating Station to the west were similarly found to affect visibility in the canyon. The plant was required to have installed SO 2 scrubbers, but was instead shut down in 2005, completely eliminating its emissions.

[ 111 ] Prescribed fires are typically conducted in the spring and fall in the forests adjacent to the canyon to reduce the potential for severe forest fires and resulting smoke conditions. Although prescribed fires also affect air quality, the controlled conditions allow the use of management techniques to minimize their impact.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] : p.86, 93 Climate change Grand Canyon Climate Summary Chart (NPS) Due to the increase of greenhouse gases, temperatures have steadily risen making recent years the warmest in the century-long record.

[ 114 ] Temperatures have increased in Arizona by 2.1 degrees Fahrenheit since 1895.

[ 115 ] From 1916 to 2014, naturalized streamflow in the Upper Colorado River Basin decreased by 16.5%, in spite of a slight increase of +1.4% in annual precipitation over the same period.

[ 116 ] Increases in temperature correlate to increased evaporation, loss of reflective snow, and decreases in snowpack, reducing available water in the Colorado River by an estimated 9.3% per degree Celsius of warming.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Over the last 30 years, the South Rim of the Grand Canyon has averaged 13.4 inches of rainfall per year, while the North Rim has averaged 24 inches.

[ 119 ] The first dual distribution water system in the United States was built on the South Rim, treating and reclaiming wastewater for nonpotable reuse as early as 1926. Early on, water for human use was brought in by tankers, and pumped up from a spring deeper in the canyon.

[ 120 ] In the 1960s, the Transcanyon Pipeline was built to carry water from the North Rim down into the canyon and back up to the South Rim.

[ 121 ] Every day 500,000 gallons of water are pumped from underground springs on the North Rim through the pipeline to supply the more heavily developed South Rim with water.

[ 7 ] [ 122 ] As water consumption continues to soar due to increasing visitation in the park, both the sustainability of the water supply and the condition of the pipeline are in question.

[ 7 ] [ 122 ] As of 2019, plans to replace the aging 16-mile aluminum pipeline were proposed.

[ 121 ] Another proposal, from the Bureau of Reclamation, recommended that the park drill a well into the Redwall-Muav aquifer to meet the increasing water consumption. However, the aquifer's recharge rate stands to decline over time due to decreases in precipitation and snowpack.

[ 123 ] Some effects of over pumping aquifers include land subsidence, reduction in rivers and lakes, disrupted riparian systems, and poor water quality.

[ 124 ] In the National Park Service 's "Climate Action Plan," goals were set to reduce greenhouse gases 30 percent below 2008 levels by 2020 and plan and implement measures that best allow the park to adapt to the impacts of climate change . Strategies to accomplish these goals included: "reduce [greenhouse gases] emissions resulting from activities within and by the park, developing and implementing a plan to adapt to current and future impacts of climate change, increase climate change education and outreach, and monitor progress and identify areas for improvement".

[ 114 ] Biology and ecology Plants There are approximately 1,737 known species of vascular plants , 167 species of fungi , 64 species of moss , and 195 species of lichen found in Grand Canyon National Park.

[ 125 ] This variety is largely due to the 8,000 foot (2,400 m) elevation change from the Colorado River up to the highest point on the North Rim.

[ 125 ] Grand Canyon boasts a dozen endemic plants (known only within the Park's boundaries) while only ten percent of the Park's flora is exotic.

[ 125 ] Sixty-three plants found here have been given special status by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service .

[ 125 ] Grand Canyon Clouds time lapse VP8 The Mojave Desert influences the western sections of the canyon, Sonoran Desert vegetation covers the eastern sections, and ponderosa and pinyon pine forests grow on both rims.

[ 126 ] Natural seeps and springs percolating out of the canyon walls are home to 11% of all the plant species found in the Grand Canyon.

[ 126 ] The canyon itself can act as a connection between the east and the west by providing corridors of appropriate habitat along its length.

[ 126 ] The canyon can also be a genetic barrier to some species, like the tassel-eared squirrel .

[ 126 ] The aspect, or direction a slope faces, also plays a major role in adding diversity to the Grand Canyon. North-facing slopes receive about one-third the normal amount of sunlight, so plants growing there are similar to plants found at higher elevations, or in more northern latitudes.

[ 126 ] The south-facing slopes receive the full amount of sunlight and are covered in vegetation typical of the Sonoran Desert.

[ 126 ] Animals A bighorn ram perched on a cliff in the Grand Canyon Of the 90 mammal species found along the Colorado River corridor, 18 are rodents and 22 are bats.

[ 127 ] Life zones and communities The Park contains several major ecosystems.

[ 18 ] Its great biological diversity can be attributed to the presence of five of the seven life zones and three of the four desert types in North America.

[ 18 ] The five life zones represented are the Lower Sonoran, Upper Sonoran, Transition, Canadian, and Hudsonian.

[ 18 ] This is equivalent to traveling from Mexico to Canada. Differences in elevation and the resulting variations in climate are the major factors that form the various life zones and communities in and around the canyon. Grand Canyon National Park contains 129 vegetation communities, and the composition and distribution of plant species are influenced by climate, geomorphology and geology.

[ 125 ] Lower Sonoran The Lower Sonoran life zone spans from the Colorado River up to 3,500 feet (1,100 m). Along the Colorado River and its perennial tributaries, a riparian community exists.

[ 125 ] Coyote willow , arrowweed , seep-willow , western honey mesquite , catclaw acacia , and exotic tamarisk (saltcedar) are the predominant species.

[ 125 ] Hanging gardens, seeps and springs often contain rare plants such as the white-flowering western redbud , stream orchid , and Flaveria mcdougallii .

[ 125 ] Endangered fish in the river include the humpback chub and the razorback sucker .

[ 128 ] A bighorn ewe at the Grand Canyon, 2008 The three most common amphibians in these riparian communities are the canyon tree frog , red-spotted toad , and Woodhouse's Rocky Mountain toad .

[ 129 ] Leopard frogs are very rare in the Colorado River corridor; they have undergone major declines and have not been seen in the Canyon in several years.

[ 129 ] There are 33 crustacean species found in the Colorado River and its tributaries within Grand Canyon National Park. Of these 33, 16 are considered true zooplankton organisms.

[ 130 ] Only 48 bird species regularly nest along the river, while others use the river as a migration corridor or as an overwintering habitat. The bald eagle is one species that uses the river corridor as a winter habitat.

[ 131 ] River otters may have disappeared from the park in the late 20th century, and muskrats are extremely rare.

[ 127 ] Beavers cut willows, cottonwoods, and shrubs for food, and can significantly affect the riparian vegetation.

[ 127 ] Other rodents, such as antelope squirrels and pocket mice , are mostly omnivorous, using many different vegetation types.

[ 127 ] Grand Canyon bats typically roost in desert uplands but forage on the abundance of insects along the river and its tributaries.

[ 127 ] In addition to bats, coyotes , ringtails , and spotted skunks are the most numerous riparian predators and prey on invertebrates, rodents, and reptiles.

[ 127 ] Raccoons , weasels , bobcats , gray foxes , and mountain lions are also present but are much rarer.

[ 127 ] Ungulate species such as mule deer and desert bighorn sheep frequent the river corridor. Since the removal of 500 feral burros in the early 1980s, bighorn sheep numbers have rebounded.

[ 127 ] Mule deer are generally not permanent residents along the river but travel down from the rim when food and water resources there become scarce.

[ 127 ] The insect species commonly found in the river corridor and tributaries are midges , caddisflies , mayflies , stoneflies , black flies , mites , beetles , butterflies , moths , and fire ants .

[ 132 ] Numerous species of spiders and several species of scorpions , including the bark scorpion and the giant desert hairy scorpion , inhabit the riparian zone.

[ 132 ] Eleven aquatic and 26 terrestrial species of mollusks have been identified in and around Grand Canyon National Park.

[ 133 ] Of the aquatic species, two are bivalves (clams) and nine are gastropods (snails).

[ 133 ] Twenty-six species of terrestrial gastropods have been identified, primarily land snails and slugs .

[ 133 ] There are approximately 41 reptile species in Grand Canyon National Park. Ten are considered common along the river corridor and include lizards and snakes.

[ 134 ] Lizard density tends to be highest along the stretch of land between the water's edge and the beginning of the upland desert community.

[ 134 ] The two largest lizards in the canyon are gila monsters and chuckwallas .

[ 134 ] Many snake species, which are not directly dependent on surface water, may be found both within the inner gorge and the Colorado River corridor. Six rattlesnake species have been recorded in the park.

[ 134 ] Above the river corridor a desert scrub community, composed of North American desert flora, thrives. Typical warm desert species such as creosote bush , white bursage , brittlebush , catclaw acacia, ocotillo , mariola , western honey mesquite, four-winged saltbush , big sagebrush , blackbrush , and rubber rabbitbrush grow in this community.

[ 125 ] The mammalian fauna in the woodland scrub community consists of 50 species, mostly rodents and bats.

[ 127 ] Three of the five Park woodrat species live in the desert scrub community.

[ 127 ] Except for the western banded gecko , which seems to be distributed only near water along the Colorado River, all of the reptiles found near the river also appear in the uplands, but in lower densities.

[ 134 ] The desert gopher tortoise , a threatened species, inhabits the desert scrublands in the western end of the park.

[ 134 ] Some of the common insects found at elevations above 2,000 feet (610 m) are orange paper wasps , honey bees , black flies, tarantula hawks , stink bugs , beetles, black ants , and monarch and swallowtail butterflies .

[ 132 ] Solifugids , wood spiders , garden spiders , black widow spiders , and tarantulas can be found in the desert scrub and higher elevations.

[ 132 ] Upper Sonoran and Transition A California condor in flight, photographed from Navajo Bridge at Marble Canyon , 2008. Wild condors are numbered to aid wildlife researchers. As of April 2009, there were 172 wild California condors known.

The Upper Sonoran Life Zone includes most of the inner canyon and South Rim at elevations from 3,500 to 7,000 feet (1,100 to 2,100 m).

[ 126 ] This zone is generally dominated by blackbrush, sagebrush , and pinyon-juniper woodlands. Elevations of 3,500 to 4,000 feet (1,100 to 1,200 m) are in the Mojave Desert Scrub community of the Upper Sonoran. This community is dominated by the four-winged saltbush and creosote bush; other important plants include Utah agave , narrowleaf mesquite , ratany , catclaw acacia, and various cacti species.

[ 126 ] Approximately 30 bird species breed primarily in the desert uplands and cliffs of the inner canyon.

[ 131 ] Virtually all bird species present breed in other suitable habitats throughout the Sonoran and Mohave deserts.

[ 131 ] The abundance of bats, swifts, and riparian birds provides ample food for peregrines , and suitable eyrie sites are plentiful along the steep canyon walls. Also, several critically endangered California condors have made the eastern part of the Park their home, having been re-introduced to the Colorado Plateau on the Arizona Strip earlier.

[ 131 ] Red-tailed Hawk flying at the south rim of Grand Canyon An elk searching for water at Grand Canyon National Park in 2018 The conifer forests provide habitat for 52 mammal species.

[ 127 ] Porcupines , shrews , red squirrels , tassel-eared Kaibab and Abert's squirrels , black bear , mule deer, and elk are found at the park's higher elevations on the Kaibab Plateau.

[ 127 ] Above the desert scrub and up to 6,200 feet (1,900 m) is a pinyon pine forest and one seed juniper woodland.

[ 125 ] Within this woodland one can find big sagebrush, snakeweed , Mormon tea , Utah agave, banana and narrowleaf Yucca , winterfat , Indian ricegrass , dropseed , and needlegrass .

[ 125 ] There are a variety of snakes and lizards here, but one species of reptile, the mountain short-horned lizard , is a particularly abundant inhabitant of the piñon-juniper and ponderosa pine forests.

[ 134 ] Ponderosa pine forests grow at elevations between 6,500 and 8,200 feet (2,000 and 2,500 m), on both North and South rims in the Transition life zone.

[ 125 ] The South Rim includes species such as gray fox, mule deer, bighorn sheep, rock squirrels , pinyon pine, and Utah juniper .

[ 126 ] Additional species such as Gambel oak , New Mexico locust , mountain mahogany , elderberry , creeping mahonia , and fescue have been identified in these forests.

[ 125 ] The Utah tiger salamander and the Great Basin spadefoot toad are two amphibians that are common in the rim forests.

[ 129 ] Of the approximately 90 bird species that breed in the coniferous forests, 51 are summer residents and at least 15 of these are known to be neotropical migrants.

[ 131 ] Canadian and Hudsonian Elevations of 8,200 to 9,000 feet (2,500 to 2,700 m) are in the Canadian Life Zone, which includes the North Rim and the Kaibab Plateau .

[ 126 ] Spruce-fir forests characterized by Engelmann spruce , blue spruce , Douglas fir , white fir , aspen , and mountain ash , along with several species of perennial grasses, groundsels , yarrow , cinquefoil , lupines , sedges , and asters , grow in this sub-alpine climate.

[ 125 ] Mountain lions, Kaibab squirrels, and American goshawks are found here.

[ 126 ] Montane meadows and subalpine grassland communities of the Hudsonian life zone are rare and located only on the North Rim.

[ 125 ] Both are typified by many grass species. Some of these grasses include blue and black grama , big galleta , Indian ricegrass , and three-awns .

[ 125 ] The wettest areas support sedges and forbs .

[ 125 ] View from the South Rim Tourism Grand Canyon National Park is one of the world's premier natural attractions, attracting about five million visitors per year. According to a survey conducted of visitors to the canyon between September 2003 through August 2004, 83% were from the United States: California (12%), Arizona (9%), Texas (5%), Florida (3%) and New York (4%) represented the top domestic visitors. Seventeen percent of visitors were from outside the United States; the most prominently represented nations were the United Kingdom (3%), Canada (4%), Japan (2%), Germany (2%) and the Netherlands (1%).

[ 135 ] The South Rim is open all year, weather permitting. The North Rim is generally open mid-May to mid-October.

[ 136 ] Activities Grand Canyon regional map Rafters in the Grand Canyon pass one of the rapids of the Colorado River There are many viewing points on all sides of the canyon, with the most accessible locations inside Grand Canyon National Park and the Hualapai Indian Reservation. About 90% of tourists visit the South Rim from Arizona State Route 64 , which averages 7,000 feet (2,100 m) above sea level. The South Rim houses two visitor centers, a geological museum, art gallery/bookstore, and other attractions near Grand Canyon Village . Further east along the South Rim is the Desert View Watchtower . Grand Canyon National Park also has a visitor center in an easterly area known as the North Rim, via Arizona State Route 67 ; the center and the road are closed in winter months.

[ 137 ] On the Hualapai reservation, Grand Canyon West is the third major area with tourist services, about 125 mi (201 km) driving from Las Vegas and about 250 miles (400 km) by road from Grand Canyon Village at the South Rim.

[ 138 ] The tribe opened the glass-bottomed Grand Canyon Skywalk in 2007, which has since attracted "thousands of visitors a year, most from Las Vegas".

[ 139 ] Also at Grand Canyon West is Guano Point , which features a narrow peninsula surrounded on all sides by steep dropoffs. On the north side of the canyon to the west, the Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument has no paved roads and no visitor services.

Rafting, hiking, running, and helicopter tours are also popular in the canyon area. The floor of the valley is accessible by foot, muleback, or by boat or raft from upriver. Hiking down to the river and back up to the rim in one day is discouraged by park officials because of the distance, steep and rocky trails, change in elevation, and danger of heat exhaustion from the much higher temperatures at the bottom. Rescues are required annually of unsuccessful rim-to-river-to-rim travelers. Nevertheless, hundreds of fit and experienced hikers complete the trip every year.

[ citation needed ] Camping on the North and South rims is generally restricted to established campgrounds and reservations are highly recommended, especially at the busier South Rim. There is at large camping available along many parts of the North Rim managed by Kaibab National Forest . North Rim campsites are only open seasonally due to road closures from weather and winter snowpack. All overnight camping below the rim requires a backcountry permit from the Backcountry Office (BCO).

[ 140 ] Each year Grand Canyon National Park receives approximately 30,000 requests for backcountry permits. The park issues 13,000 permits, and close to 40,000 people camp overnight.

[ 140 ] The earliest a permit application is accepted is the first of the month, four months before the proposed start month.

A 6-minute video of a flight over the Grand Canyon ( view in high quality ) Tourists wishing for a more vertical perspective can go skydiving, board helicopters and small airplanes in Boulder, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Grand Canyon West Airport , and Grand Canyon National Park Airport (seven miles from the South Rim) for canyon flyovers. Scenic flights are no longer allowed to fly within 1,500 feet (460 m) of the rim within the national park because of a late 1990s crash.

[ 141 ] The last aerial video footage from below the rim was filmed in 1984. However, some helicopter flights land on the Havasupai and Hualapai Indian Reservations within the Grand Canyon (outside of the park boundaries).

In 2016, skydiving at the Grand Canyon become possible with the first Grand Canyon Skydiving operation opening up at the Grand Canyon National Park Airport, on the South Rim.

In 2014, a developer announced plans to build a multimedia complex on the canyon's rim called the Grand Canyon Escalade . On 420 acres (170 ha) there would be shops, an IMAX theater, hotels and an RV park. A gondola would enable easy visits to the canyon floor where a "riverwalk" of "connected walkways, an eatery, a tramway station, a seating area and a wastewater package plant" would be situated. On October 31, 2017, the Navajo Nation Council voted against the project.

[ 142 ] Fatalities Grand Canyon rescue helicopter, 1978 About 770 deaths have occurred between the mid-1800s and 2015.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Of the fatalities that occurred from 1869 to 2001, the most common cause was airplane and helicopter crashes, with 242 deaths (128 of them in the 1956 disaster mentioned below), along with the following: 53 resulted from falls; 65 were attributable to environmental causes, including heat stroke, cardiac arrest, dehydration, and hypothermia; 7 were caught in flash floods; 79 were drowned in the Colorado River; 25 died in freak errors and accidents, including lightning strikes and rock falls; and 23 were the victims of homicides.

[ 145 ] Nearly all deaths that occur are preventable.

[ 146 ] On October 3, 2020, former Major League Baseball player Charlie Haeger was found dead from a self-inflicted gunshot wound on a canyon trail. He was under investigation for the murder of his ex-girlfriend which had taken place the day before in Scottsdale .

[ 147 ] In 1956, the Grand Canyon was the site of the deadliest commercial aviation disaster in history at the time when two commercial planes en route from Los Angeles collided at 21,000 feet above the canyon. The disaster killed all 128 passengers and crew members aboard both planes.

South Kaibab Trail at Cedar Ridge.

O'Neill Butte on the left.

See also Arizona portal Earth sciences portal Geography portal Rivers portal A Bigger Grand Canyon , 1998 painting Copper Canyon , Mexico Grand Canyon National Park Grand Canyon Suite Jacob Lake, Arizona List of Colorado River rapids and features List of trails in Grand Canyon National Park Making North America (2015 PBS film) Pine Creek Gorge – Gorge in northeastern Pennsylvania also known as the "Pennsylvania Grand Canyon" Providence Canyon – Canyon in southwestern Georgia also known as Georgia's "Little Grand Canyon" Valles Marineris – A gigantic canyon on Mars , one of the largest in the Solar System Verdon Gorge , France Notes ^ Hopi : Öngtupqa , [ 2 ] Yavapai : Wi:kaʼi:la , Navajo : Bidááʼ Haʼaztʼiʼ Tsékooh , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Southern Paiute language : Paxa’uipi, [ 5 ] Spanish: Gran Cañón or Gran Cañón del Colorado References ^ a b Karlstrom, Karl E.; Lee, John P.; Kelley, Shari A.; Crow, Ryan S.; et al. (2014). "Formation of the Grand Canyon 5 to 6 million years ago through integration of older palaeocanyons".

Nature Geoscience .

7 (3): 239– 244.

Bibcode : 2014NatGe...7..239K .

doi : 10.1038/ngeo2065 .

ISSN 1752-0894 .

^ "Pueblos join forces to oppose Grand Canyon Escalade Project" . Navajo Times. September 11, 2014.

Archived from the original on June 1, 2016 . Retrieved April 20, 2016 .

^ Linford, Laurence D.

Navajo Places. History, Legend, Landscape.

University of Utah Press. Salt Lake City, UT: 2000.

^ Wilson, Alan with Gene Dennison.

Navajo Place Names. An observer's guide.

Jeffrey Norton Publishers. Guilford, CT: 1995.

^ Yanawant Paiute Places and Landscapes in the Arizona Strip: Volume Two of the Arizona Strip Landscapes and Place Name Study, Part 2, p. 69 Link Archived January 29, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Kiver, Eugene P.; Harris, David V. (June 15, 1999).

Geology of U.S. Parklands . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-33218-3 .

Archived from the original on June 23, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Witze, Alexandra (February 26, 2019).

"A deeper understanding of the Grand Canyon" .

Knowable Magazine .

doi : 10.1146/knowable-022619-1 .

Archived from the original on June 23, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Geologic Formations of the Grand Canyon National Park Service Retrieved November 17, 2009 ^ Ranney, Wayne (2005).

Carving Grand Canyon: Evidence, Theories, and Mystery . Grand Canyon Association.

ISBN 978-0938216827 .

^ Darling, Andrew; Whipple, Kelin (2015).

"Geomorphic constraints on the age of the western Grand Canyon" .

Geosphere .

11 (4): 958– 976.

Bibcode : 2015Geosp..11..958D .

doi : 10.1130/ges01131.1 .

^ Spencer, J.E.; Patchett, P.J.; Pearthree, P.A.; House, P.K.; Sarna-Wojcicki, A.M.; Wan, E.; Roskowski, J.A.; Faulds, J.E. (2013).

"Review and analysis of the age and origin of the Pliocene Bouse Formation, lower Colorado River Valley, southwestern USA" .

Geosphere .

9 (3): 444– 459.

Bibcode : 2013Geosp...9..444S .

doi : 10.1130/ges00896.1 .

^ Mitchell, Douglas R.; Lippert, Dorothy; Brunson-Hadley, Judy L. (2004).

Ancient Burial Practices in the American Southwest (reprint, illustrated ed.). Albuquerque, NM: UNM Press. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0826334619 .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2016.

^ "History of the Colorado Plateau" .

Utah History Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on January 9, 2013 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b Ranney, Wayne (April 2014).

"A pre–21st century history of ideas on the origin of the Grand Canyon" .

Geosphere .

10 (2): 233– 242.

Bibcode : 2014Geosp..10..233R .

doi : 10.1130/GES00960.1 .

ISSN 1553-040X .

^ Leydsman McGinty, Ellie I.; McGinty, Christopher M. (2009). "Physiography of Utah". In Banner, R. E.; Baldwin, B. D.; Leydsman McGinty, Ellie I. (eds.).

Rangelands resources of Utah (PDF) . Logan, Utah, USA: Utah State University Cooperative Extension Service. pp.

24– 28.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Montmoli, C.

"A geological journey through the deepest gorge on Earth: the Kali Gandaki valley section, west-central Nepal" .

ResearchGate.net .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 27, 2021 .

^ Marlatt, William; Riehl, Herbert (December 15, 1963). "Precipitation regimes over the upper Colorado River".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

68 (24): 6447– 6458.

Bibcode : 1963JGR....68.6447M .

doi : 10.1029/JZ068i024p06447 .

^ a b c d This article incorporates public domain material from "Nature and Science" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service .

^ "Winter on the North Rim (off-season)" .

Operating Hours & Seasons . National Park Service; US Dept. of Interior.

Archived from the original on March 3, 2011 . Retrieved January 21, 2013 .

^ B. Wernicke (January 26, 2011).

"The California River and its role in carving Grand Canyon" (PDF) .

Geological Society of America Bulletin .

123 ( 7– 8): 1288– 1316.

Bibcode : 2011GSAB..123.1288W .

doi : 10.1130/B30274.1 .

ISSN 0016-7606 .

Wikidata Q56082876 .

^ Johnson, Joshua (2013).

"Western U.S. Tectonics: The Origin of the Grand Canyon – Controversy and Tectonic Implications – Intro page" .

cires1.colorado.edu .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Johnson, Joshua (2013).

"Western U.S. Tectonics: The Origin of the Grand Canyon – Controversy and Tectonic Implications – SYNTHESIS AND TECTONIC IMPLICATIONS" .

cires1.colorado.edu .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Wilford, John (February 6, 2008).

"Study Says Grand Canyon Older Than Thought" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2008 .

^ "How Old Is the Grand Canyon?" .

NPR.org . March 7, 2008.

Archived from the original on June 23, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Polyak, Victor; Hill, Carol; Asmerom, Yemane (March 7, 2008).

"Age and evolution of the Grand Canyon revealed by U-Pb dating of water table-type speleothems" (PDF) .

Science .

319 (5868): 1377– 1380.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...319.1377P .

doi : 10.1126/science.1151248 .

ISSN 1095-9203 .

PMID 18323451 .

S2CID 206509716 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ a b Wilford, John Noble (November 29, 2012).

"60-Million-Year Debate on Grand Canyon's Age" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2013 . Retrieved January 22, 2013 .

^ Flowers, R. M.; Wernicke, B. P.; Farley, K. A. (May 1, 2008).

"Unroofing, incision, and uplift history of the southwestern Colorado Plateau from apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronometry" .

GSA Bulletin .

120 ( 5– 6): 571– 587.

Bibcode : 2008GSAB..120..571F .

doi : 10.1130/B26231.1 .

ISSN 0016-7606 .

Archived from the original on June 23, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Achenbach, Joel (January 26, 2014).

"New research revives debate over Grand Canyon's age" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 4, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ Flowers, R. M.; Farley, K. A. (December 21, 2012).

"Apatite 4He/3He and (U-Th)/He Evidence for an Ancient Grand Canyon" .

Science .

338 (6114): 1616– 1619.

Bibcode : 2012Sci...338.1616F .

doi : 10.1126/science.1229390 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 23196906 .

S2CID 32277486 .

^ "Grand Canyon as old as the dinosaurs?" .

3 News NZ . December 3, 2012. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013 . Retrieved December 2, 2012 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (January 26, 2014).

"Grand Canyon 'formed recently' " .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on July 11, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2022 .

^ Bush, Mike (February 3, 2014).

"Debate over the origins of the Grand Canyon - Albuquerque Journal" .

www.abqjournal.com .

Archived from the original on July 11, 2022 . Retrieved July 11, 2022 .

^ Leveson, David.

"The Hypothesis of Differential Erosion" .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2011 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ Wesoloski, Catherine.

"The Pressure on Groundwater in the Grand Canyon" (PDF) .

UC Davis Center for Watershed Sciences .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2022 .

^ a b Knight, Jacob E.; Huntoon, Peter W. (2022).

Conceptual models of groundwater flow in the Grand Canyon region, Arizona: U.S. Geological Survey Scientific Investigation Report 2022–5037 (PDF) . U.S. Department of the Interior U.S. Geological Survey.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 19, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2022 .

^ Solder, John E.; Beisner, Kimberly R.; Anderson, Jessica; Bills, Don J. (August 1, 2020).

"Rethinking groundwater flow on the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, USA: characterizing recharge sources and flow paths with environmental tracers" .

Hydrogeology Journal .

28 (5): 1593– 1613.

Bibcode : 2020HydJ...28.1593S .

doi : 10.1007/s10040-020-02193-z .

ISSN 1435-0157 .

S2CID 220260022 .

^ "Mystery of Grand Canyon's water supply" .

ScienceDaily . January 23, 2020.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ Jones, Natalie A.; Hansen, Jered; Springer, Abraham E.; Valle, Cynthia; Tobin, Benjamin W. (December 2019).

"Modeling intrinsic vulnerability of complex karst aquifers: modifying the COP method to account for sinkhole density and fault location" .

Hydrogeology Journal .

27 (8): 2857– 2868.

Bibcode : 2019HydJ...27.2857J .

doi : 10.1007/s10040-019-02056-2 .

S2CID 207990859 .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ Congress, The Library of.

"LC Linked Data Service: Authorities and Vocabularies (Library of Congress)" .

id.loc.gov .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2020 . Retrieved December 25, 2020 .

^ "Anasazi" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Getting Started" .

The Ancestral Puebloans . Hewit Institute, University of Northern Colorado. Archived from the original on July 9, 2010 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b Tufts, Lorraine Salem (1998).

Secrets in The Grand Canyon, Zion and Bryce Canyon National Parks (Third ed.). North Palm Beach, Florida: National Photographic Collections. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-0962025532 .

^ "Kaibab National Forest" . USDA Forest Service. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009 . Retrieved January 4, 2007 .

^ McGregor, John Charles (1951).

The Cohonina culture of northwestern Arizona . University of Illinois Press. pp.

1–7 .

^ Whiting, A.F. (1985).

Havasupai Habitat . Tucson, Arizona: University of Arizona Press.

ISBN 978-0816508662 .

^ "Discovery of the Athabascan Origin of the Apache and Navajo Language" . Watkins, Thayer – San Jose State University.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2014 . Retrieved July 30, 2014 .

^ Courlander, Harold; Harmon, Daniel (1971).

The Fourth World of the Hopis .

UNM Press . p. 214.

ISBN 978-0826310118 .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved October 25, 2020 .

^ a b Stegner, Page (1994).

Grand Canyon, The Great Abyss . HarperCollins. p.

25 .

ISBN 978-0062585646 .

^ Kroeber, A. L.; Kroeber, Clifton B.; Euler, R. C.; Schreoder, A. H. (1964).

"The Route of James O. Pattie on the Colorado in 1826: A Reappraisal by A. L. Kroeber" .

Arizona and the West .

6 (2): 119– 136.

JSTOR 40167806 .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Hill, Joseph J. (1923).

"New light on Pattie and the southwestern fur trade" .

Southwestern Historical Quarterly .

26 (4).

Archived from the original on June 21, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "Canyon Club hosts presentation on Crossing of the Fathers" .

Lake Powell Chronicle . April 20, 2022.

Archived from the original on May 28, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ a b "Lee's Ferry Historic Site" .

The Page-Lake Powell Hub .

Archived from the original on May 19, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "Pearce Ferry" .

Western River Expeditions .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Stacey, May Humphreys (1929).

Uncle Sam's camels; the journal of May Humphreys Stacey supplemented by the report of Edward Fitzgerald Beale (1857–1858) edited by Lewis Burt Lesley . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 100.

Archived from the original on November 5, 2023 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Tabor, C C (1968).

The Ives Expedition of 1858 (PDF) . El Centro, Calif.: Imperial Irrigation District.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "The Colorado Exploring Expedition (Ives Expedition) (1857–1858)" .

Smithsonian Institution .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Anderson, Michael F.

"Rim to River and Inner Canyon Trails – Nature, Culture and History at the Grand Canyon" .

Grand Canyon History . Arizona State University.

Archived from the original on September 4, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Ives, Joseph C. (1861).

Report Upon the Colorado River of the West . U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Gilbert, Bil (1985).

Westering Man: The Life of Joseph Walker . University of Oklahoma Press. pp.

236– 238.

ISBN 978-0806119342 .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Chorley, Richard J. (1984).

Geomorphology before Davis . Methuen.

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved May 23, 2020 .

^ Stojka, Andre (October 7, 2015).

"Shipping a boat over land west in 1869" .

Listen2Read .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "Powell's 1869 Journey Down the Green and Colorado Rivers – Utah Geological Survey" .

Utah Geological Survey . August 29, 2019.

Archived from the original on August 13, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ a b c "Oramel G. Howland (1833–1869) Seneca B. Howland (1843–1869) William Dunn (? – 1869)" .

American Experience . PBS. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Ribokas, Bob.

"The Powell Expedition" .

Grand Canyon Explorer .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Waterman, Jonathan.

"Seeking Hard Desert Truth" (PDF) .

jonathanwaterman.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "John Wesley Powell's Undertakings" .

American Experience . PBS.

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ "John Wesley Powell" .

U.S. Geological Survey .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2022 . Retrieved June 21, 2022 .

^ Grand Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Etymonline.com ^ "Late Arrivals" .

The Geologic Story of Colorado National Monument . United States Geological Survey. Geological Survey Bulletin 1508. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved November 7, 2010 .

^ "Grand Canyon Facts" .

National Geographic Visitor Center, Arizona .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2016.

^ Billingsley, George; Spamer, Earle (January 1, 1997).

"Quest for the pillar of gold : The mines and miners of the Grand Canyon" .

Grand Canyon Association (Monograph No. 10) .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "William Wallace Bass Collection" .

Arizona Historical Society .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Drew, Dr Daryl (February 1, 2016).

"Louis Boucher: Canadian Guide of the Grand Canyon | Canadian Cowboy Country Magazine" .

Cowboy Country Magazine.com .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "Seth Tanner" .

All Hikers .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "Charles Spencer collection, 1910–1920 Spencer (Charles) collection" .

Arizona Archives Online .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "The Tunnels In Mooney Falls, Havasu Canyon" .

tchester.org .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "Lees Ferry History" .

Glen Canyon National Recreation Area (U.S. National Park Service) .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ St. John Stott, Graham (1978).

"Zane Grey and James Simpson Emmett" .

Brigham Young University Studies .

18 (4): 491– 503.

ISSN 0007-0106 .

JSTOR 43040779 .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Swanson, Frederick H. (2007).

Dave Rust : a life in the canyons . Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.

ISBN 978-0874809152 .

^ Berke, Arnold (2002).

Mary Colter, architect of the Southwest . New York: Princeton Architectural Press.

ISBN 978-1568983455 .

^ Grattan, Virginia L. (1992).

Mary Colter, builder upon the red earth . Grand Canyon, Arizona: Northland Press.

ISBN 978-0938216452 .

^ Sowards, Adam M. (July 31, 2019).

"The Man Who Tried to Claim the Grand Canyon" .

JSTOR Daily .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "The Kolb Brothers" .

Northern Arizona University Library .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ Sheldon, Charles.

"History of the Boone and Crockett Club" .

University of Montana Mansfield Library . Boone and Crockett Club.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2017 . Retrieved February 24, 2017 .

^ Denetclaw, Pauly (March 1, 2022).

"Colorado River, stolen by law" .

High Country News .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ Myers, A.L. (March 6, 2008).

"Three-Day Grand Canyon Flood Aims to Restore Ecosystem" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.

^ "On-going experiment in high-volume CO River releases from Glen Canyon Dam set | Arizona Department of Water Resources" .

Arizona Department of Water Resources . November 1, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Hager, Alex (May 4, 2022).

"Lake Powell water level: Feds announce measures to help Glen Canyon Dam hydropower" .

Cronkite News – Arizona PBS .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2022 . Retrieved June 23, 2022 .

^ a b "Grand Canyon National Park Weather" . April 27, 2016. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012.

^ "Flagstaff Weather Forecast Office" . National Weather Service.

Archived from the original on January 2, 2007 . Retrieved January 4, 2007 .

^ "Grand Canyon National Park Climate Summary" . Western Regional Climate Center.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2012 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ "Grand Canyon National Park Climate Summary" . Western Regional Climate Center.

Archived from the original on September 2, 2012 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ "Grand Canyon National Park Climate Summary" . Western Regional Climate Center.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2010 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ "Grand Canyon News Release – Fire Managers Prepare to Implement Several Prescribed Fires" (PDF) . March 8, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 29, 2010 . Retrieved April 11, 2012 .

^ "Project MOHAVE (Measurement of Haze and Visual Effects) Final Report" (PDF) . Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments (IMPROVE). March 19, 1999. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 19, 2006 . Retrieved April 16, 2012 .

^ a b "US Annual Spatial and Seasonal Patterns of PM2.5, Light Extinction and Contributions of Major Aerosol Types, 1996 – 1998" . Interagency Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments (IMPROVE). Archived from the original on August 1, 2010 . Retrieved June 27, 2011 .

Note: Air quality as represented by PM-2.5 is shown by clicking the canyon's location on the map and selecting 'Fine Mass' from dropdown box above the map. Visibility is shown by selecting 'Deciview' from the dropdown box.

^ "Air Quality at Grand Canyon National" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ "Park Air Profiles – Grand Canyon National Park" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ a b Nicla, Andrew (October 18, 2019).

"Will power plant's closure help clear the air, restore the view of Grand Canyon?" .

The Arizona Republic .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Brewer, Patricia; Moore, Tom (September 2009).

"Source Contributions to Visibility Impairment in the Southeastern and Western United States" .

Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association .

59 (9): 1070– 1081.

Bibcode : 2009JAWMA..59.1070B .

doi : 10.3155/1047-3289.59.9.1070 .

ISSN 1096-2247 .

PMID 19785274 .

S2CID 42362472 .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Air Quality in the National Parks (PDF) (2nd ed.). Lakewood, Colorado: National Park Service Air Resources Division. 2002.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 16, 2019 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ "Grand Canyon Breathtaking views" (PDF) .

National Park Service .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ William C. Malm, Air Resources Division, National Park Service (May 1999).

"Introduction to Visibility" (PDF) . Cooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere (CIRA), Colorado State University. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 11, 2012 . Retrieved May 28, 2011 .

^ "Recommendations for Improving Western Vistas, Report of the Grand Canyon Visibility Transport Commission to the United States Environmental Protection Agency" (PDF) . Western Regional Air Partnership. June 10, 1996.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2012 . Retrieved May 17, 2012 .

^ "Western Regional Air Partnership" .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2012 . Retrieved April 19, 2012 .

^ "Federal Register 40 CFR Part 51: Regional Haze Regulations and Guidelines for Best Available Retrofit Technology (BART) Determinations" (PDF) . United States Environmental Protection Agency. July 6, 2005.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 26, 2014 . Retrieved July 26, 2012 .

^ Mike Sundblom, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.

"RA BART (Reasonably Attributable Best Available Retrofit Technology) Case Study, Navajo Generating Station, Appendix C" . Western Regional Air Partnership.

Archived from the original on March 31, 2012 . Retrieved August 22, 2011 .

^ Reitze, Arnold W. Jr. (2019).

2019 Visibility Protection Under the Clean Air Act . SJ Quinney College of Law, University of Utah.

Archived from the original on May 27, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Green, Mark; Farber, Rob; Lien, Nghi; Gebhart, Kristi; Molenar, John; Iyer, Hari; Eatough, Delbert (November 1, 2005).

"The Effects of Scrubber Installation at the Navajo Generating Station on Particulate Sulfur and Visibility Levels in the Grand Canyon" .

Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association .

55 (11): 1675– 1682.

Bibcode : 2005JAWMA..55.1675G .

doi : 10.1080/10473289.2005.10464759 .

ISSN 1096-2247 .

PMID 16350365 .

S2CID 31615461 .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Hurlbut, David J.; Haase, Scott; Brinkman, Gregory; Funk, Kip; Gelman, Rachel; Lantz, Eric; Larney, Christina; Peterson, David; Worley, Christopher; Liebsch, Ed (2012).

Navajo Generating Station and Air Visibility Regulations: Alternatives and Impacts: Technical Report NREL/TP-6A20-53024 (PDF) . U.S. Department of Energy.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 25, 2012 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ "Revision of the Visibility FIP (Federal Implementation Plan) for Nevada (to include emissions reduction requirements for the Mohave Generating Station): Final Rule Fact Sheet" (PDF) . United States Environmental Protection Agency. June 6, 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved July 26, 2012 .

^ "Kaibab National Forest Fire Management Plan" (PDF) . U.S. Forest Service. January 31, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 27, 2014 . Retrieved July 30, 2012 .

^ "Grand Canyon National Park Fire Management Plan" . U.S. National Park Service. March 2012.

Archived from the original on March 1, 2013 . Retrieved July 30, 2012 .

^ a b "Grand Canyon National Park Climate Action Plan" (PDF) .

National Park Service .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 11, 2019.

^ "State of the Earth in Numbers" .

USAFacts .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2022 . Retrieved March 6, 2022 .

^ Xiao, Mu; Udall, Bradley; Lettenmaier, Dennis P. (September 2018).

"On the Causes of Declining Colorado River Streamflows" .

Water Resources Research .

54 (9): 6739– 6756.

Bibcode : 2018WRR....54.6739X .

doi : 10.1029/2018WR023153 .

S2CID 133694146 .

^ Childs, Jan Wesner (March 17, 2020).

"Climate Change Threatens Colorado River And the Water Supply for 40 Million People" .

The Weather Channel .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Milly, P. C. D.; Dunne, K. A. (March 13, 2020).

"Colorado River flow dwindles as warming-driven loss of reflective snow energizes evaporation" .

Science .

367 (6483): 1252– 1255.

Bibcode : 2020Sci...367.1252M .

doi : 10.1126/science.aay9187 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 32079679 .

S2CID 211233121 .

^ "Park Statistics – Grand Canyon National Park (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Grand Canyon National Park, AZ.

Archived from the original on February 28, 2015 . Retrieved March 6, 2022 .

^ Okun, Daniel A. (May 2000). "Water Reclamation and Unrestricted Nonpotable Reuse: A New Tool in Urban Water Management".

Annual Review of Public Health .

21 (1): 223– 245.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.21.1.223 .

ISSN 0163-7525 .

PMID 10884953 .

^ a b Repanshek, Kurt (May 9, 2019).

"Grand Canyon National Park Settles On Plan To Replace Transcanyon Water Pipeline" .

www.nationalparkstraveler.org .

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ a b O'Sullivan, Serena (May 23, 2019).

"Grand Canyon restricts water use after water pipeline damaged again" .

The Arizona Republic .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2022 . Retrieved June 24, 2022 .

^ Markovich, Katie (2015).

"Climate Change, Development, and Groundwater-Surface Water Interactions in Grand Canyon National Park" (PDF) .

University of California, Davis .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 27, 2022.

^ "Groundwater Decline and Depletion | U.S. Geological Survey" .

www.usgs.gov .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2022 . Retrieved March 25, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q This article incorporates public domain material from "Plants" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k This article incorporates public domain material from "Animals" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m This article incorporates public domain material from "Mammals" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ This article incorporates public domain material from "Endangered Fish" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c This article incorporates public domain material from "Amphibians" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ This article incorporates public domain material from "Crustaceans" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c d e This article incorporates public domain material from "Birds" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c d This article incorporates public domain material from "Insects, Spiders, Centipedes, Millipedes" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c This article incorporates public domain material from "Mollusks" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g This article incorporates public domain material from "Reptiles" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

National Park Service .

^ "Executive Summary of Grand Canyon Tourism" (PDF) . Northern Arizona University. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2010 . Retrieved January 4, 2007 .

^ "Operating Hours & Seasons – Grand Canyon National Park" .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2011.

^ "Grand Canyon Area Map" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 23, 2023 . Retrieved November 28, 2023 .

^ "Skywalk" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2013 . Retrieved March 19, 2013 .

^ Adam Nagourney (December 3, 2014).

"Where 2 Rivers Meet, Visions for Grand Canyon Clash" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2015 . Retrieved March 5, 2015 .

^ a b "Backcountry Permit" .

Grand Canyon National Park .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2010 . Retrieved October 22, 2010 .

^ Moorman, Robert W. " Noise in the Parks " AHS International , 2015.

Source Archived February 20, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Navajo Nation Votes Down Controversial Hotel and Tram Project at Grand Canyon" .

NBC News . November 1, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 25, 2021 . Retrieved April 24, 2021 .

^ The Active Times (August 9, 2016).

"How Many People Die in the Grand Canyon and is it Becoming Too Dangerous?" .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2017.

^ Citylab (May 26, 2015).

"This Grim Map Shows How People Have Died at the Grand Canyon" .

Bloomberg.com .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2017.

^ Ghiglieri, Michael P.; Myers, Thomas M. (2001).

Over the Edge: Death in Grand Canyon . Puma Press.

ISBN 978-0970097316 .

^ Burkitt, Bree (April 10, 2019).

"Falls, heat and murder: What's really killing people at the Grand Canyon" .

The Arizona Republic . Archived from the original on March 28, 2022 . Retrieved April 2, 2025 .

^ Ackley, Madeline (October 3, 2020).

"Former MLB player suspected of killing ex-girlfriend found dead of self-inflicted gunshot wound" .

Arizona Republic .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2024 . Retrieved July 7, 2021 – via azcentral.com.

External links Grand Canyon at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage External image Public domain images at the Wayback Machine (archived August 30, 2010) from the National Park Service .

Grand Canyon National Park Service Grand Canyon Backcountry Use Areas – Map Geographic data related to Grand Canyon at OpenStreetMap History Grand Canyon Bibliography Archived January 17, 2016, at the Wayback Machine – bibliography of the Grand Canyon. 37,462 items produced between 1540 and the present.

Grand Canyon Explorer: History timeline from 10,000 years ago to 1994.

Travel and sites Grand Canyon Chamber & Visitor's Bureau 36 Hours at the Grand Canyon by The New York Times , May 31, 2009 Multimedia NPS Photographs Grand Canyon 3-D perspective – view looking southwesterly, showing North Rim and Canyon.

Grand Canyon – Street View – Google Maps v t e Grand Canyon Facilities Black Suspension Bridge Bridge Canyon Dam Grand Canyon National Park Grand Canyon West Grand Canyon Skywalk Grand Canyon Village, Arizona Kolb Studio Marble Canyon Dam Maswik Lodge Phantom Ranch Geology Agave phillipsiana Apollo Temple Bat Cave mine Cardenas Basalt Dox Formation Ericameria arizonica Esplanade Sandstone Grand Canyon Caverns Grand Canyon Forest Reserve Grand Canyon–Parashant National Monument Grand Canyon Supergroup Chuar Group Nankoweap Formation Sixtymile Formation Unkar Group Bass Formation Shinumo Quartzite Grand Staircase Freya Castle Hakatai Shale Hermit Formation Hyaloclastite Dam Isis Temple Kanab Plateau Newton Butte Ochoa Point Prospect Dam Redwall Limestone Tanner Graben Temple Butte Tonto Group Bright Angel Shale Toroweap Fault Uinkaret volcanic field Vasey's Paradise Venus Temple Vishnu Temple Vulcan's Throne Bodies of water Colorado River Deer Creek Havasu Creek Havasu Falls Kanab Creek Little Colorado River Bright Angel Creek People Harvey Butchart Colin Fletcher Kenton Grua John Hance Tribes Havasupai Hualapai Events Powell Geographic Expedition of 1869 1956 Grand Canyon mid-air collision Grand Canyon Airlines Flight 6 Related Grand Canyon Backcountry Camping List of trails in Grand Canyon National Park National Register of Historic Places listings in Grand Canyon National Park Grand Canyon Conservancy Grand Canyon Suite Desert Wonderland Grand Canyon (1958 film) A Bigger Grand Canyon (1998 painting) Grand Canyon (2017 children's book) The Man Who Walked Through Time Grand Canyon: The Hidden Secrets Grand Canyon: A Different View Grand Canyon Escalade v t e State of Arizona Phoenix (capital) Topics Agriculture Geography Government Constitution Governor Legislature Index Congressional Delegations Senators Representatives Museums Music Native Americans People Symbols Tourist attractions Transportation Society Abortion Climate change Culture Crime Demographics Economy Education Elections Gun laws LGBTQ rights Politics Homelessness Regions Arizona Strip Arizona Sun Corridor Coconino Plateau Colorado Plateau Grand Canyon Kaibab Plateau Mogollon Plateau Mogollon Rim Mojave Desert Monument Valley North Central Arizona Northeast Arizona Northern Arizona Oak Creek Canyon Phoenix Metropolitan Area Safford area San Francisco Volcanic Field Sonoran Desert Southern Arizona Traditional Arizona Transition zone Verde Valley White Mountains Counties Apache Cochise Coconino Gila Graham Greenlee La Paz Maricopa Mohave Navajo Pima Pinal Santa Cruz Yavapai Yuma Cities Avondale Buckeye Bullhead City Casa Grande Chandler Flagstaff Gilbert Glendale Goodyear Kingman Lake Havasu City Mesa Peoria Phoenix Prescott Scottsdale Surprise Sierra Vista Tempe Tucson Yuma History Arizona Territory Aztec Land & Cattle Company Battle of Ambos Nogales Hualapai War Mohave War Pah-Ute County Sheep wars Sitgreaves Expedition Territorial evolution Timeline Mesa Phoenix Tucson World War II Women's suffrage Arizona portal v t e Colorado River system Jurisdictions United States Arizona California Colorado Nevada New Mexico Utah Wyoming Mexico Baja California Sonora Canyons Byers Canyon Gore Canyon Red Gorge Glenwood Canyon De Beque Canyon Horsethief Canyon Ruby Canyon Westwater Canyon Cataract Canyon Narrow Canyon Glen Canyon Grand Canyon Marble Canyon Granite Gorge Middle Granite Gorge Lower Granite Gorge Grand Wash Canyon Iceberg Canyon Virgin Canyon Boulder Canyon Black Canyon Pyramid Canyon Mohave Canyon Natural features River course Rocky Mountains Colorado River Basin Colorado Plateau Grand Lake Horseshoe Bend Sonoran Desert Mojave Desert Lower Colorado River Valley Mohave Valley Parker Valley Palo Verde Valley Colorado Desert Alamo River New River Salton Sea Imperial Valley Delta Montague Island Gulf of California/Sea of Cortez Tributaries Blue River Dirty Devil River Dolores River Escalante River Eagle River Fraser River Gila River Green River Gunnison River Kanab Creek Little Colorado River Paria River Roaring Fork River San Juan River Thunder River / Tapeats Creek Virgin River Las Vegas Wash Williams Fork Río Hardy Engineering Mainstem dams Shadow Mountain Granby Windy Gap Grand Valley Price-Stubb Glen Canyon Hoover Davis Parker Headgate Rock Palo Verde Imperial Laguna Morelos Major reservoirs Fontenelle Reservoir Flaming Gorge Reservoir Blue Mesa Reservoir Navajo Lake Lake Powell Lake Mead Lake Mohave Lake Havasu Imperial Reservoir Theodore Roosevelt Lake San Carlos Lake Aqueducts and canals Grand Ditch Colorado River Aqueduct San Diego Aqueduct Central Arizona Project All-American Canal Alamo Canal Coachella Canal Water projects Boulder Canyon Project Colorado–Big Thompson Project Colorado River Storage Project Grand Valley AVA Yuma Project Designated areas Arches National Park Canyonlands National Park Colorado National Monument Dead Horse Point State Park Glen Canyon National Recreation Area Grand Canyon National Park Lake Mead National Recreation Area Rocky Mountain National Park Related topics Arizona v. California Colorado River Board of California Colorado River Compact Floyd Dominy Lee's Ferry International Boundary and Water Commission Metropolitan Water District of Southern California Rapids and features U.S. Bureau of Reclamation William Mulholland v t e Woodrow Wilson 28th President of the United States (1913–1921) 34th Governor of New Jersey (1911–1913) 13th President of Princeton University (1902–1910) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition 1913 inauguration 1917 inauguration Roosevelt desk Judicial appointments Supreme Court nominees Louis Brandeis Supreme Court nomination Cabinet 1919 Nobel Peace Prize 19th Amendment Silent Sentinels Woman Suffrage Procession State of the Union Address 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1920 Harding transition Foreign policy Wilsonianism Bryan–Chamorro Treaty (1914) Occupation of Haiti (1915–1934) Occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–1924) Army Appropriations Act of 1916 Council of National Defense Philippine Autonomy Act (1916) World War I 1917–1918; entry campaigns home front Committee on Public Information Four Minute Men Fourteen Points The Inquiry American Commission to Negotiate Peace Armistice of 11 November 1918 Espionage Act of 1917 Immigration Act of 1917 Selective Service Act of 1917 Immigration Act of 1918 Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 National War Labor Board (1918) Sedition Act of 1918 Wartime Measure Act of 1918 Paris Peace Conference 1919–1920; Racial Equality Proposal Pueblo speech (1919) Treaty of Versailles 1919; Big Four League of Nations 1920; charter Wilsonian Armenia (1920) New Freedom Federal racial segregation Federal Reserve Act 1913; Federal Reserve Newlands Labor Act 1913; Board of Mediation and Conciliation Raker Act (1913) Revenue Act of 1913 Federal income tax Rivers and Harbors Acts 1913 1914 1915 1916 Sabath Act (1913) Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 Cotton Futures Act of 1914 Cutter Service Act (1914) Emergency Internal Revenue Tax Act (1914) Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 Federal Trade Commission Glacier National Park Act of 1914 Legislative Reference Service (1914) Smith–Lever Act of 1914 War Risk Insurance Act (1914) Locomotive Inspection Act (1915) National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (1915) Occupancy Permits Act (1915) Adamson Act (1916) Brush Disposal Act of 1916 Cotton Futures Act of 1916 Federal Aid Road Act of 1916 Federal Employees' Compensation Act (1916) Federal Farm Loan Act 1916; Farm Credit System Federal Farm Loan Board Flag Day (1916) Fraudulent Advertising Act of 1916 Keating–Owen Act (1916) National Park Service Organic Act 1916; National Park Service Revenue Act of 1916 Rural Post Roads Act of 1916 Smith Act (1916) Stock-Raising Homestead Act (1916) United States Grain Standards Act of 1916 Warehouse Act of 1916 Wildlife Game Refuges Act of 1916 Flood Control Act of 1917 Smith–Hughes Act 1917; U.S. Federal Board for Vocational Education United States Railroad Administration 1917; USRA standard War Revenue Act of 1917 Revenue Act of 1918 Acadia National Park Act of 1919 Grand Canyon Park Act of 1919 Red Summer (1919) Wheat Price Guarantee Act (1919) Esch–Cummins Act 1920; Railroad Labor Board Federal Power Act 1920; Federal Power Commission Merchant Marine Act of 1920 Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 Life Birthplace and Presidential Library papers and manuscripts Boyhood home in Georgia Boyhood home in South Carolina Princeton University president Summer White House (Harlakenden Shadow Lawn) Woodrow Wilson House Gravesite Books Congressional Government (1900) When a Man Comes to Himself (1901) The New Freedom (1913) Elections 1910 New Jersey gubernatorial election 1912 Democratic National Convention 1912 U.S. presidential election 1916 Democratic National Convention 1916 U.S. presidential election Legacy ( memorials ) Bibliography Woodrow Wilson Awards Woodrow Wilson Foundation Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars The Wilson Quarterly Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs High schools Woodrow Wilson Junior College Celestial Sphere Woodrow Wilson Memorial Woodrow Wilson (Austin statue) Wilson Square (Warsaw) Woodrow Wilson Monument (Prague) Woodrow Wilson Bridge Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation Mount Wilson (Vermont) SS President Wilson U.S. Postage stamps United States one-hundred-thousand-dollar bill Popular culture Wilson (1944 film) Profiles in Courage (1965 series) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Woodrow Wilson and the Birth of the American Century (2002 documentary) Wilson (2013 book) Suffs (2022 musical) Family Ellen Axson Wilson (wife, 1885–1914, death) Edith Bolling Wilson (wife, 1915–1924) Margaret Wilson (daughter, acting first lady) Jessie Wilson Sayre (daughter) Eleanor Wilson McAdoo (daughter) Francis Sayre Jr.

(grandson) Joseph Ruggles Wilson (father) James Wilson (grandfather) Helen Woodrow Bones (cousin, secretary) William McAdoo (son-in-law) Related Progressive Era Jefferson Literary and Debating Society Woodrow Wilson and race ← William Howard Taft Warren G. Harding → Category Authority control databases International VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xjlr4
Cached time: 20250817044450
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.905 seconds
Real time usage: 2.226 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15231/1000000
Revision size: 123726/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 512866/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18113/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 602484/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.192/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22597281/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1813.907      1 -total
 56.14% 1018.385      2 Template:Reflist
 16.09%  291.786     64 Template:Cite_web
 12.42%  225.224      2 Template:Infobox
 12.07%  218.867      1 Template:Infobox_valley
 11.09%  201.175     20 Template:Cite_journal
  7.52%  136.397     43 Template:If_empty
  7.02%  127.411     22 Template:Cite_book
  6.38%  115.747     21 Template:Cite_news
  5.48%   99.404     11 Template:NPS Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:46989:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044450 and revision id 1304347347. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grand_Canyon&oldid=1304347347 " Categories : Grand Canyon Grand Canyon National Park Canyons and gorges of Arizona Colorado Plateau Colorado River Landforms of Coconino County, Arizona Landforms of Mohave County, Arizona Physiographic sections Southwestern United States First 100 IUGS Geological Heritage Sites Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Hopi-language text Articles containing Yavapai-language text Articles containing Navajo-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the National Park Service Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use mdy dates from July 2017 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 1999 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 13:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Grand Canyon 110 languages Add topic

