Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents East Indies 56 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Кыргызча Latviešu Македонски Malagasy मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 1°00′N 103°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.000°N 103.000°E ﻿ / 1.000; 103.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical term referring to non-Burmese Southeast Asia "Indies" redirects here. For other uses, see Indies (disambiguation) .

For other uses, see East Indies (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with East India .

A 1606 map of the East Indies An 1801 map of the East Indies East Indies Indies ( Indian subcontinent and Myanmar ) Western New Guinea West Indies (present-day; historically included the Americas entirely) Countries sometimes included in West Indies The East Indies (or simply the Indies ) is a term used in historical narratives of the Age of Discovery . The Indies broadly referred to various lands in the East or the Eastern Hemisphere , particularly the islands and mainlands found in and around the Indian Ocean by Portuguese explorers , soon after the Cape Route was discovered. In a narrow sense, the term was used to refer to the Malay Archipelago , which today comprises the Philippine Archipelago , Indonesian Archipelago , Borneo , and New Guinea . Historically, the term was used in the Age of Discovery to refer to the coasts of the landmasses comprising the Indian subcontinent and the Indochinese Peninsula along with the Malay Archipelago .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) During the era of European colonization , territories of the Spanish Empire in Asia were known as the Spanish East Indies for 333 years before the American conquest and later the independence of the Philippines .

Dutch occupied colonies in the area were known for about 300 years as the Dutch East Indies until Indonesian independence . The East Indies may also include the former French Indochina , former British territories Brunei , Hong Kong and Singapore and former Portuguese Macau and Timor . It does not, however, include the former Dutch New Guinea , which is geographically considered to be part of Melanesia .

The inhabitants of the East Indies are never called East Indians , as they are not linguistically related to South Asia, most specifically the Indo-Aryan languages . It distinguishes them both from inhabitants of the Caribbean (which is also called the West Indies ) and from the indigenous peoples of the Americas who are often called American Indians . However, in colonial times, the non-Indian Southeast Asians were also called "Indians".

Peoples of the East Indies comprise a wide variety of cultural diversity, and the inhabitants do not consider themselves as belonging to a single ethnic group . The region is mostly populated by the Austronesians , who first expanded from the island of Taiwan , and later on during the early modern period , when East Asians such as the Han Chinese started to migrate south and became known as the Peranakans or Straits Chinese.

Buddhism , Christianity , Islam and Hinduism are the most popular religions throughout the region, while Sikhism , Jainism , Chinese folk religion and various other traditional beliefs and practices are also prominent in some areas. The major languages in this area draw from a wide variety of language families such as the Austronesian and Sino-Tibetan languages , and should not be confused with the term Indo-Aryan , a group of languages spoken in the Indian subcontinent . Speakers of Austroasiatic , Tai–Kadai , and Hmong–Mien languages also live in the region.

Regions of the East Indies are sometimes known by the colonial empire they once belonged to, hence, Spanish East Indies means the Philippines , Dutch East Indies means Indonesia , and British East Indies refers to Malaysia .

Historically, the king of Abyssinia (modern Ethiopia ) was identified with " Prester John of the Indies", since that part of the world was imagined to be one of "Three Indias".

History [ edit ] Batavia , Dutch East Indies .

Exploration of the East Indies by European powers began in the last three years of the 15th century and continued into the 16th century, led by the Portuguese explorers .

[ 4 ] The Portuguese described the entire region they discovered as the Indies . Eventually, the region would be broken up into a series of Indies : The East Indies, which was also called "Old Indies" or "Great Indies", consisting of India , and the West Indies, also called "New Indies" or "Little Indies", consisting of the Americas .

[ 5 ] These regions were important sources of trading goods, particularly cotton , indigo and spices after the establishment of European trading companies: the British East India Company and Dutch East India Company , among others, in the 17th century.

The New World was initially thought to be the easternmost part of the Indies by explorer Christopher Columbus , who had grossly underestimated the westerly distance from Europe to Asia. Later, to avoid confusion, the New World came to be called the "West Indies", while the original Indies came to be called the "East Indies".

The designation East Indian was once primarily used to describe people of all of the East Indies, in order to avoid the potential confusion from the term American Indian who were once simply referred to as Indians (see the Native American name controversy for more information).

See also [ edit ] West Indies Spanish East Indies Dutch East Indies List of governors of the Dutch East Indies Insulindia Portuguese East Indies French Indochina List of governors-general of the Philippines Global Southeast , largely coterminous with historic meaning of East Indies Greater Philippines Straits Settlements List of governors of the Straits Settlements Malayness Bumiputera Pribumi Malay world Malay Archipelago Malay race Maphilindo Maritime Southeast Asia Nusantara Greater Indonesia History of the Americas References [ edit ] ^ "A map of the East-Indies and the adjacent countries, with the settlements, factories and territories, explaning [sic] what belongs to England, Spain, France, Holland, Denmark, Portugal & c with many remarks not extant in any other map" . 1720.

^ "East Indies | islands, Southeast Asia | Britannica" .

^ "East Indies | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

^ "The Present State of the West-Indies: Containing an Accurate Description of What Parts Are Possessed by the Several Powers in Europe" .

World Digital Library . 1778 . Retrieved 2013-08-30 .

^ Kitchin, Thomas (1778).

The Present State of the West-Indies: Containing an Accurate Description of What Parts Are Possessed by the Several Powers in Europe . London: R. Baldwin. p. 3.

v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Countries and territories in Southeast Asia Sovereign states Brunei Cambodia East Timor Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Dependent territories Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX 1°00′N 103°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 1.000°N 103.000°E ﻿ / 1.000; 103.000 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=East_Indies&oldid=1275701492 " Categories : Archipelagoes of Southeast Asia Archipelagoes of the Pacific Ocean Maritime Southeast Asia Regions of Asia European colonisation in Asia Geography of Southeast Asia Historical regions Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents East Indies 56 languages Add topic

