Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Africa 1.1.1 Central Africa 1.1.2 Ethiopia 1.2 Asia 1.2.1 China 1.2.2 India 1.2.3 Japan 1.3 Europe 1.3.1 Albania 1.3.2 Austria-Hungary 1.3.3 France 1.3.4 Germany 1.3.5 Italy 1.3.6 Liechtenstein 1.3.7 Norway 1.3.8 Russia 1.3.9 Spain 1.3.10 United Kingdom 1.3.11 Vatican City State 1.4 North America 1.4.1 Canada 1.4.2 Costa Rica 1.4.3 Honduras 1.4.4 Mexico 1.4.5 Nicaragua 1.4.6 United States 1.5 South America 1.5.1 Brazil 2 Current monarchies 3 Political philosophy Toggle Political philosophy subsection 3.1 Non-partisanship 3.2 Private interest 3.3 Wise counsel 3.4 Long termism 3.5 Civil war reduction 3.6 Liberty 3.7 Natural desire for hierarchy 3.8 Political accountability 3.9 Notable works 4 Support for monarchy Toggle Support for monarchy subsection 4.1 Current monarchies 4.2 Former monarchies 4.3 Notable monarchists 4.3.1 Arts and entertainment 4.3.2 Clergy 4.3.3 Philosophy 4.3.4 Politics 4.4 Monarchist movements and parties 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Monarchism 50 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova La .lojban.

Lombard Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Advocacy of a monarch or monarchical rule Not to be confused with Monarchianism , Monorchism , or Minarchism .

Absolute monarchies Semi-constitutional monarchies Parliamentary monarchies Commonwealth realms (parliamentary monarchies in personal union ) Subnational monarchies Part of the Politics series Monarchy Central concepts Monarch Monarchism Divine right of kings Mandate of Heaven Royal prerogative Types Abdication system Absolute Chinese Legalist Composite Constitutional Crowned republic Diarchy Dual Duchy Grand Dynastic union Elective Emirate Ethnarch Federal Hereditary Khanate Lordship Non-sovereign Pentarchy Personal union Popular Principality Real union Regency Coregency Self-proclaimed Signoria Tetrarch Triarchy Universal Philosophy Philosophers Aquinas Dante Bodin Bellarmine Filmer Hobbes Bossuet Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Novalis Balzac Crétineau-Joly Gogol Cortés Balmes Kierkegaard Dostoevsky Youwei Maurras Bainville Seca Evola Kuehnelt-Leddihn Bogdanor Scruton Hoppe Yarvin Works De Regno (1265-1266) Monarchia (1313) Les Six livres de la République (1576) Leviathan (1651) Patriarcha (1680) Considerations on France (1796) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) Politicians Mazarin Pius VI Ruffo Consalvi Plessis Metternich Villèle Polignac Decazes Disraeli Cortés Castillo Bismarck Mella Maurras Metaxas Churchill Renouvin Zhirinovsky Popescu-Tăriceanu Zourabichvili History Birth of the Roman Empire Magna Carta Foundation of the Ottoman Empire Tsarist autocracy Birth of the Dutch Republic Glorious Revolution French Revolution Establishment of the Dutch monarchy Trienio Liberal First French Empire Liberal Wars Second French Empire Unification of Italy Meiji Restoration Austro-Hungarian Compromise German unification 5 October 1910 Revolution Proclamation of the Republic in Brazil Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution Siamese revolution of 1932 Birth of the Italian Republic Spanish transition to democracy Iranian Revolution Modern Cambodia Nepalese Civil War Polity Aristocracy Autocracy Oligarchy Administration Court Appointment Great Officers Household Retinue Camarilla Courtier Favourite Royal guard Privy council Crown Council Makhzen Riksråd Royal assent Related ideologies Conservatism Authoritarian Traditionalist Despotism Enlightened absolutism Legal despotism Noblesse oblige Royalism National variants Brazil Canada France Bonapartism Legitimism Ultra-royalist Orléanism Georgia Germany Bavaria Iran Low Countries Belgium Dutch Republic Netherland Luxembourg Mexico Portugal Miguelism Romania Russia Serbia Spain Alfonsism Carlism United States United Kingdom Jacobitism Toryism High Uruguay Related topics Coronation Criticism Dynasty Lists Family Consort Descent Family trees Illegitimate Emperor system of Japan Figurehead Heir apparent presumptive Kingmaker List of monarchies Current Former Non-sovereign Nobility Peerage Realm Philosopher king Pretender List Rank Realm Empire Reich Regicide Regnal list Regnal number Sovereign Style Succession Anti-king Crisis Interregnum Rebellion War Usurper list Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e Monarchism is the advocacy of the system of monarchy or monarchical rule.

[ 1 ] A monarchist is an individual who supports this form of government independently of any specific monarch, whereas one who supports a particular monarch is a royalist . Conversely, the opposition to monarchical rule is referred to as republicanism .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Depending on the country, a royalist may advocate for the rule of the person who sits on the throne, a regent , a pretender , or someone who would otherwise occupy the throne but has been deposed.

History [ edit ] Monarchical rule is among the oldest political institutions.

[ 5 ] The similar form of societal hierarchy known as chiefdom or tribal kingship is prehistoric. Chiefdoms provided the concept of state formation, which started with civilizations such as Mesopotamia , Ancient Egypt and the Indus Valley civilization .

[ 6 ] In some parts of the world, chiefdoms became monarchies.

[ 7 ] Monarchs have generally ceded power in the modern era, having substantially diminished since World War I and World War II . This process can be traced back to the 18th century, when Voltaire and others encouraged " enlightened absolutism ", which was embraced by the Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II and by Catherine II of Russia .

[ citation needed ] In the 17th and 18th centuries the Enlightenment began.

[ 8 ] This resulted in new anti-monarchist ideas [ 9 ] which resulted in several revolutions such as the 18th century American Revolution and the French Revolution which were both additional steps in the weakening of power of European monarchies. Each in its different way exemplified the concept of popular sovereignty upheld by Jean-Jacques Rousseau . 1848 ushered in a wave of revolutions against the continental European monarchies.

World War I and its aftermath saw the end of three major European monarchies: the Russian Romanov dynasty, the German Hohenzollern dynasty, including all other German monarchies, and the Austro-Hungarian Habsburg dynasty.

[ citation needed ] With the arrival of communism in Eastern Europe by the end of 1947, the remaining Eastern European monarchies, namely the Kingdom of Romania , the Kingdom of Hungary , the Kingdom of Albania , the Kingdom of Bulgaria , and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , were all abolished and replaced by socialist republics .

Africa [ edit ] Central Africa [ edit ] In 1966, the Central African Republic was overthrown at the hands of Jean-Bédel Bokassa during the Saint-Sylvestre coup d'état . He established the Central African Empire in 1976 and ruled as Emperor Bokassa I until 1979, when he was subsequently deposed during Operation Caban and Central Africa returned to republican rule.

[ citation needed ] Ethiopia [ edit ] In 1974, one of the world's oldest monarchies was abolished in Ethiopia with the fall of Emperor Haile Selassie .

[ 10 ] Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] Main article: Dynasties of China For most of its history, China was organized into various dynastic states under the rule of hereditary monarchs . Beginning with the establishment of dynastic rule by Yu the Great c.

2070 BC , and ending with the abdication of the Xuantong Emperor in AD 1912, Chinese historiography came to organize itself around the succession of monarchical dynasties.

[ a ] [ b ] Besides those established by the dominant Han ethnic group or its spiritual Huaxia predecessors, dynasties throughout Chinese history were also founded by non-Han peoples.

[ 16 ] India [ edit ] In India, monarchies recorded history of thousands of years before the country was declared a republic in 1950. King George VI had previously been the last Emperor of India until August 1947, when the British Raj dissolved.

Karan Singh served as the last prince regent of Jammu and Kashmir until November 1952.

[ citation needed ] Japan [ edit ] Enthronement ceremony of Emperor Naruhito in 2019 Main article: Emperor of Japan The emperor of Japan or Tennō ( 天皇 ; pronounced [tennoꜜː] ) , literally " ruler from heaven " or " heavenly sovereign ", [ 17 ] [ c ] is the hereditary monarch and head of state of Japan . The Imperial Household Law governs the line of imperial succession . The emperor is personally immune from prosecution [ 19 ] and is also recognized as the head of the Shinto religion, which holds the emperor to be the direct descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu . According to tradition, the office of emperor was created in the 7th century BC, but modern scholars believe that the first emperors did not appear until the 5th or 6th centuries AD .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] During the Kamakura period from 1185 to 1333, the shōguns were the de facto rulers of Japan, with the emperor and the imperial court acting as figureheads .

[ 22 ] In 1867, shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu stepped down, restoring Emperor Meiji to power.

[ 23 ] The Meiji Constitution was adopted In 1889, after which the emperor became an active ruler with considerable political power that was shared with the Imperial Diet .

[ 24 ] After World War II , the 1947 Constitution of Japan was enacted, defining the emperor as the symbol of the Japanese state and the unity of the Japanese people.

[ 25 ] The emperor has exercised a purely ceremonial role ever since.

[ 26 ] Europe [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Europe Ideologies Christian democracy Christian right Counter-revolution Counter-enlightenment Integralism Liberal conservatism Economic Ordo Monarchism New Right Nouvelle Droite One-nation conservatism Perennialism Postliberalism Radical conservatism Toryism Principles Chivalry Christian values Civilizational impact Protestant work ethic Cultural heritage Culture of life Pro-Life Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnofuturism Ethnic pluralism Europe of 100 Flags Familialism Gender roles Complementarianism Law and order Medievalism Monarchism Royalism Opposition to immigration Ordered liberty Organicism Paideia Pan-European identity Euroscepticism Nationalist Federalist Patriotism Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty State religion Subsidiarity Tradition Metamodern Western values Occidentalism Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Haller Chateaubriand Coleridge Savigny Carlyle Newman Tocqueville Cortés Taine Le Bon Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Gini Schmitt Jünger Evola Röpke Oakeshott Voegelin Lefebvre Eliade Kuehnelt-Leddihn Fouéré Koselleck Ye'or Scruton Hitchens Dugin Peterson Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Christianity or Europe (1799) Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1798) The Genius of Christianity (1802) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) The Concept of the Political (1932) " The Peace " (1943) The Death of the West (2001) While Europe Slept (2006) Reflections on the Revolution in Europe (2009) We Are Doomed (2009) How to Be a Conservative (2014) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Politicians Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Salazar De Gaulle Franco von Coudenhove-Kalergi Powell von Habsburg Thatcher Kohl Fortuyn Putin Orbán Wilders Meloni Organizations Center for European Renewal Centrist Democrat International Edmund Burke Stichting European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance European Democrats Europe of Sovereign Nations Group Europe of Sovereign Nations (party) European Conservatives and Reformists Group European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party European People's Party Group International Monarchist League Libertas.eu The Movement Movement for European Reform NatCon Patriots for Europe Pegida Stop Islamisation of Europe Media The European Conservative EU Le Figaro (Fr) ' Nouvelle École (FR) ' NZZ (CH) Personal variants Berlusconism Bonapartism Cameronism Fortuynism Francoism Gaullism Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Putinism Sarkozysm Thatcherism National variants Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Russia Serbia Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Historical background Ancien Régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment Counter-revolution German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related topics Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Demographic futures Eurabia Great Replacement Population decline Sub-replacement fertility Educational inflation Elite overproduction Historism Intelligence and public policy Managerial state Metapolitics Movements Counter-jihad Men's movement Men's rights Multiculturalism and Islam Muslim immigration ban Remigration Conservatism portal Politics portal Europe portal v t e Albania [ edit ] The last separate monarchy to take root in Europe, Albania began its recognised modern existence as a principality (1914) and became a kingdom after a republican interlude in 1925–1928. Since 1945 the country has operated as an independent republic. The Albanian Democratic Monarchist Movement Party (founded in 2004) and the Legality Movement Party (founded in 1924) advocate restoration of the House of Zogu as monarchs—the concept has gained little electoral support.

[ citation needed ] Austria-Hungary [ edit ] Main article: Monarchism in German-speaking countries Following the collapse of Austria-Hungary, the Republic of German-Austria was proclaimed. The Constitutional Assembly of German Austria passed the Habsburg Law , which permanently exiled the Habsburg family from Austria. Despite this, significant support for the Habsburg family persisted in Austria. Following the Anschluss of 1938, the Nazi government suppressed monarchist activities. By the time Nazi rule ended in Austria, support for monarchism had largely evaporated.

[ 27 ] In Hungary, the rise of the Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919 provoked an increase in support for monarchism; however, efforts by Hungarian monarchists failed to bring back a royal head of state, and the monarchists settled for a regent , Admiral Miklós Horthy , to represent the monarchy until the throne could be re-occupied. Horthy ruled as regent from 1920 to 1944. During his regency, attempts were made by Karl von Habsburg ( r.

1916–1918 ) to return to the Hungarian throne, which ultimately failed. Following Karl's death in 1922, his claim to the Kingdom of Hungary was inherited by Otto von Habsburg (1912–2011), although no further attempts were made to take the Hungarian throne.

[ citation needed ] France [ edit ] Main article: List of French monarchs Louis Philippe I being sworn in as King France was ruled by monarchs from the establishment of the Kingdom of West Francia in 843 until the end of the Second French Empire in 1870, with several interruptions.

Classical French historiography usually regards Clovis I , King of the Franks ( r.

507–511 ), as the first king of France. However, historians today consider that such a kingdom did not begin until the establishment of West Francia , during the dissolution of the Carolingian Empire in the 800s.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: Monarchism in German-speaking countries In 1920s Germany, a number of monarchists gathered around the German National People's Party (founded in 1918), which demanded the return of the Hohenzollern monarchy and an end to the Weimar Republic ; the party retained a large base of support until the rise of Nazism in the 1930s, as Adolf Hitler staunchly opposed monarchism.

[ 30 ] Italy [ edit ] The aftermath of World War II saw the return of monarchist/republican rivalry in Italy , where a referendum was held on whether the state should remain a monarchy or become a republic. The republican side won the vote by a narrow margin, and the modern Republic of Italy was created.

[ 31 ] Liechtenstein [ edit ] Main article: Monarchism in German-speaking countries There have been 16 monarchs of the Principality of Liechtenstein since 1608. The current Prince of Liechtenstein, Hans-Adam II , has reigned since 1989. In 2003, during a referendum , 64.3% of the population voted to increase the power of the prince.

[ citation needed ] Norway [ edit ] The position of King of Norway has existed continuously since the unification of Norway in 872. Following the dissolution of union with Sweden and the abdication of King Oscar II of Sweden as King of Norway, the 1905 Norwegian monarchy referendum saw 78.94% of Norway's voters approving the government's proposition to invite Prince Carl of Denmark to become their new king. Following the vote, the prince then accepted the offer, becoming King Haakon VII .

[ citation needed ] In 2022, the Norwegian parliament held a vote on abolishing the monarchy and replacing it with a republic. The proposal failed, with a 134–35 result in favor of retaining the monarchy. The idea was highly controversial in Norway, as the vote was spearheaded by the sitting Minister of Culture and Equality , who had sworn an oath of loyalty to King Harald V of Norway the previous year. Additionally, when polls were conducted, it was found that 84% of the Norwegian public supported the monarchy, with only 16% unsure or against the monarchy.

[ citation needed ] Russia [ edit ] Monarchy in the Russian Empire collapsed in March 1917, following the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II . Parts of the White movement , and in particular émigrés and their Supreme Monarchical Council [ ru ] (founded in 1921 and now based in Canada) continued to advocate for monarchy as "the sole path to the rebirth of Russia". In the modern era, a minority of Russians, including Vladimir Zhirinovsky (1946–2022), have openly advocated for a restoration of the Russian monarchy .

Grand Duchess Maria Vladimirovna is widely considered the valid heir to the throne, in the event that a restoration occurs.

Other pretenders and their supporters dispute her claim.

Spain [ edit ] In 1868, Queen Isabella II of Spain was deposed during the Spanish Glorious Revolution . The Duke of Aosta , an Italian prince, was invited to rule and replace Isabella. He did so for a three-year period, reigning as Amadeo I before abdicating in 1873, resulting in the establishment of the First Spanish Republic . The republic lasted less than two years, and was overthrown during a coup by General Arsenio Martínez Campos . Campos restored the Bourbon monarchy under Isabella II's more popular son, Alfonso XII .

After the 1931 Spanish local elections , King Alfonso XIII voluntarily left Spain and republicans proclaimed a Second Spanish Republic .

[ 32 ] After the assassination of opposition leader José Calvo Sotelo in 1936, right-wing forces banded together to overthrow the Republic. During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939, General Francisco Franco established the basis for the Spanish State (1939–1975). In 1938, the autocratic government of Franco claimed to have reconstituted the Spanish monarchy in absentia (and in this case ultimately yielded to a restoration, in the person of King Juan Carlos ).

In 1975, Juan Carlos I became King of Spain and began the Spanish transition to democracy . He abdicated in 2014, and was succeeded by his son Felipe VI .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Part of a series on Toryism Principles Agrarianism Classicism Counterrevolution High Church Anglicanism High culture Interventionism Loyalism Monarchism Noblesse oblige Royalism Traditionalism Unionism Variants Blue High Pink Red Socialist General topics Cavaliers Cavalier Parliament Château Clique Conservative corporatism Divine right of kings Family Compact Jacobitism Oxford Movement Powellism Intellectuals Chesterton Bolingbroke Filmer Grant Johnson L'Estrange Scott Politicians Baldwin Bolingbroke Bute Churchill Clarendon Powell Rochester Wellington Related topics Carlism Chouans Cristeros Conservatism Distributism Legitimism Loyalism Miguelism Reactionism Spanish American royalism Sanfedismo Traditionalist conservatism Ultra-Tories Vendéens Viva Maria Veronese Easter Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Crowd attending the 2022 Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II In England, royalty ceded power to other groups in a gradual process. In 1215, a group of nobles forced King John to sign Magna Carta , which guaranteed the English barons certain liberties and established that the king's powers were not absolute. King Charles I was executed in 1649, and the Commonwealth of England was established as a republic. Highly unpopular, the republic was ended in 1660, and the monarchy was restored under King Charles II . In 1687–88, the Glorious Revolution and the overthrow of King James II established the principles of constitutional monarchy , which would later be worked out by Locke and other thinkers. However, absolute monarchy , justified by Hobbes in Leviathan (1651), remained a prominent principle elsewhere.

Following the Glorious Revolution, William III and Mary II were established as constitutional monarchs, with less power than their predecessor James II. Since then, royal power has become more ceremonial, with powers such as refusal to assent last exercised in 1708 by Queen Anne . Once part of the United Kingdom (1801–1922), southern Ireland rejected monarchy and became the Republic of Ireland in 1949. Support for a ceremonial monarchy remains high in Britain: Queen Elizabeth II ( r.

1952–2022 ), possessed wide support from the U.K.'s population.

Vatican City State [ edit ] The Vatican City State is considered to be Europe's last absolute monarchy. The microstate is headed by the Pope , who doubles as its monarch according to the Vatican constitution. The nation was formed under Pope Pius XI in 1929, following the signing of the Lateran Treaty . It was the successor state to the Papal States , which collapsed under Pope Pius IX in 1870.

Pope Leo XIV (in office from 2025) serves as the nation's absolute monarch.

North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Canada possesses one of the world's oldest continuous monarchies, having been established in the 16th century. Queen Elizabeth II had served as its sovereign since her ascension to the throne in 1952 until her death in 2022. Her son, King Charles III , now sits on the throne.

Costa Rica [ edit ] The struggle between monarchists and republicans led to the Costa Rican civil war of 1823. Costa Rican monarchists include Joaquín de Oreamuno y Muñoz de la Trinidad, José Santos Lombardo y Alvarado and José Rafael Gallegos Alvarado. Costa Rica stands out for being one of the few countries with foreign monarchism, that is, where the monarchists did not intend to establish an indigenous monarchy. Costa Rican monarchists were loyal to Emperor Agustín de Iturbide of the First Mexican Empire .

Old colonial coat of arms of Honduras with monarchical elements Honduras [ edit ] After the independence of the general captaincy of Guatemala from the Spanish empire , she joined the First Mexican Empire for a brief period, this unleashed the division of the Honduran elites. These were divided between the annexationists, made up mostly of illustrious Spanish-descendant families and members of the conservative party who supported the idea of being part of an empire, and the liberals who wanted Central America to be a separate nation under a republican system.

The greatest example of this separation was in the two most important cities of the province, on the one hand Comayagua , which firmly supported the legitimacy of Iturbide I as emperor and remained a pro-monarchist bastion in Honduras, and on the other hand Tegucigalpa who supported the idea of forming a federation of Central American states under a republican system.

Emperor Iturbide of México Mexico [ edit ] After obtaining independence from Spain, the First Mexican Empire was established under Emperor Agustín I . His reign lasted less than one year, and he was forcefully deposed. In 1864, the Second Mexican Empire was formed under Emperor Maximilian I . Maximilian's government enjoyed French aid, but opposition from America, and collapsed after three years. Much like Agustín I, Maximilian I was deposed and later executed by his republican enemies. Since 1867, Mexico has not possessed a monarchy.

Today, some Mexican monarchist organizations advocate for Maximilian von Götzen-Iturbide or Carlos Felipe de Habsburgo to be instated as the Emperor of Mexico.

Nicaragua [ edit ] The miskito ethnic group inhabits part of the Atlantic coast of Honduras and Nicaragua , by the beginning of the 17th century the said ethnic group was reorganized under a single chief known as Ta Uplika, for the reign of his grandson King Oldman I this group had a very close relationship With the English, they managed to turn the Mosquitia coast into an English protectorate that would decline in the 19th century until it completely disappeared in 1894 with the abdication of Robert II .

[ 33 ] Currently, the Miskitos who are shot between the two countries have denounced the neglect of their communities and abuses committed by the authorities. As a result of this, in Nicaragua several Miskito people began a movement of separatism from present-day Nicaragua and a re-institution of the monarchy.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Monarchism in the United States English settlers first established the colony of Jamestown in 1607, taking its name after King James VI and I . For 169 years, the Thirteen Colonies were ruled by the authority of the British crown. The Thirteen American Colonies possessed a total of 10 monarchs, ending with George III . During the American Revolutionary War , the colonies declared independence from Britain in 1776. Despite erroneous popular belief, the Revolutionary war was in fact fought over independence, not anti-monarchism as is commonly believed. In fact, many American colonists who fought in the war against George III were monarchists themselves, who opposed George, but desired to possess a different king. Additionally, the American colonists received the financial support of Louis XVI and Charles III of Spain during the war.

After the U.S. declared its independence, the form of government by which it would operate still remained unsettled. At least two of America's Founding Fathers , Alexander Hamilton and Nathaniel Gorham , believed that America should be an independent monarchy. Various proposals to create an American monarchy were considered, including the Prussian scheme which would have made Prince Henry of Prussia king of the United States. Hamilton proposed that the leader of America should be an elected monarch, while Gorham pushed for a hereditary monarchy.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] U.S. military officer Lewis Nicola also desired for America to be a monarchy, suggesting George Washington accept the crown of America, which he declined. All attempts ultimately failed, and America was founded a Republic.

During the American Civil War , a return to monarchy was considered as a way to solve the crisis, though it never came to fruition. Since then, the idea has possessed low support, but has been advocated by some public figures such as Ralph Adams Cram , Solange Hertz , Leland B. Yeager , Michael Auslin , Charles A. Coulombe , and Curtis Yarvin .

South America [ edit ] Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Empire of Brazil From gaining its independence in 1822 until 1889, Brazil was governed as a constitutional monarchy with a branch of the Portuguese Royal Family serving as monarchs. Prior to this period, Brazil had been a royal colony which had also served briefly as the seat of government for the Portuguese Empire following the occupation of that country by Napoleon Bonaparte in 1808. The history of the Empire of Brazil was marked by brief periods of political instability, several wars that Brazil won, and a marked increase in immigration which saw the arrival of both Jews and Protestants who were attracted by Brazil's reputation for religious tolerance. The final decades of the Empire under the reign of Pedro II saw a remarkable period of relative peace both at home and internationally, coupled with dramatic economic expansion, the extension of basic civil rights to most people and the gradual restriction of slavery , culminating in its final abolition in 1888. It is also remembered for its thriving culture and arts. However, Pedro II had little interest in preserving the monarchy and passively accepted its overthrow by a military coup d'état in 1889 resulting in the establishment of a dictatorship known as the First Brazilian Republic .

[ 36 ] Current monarchies [ edit ] Main article: List of current monarchs of sovereign states The majority of current monarchies are constitutional monarchies . In a constitutional monarchy the power of the monarch is restricted by either a written or unwritten constitution, this should not be confused with a ceremonial monarchy , in which the monarch holds only symbolic power and plays very little to no part in government or politics. In some constitutional monarchies the monarch does play a more active role in political affairs than in others. In Thailand , for instance, King Bhumibol Adulyadej , who reigned from 1946 to 2016, played a critical role in the nation's political agenda and in various military coups. Similarly, in Morocco , King Mohammed VI wields significant, but not absolute power.

Liechtenstein is a democratic principality whose citizens have voluntarily given more power to their monarch in recent years.

There remain a handful of countries in which the monarchy is an absolute monarchy . The majority of these countries are oil-producing Arab Islamic monarchies like Saudi Arabia , Bahrain , Qatar , Oman , and the United Arab Emirates . Other strong monarchies include Brunei and Eswatini .

Country Sovereign Andorra Co-Prince Emmanuel Macron Co-Prince Joan Enric Vives i Sicília Antigua and Barbuda King Charles III Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Bahrain King Hamad bin Isa Belgium King Philippe Bhutan King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Brunei Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah Cambodia King Norodom Sihamoni Denmark King Frederik X Eswatini King Mswati III Japan Emperor Naruhito Jordan King Abdullah II Kuwait Emir Mishal Al-Ahmad Lesotho King Letsie III Liechtenstein Prince Hans-Adam II Luxembourg Grand Duke Henri Malaysia Sultan Ibrahim Monaco Sovereign Prince Albert II Morocco King Mohammed VI Kingdom of the Netherlands King Willem-Alexander Norway King Harald V Oman Sultan Haitham bin Tariq Qatar Emir Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani Saudi Arabia King Salman Spain King Felipe VI Sweden King Carl XVI Gustaf Thailand King Vajiralongkorn Tonga King Tupou VI United Arab Emirates Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan Vatican City Pope Leo XIV Political philosophy [ edit ] Absolute monarchy stands as an opposition to anarchism and, additionally since the Age of Enlightenment ; liberalism , capitalism , communism and socialism .

Otto von Habsburg advocated a form of constitutional monarchy based on the primacy of the supreme judicial function, with hereditary succession , mediation by a tribunal is warranted if suitability is problematic.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Non-partisanship [ edit ] British political scientist Vernon Bogdanor justifies monarchy on the grounds that it provides for a nonpartisan head of state , separate from the head of government , and thus ensures that the highest representative of the country, at home and internationally, does not represent a particular political party , but all people.

[ 39 ] Bogdanor also notes that monarchies can play a helpful unifying role in a multinational state , noting that "In Belgium, it is sometimes said that the king is the only Belgian, everyone else being either Fleming or Walloon " and that the British sovereign can belong to all of the United Kingdom's constituent countries (England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland), without belonging to any particular one of them.

[ 39 ] Private interest [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes wrote that the private interest of the monarchy is the same with the public. The riches, power, and humour of a monarch arise only from the riches, strength, and reputation of his subjects. An elected Head of State is incentivised to increase his own wealth for leaving office after a few years whereas a monarch has no reason to corrupt because he would be cheating himself.

[ d ] Wise counsel [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes wrote that a monarch can receive wise counsel with secrecy while an assembly cannot. Advisors to the assembly tend to be well-versed more in the acquisition of their own wealth than of knowledge; are likely to give their advices in long discourses which often excite men into action but do not govern them in it, moved by the flame of passion instead of enlightenment. Their multitude is a weakness.

[ e ] Long termism [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes wrote that the resolutions of a monarch are subject to no inconsistency save for human nature; in assemblies, inconsistencies arise from the number. For in an assembly, as little as the absence of a few or the diligent appearance of a few of the contrary opinion, "undoes today all that was done yesterday".

[ f ] Civil war reduction [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes wrote that a monarch cannot disagree with himself, out of envy or interest, but an assembly may and to such a height that may produce a civil war.

[ g ] Liberty [ edit ] The International Monarchist League , founded in 1943, has always sought to promote monarchy on the grounds that it strengthens popular liberty, both in a democracy and in a dictatorship, because by definition the monarch is not beholden to politicians.

British-American libertarian writer Matthew Feeney argues that European constitutional monarchies "have managed for the most part to avoid extreme politics"—specifically fascism, communism, and military dictatorship—"in part because monarchies provide a check on the wills of populist politicians" by representing entrenched customs and traditions.

[ 40 ] Feeny notes that European monarchies—such as the Danish, Belgian, Swedish, Dutch, Norwegian, and British—have ruled over countries that are among the most stable, prosperous, and free in the world.

[ 40 ] Socialist writer George Orwell argued a similar point, that constitutional monarchy is effective at preventing the development of fascism .

"The function of the King in promoting stability and acting as a sort of keystone in a non-democratic society is, of course, obvious. But he also has, or can have, the function of acting as an escape-valve for dangerous emotions. A French journalist said to me once that the monarchy was one of the things that have saved Britain from Fascism...It is at any rate possible that while this division of function exists a Hitler or a Stalin cannot come to power. On the whole the European countries which have most successfully avoided Fascism have been constitutional monarchies... I have often advocated that a Labour government, i.e. one that meant business, would abolish titles while retaining the Royal Family.’ [ 41 ] Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn took a different approach, arguing that liberty and equality are contradictions. As such, he argued that attempts to establish greater social equality through the abolishment of monarchy , ultimately results in a greater loss of liberty for citizens. He believed that equality can only be accomplished through the suppression of liberty, as humans are naturally unequal and hierarchical. Kuehnelt-Leddihn also believed that people are on average freer under monarchies than they are under democratic republics, as the latter tends to more easily become tyrannical through ochlocracy . In Liberty or Equality , he writes: There is little doubt that the American Congress or the French Chambers have a power over their nations which would rouse the envy of a Louis XIV or a George III , were they alive today. Not only prohibition , but also the income tax declaration, selective service , obligatory schooling, the fingerprinting of blameless citizens, premarital blood tests—none of these totalitarian measures would even the royal absolutism of the seventeenth century have dared to introduce.

[ 42 ] Hans-Hermann Hoppe also argues that monarchy helps to preserve individual liberty more effectively than democracy.

[ 43 ] Natural desire for hierarchy [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e In a 1943 essay in The Spectator , "Equality", British author C.S. Lewis criticized egalitarianism, and its corresponding call for the abolition of monarchy, as contrary to human nature, writing, A man's reaction to Monarchy is a kind of test. Monarchy can easily be 'debunked'; but watch the faces, mark well the accents, of the debunkers. These are the men whose tap-root in Eden has been cut: whom no rumour of the polyphony, the dance, can reach—men to whom pebbles laid in a row are more beautiful than an arch...Where men are forbidden to honour a king they honour millionaires, athletes, or film-stars instead: even famous prostitutes or gangsters. For spiritual nature, like bodily nature, will be served; deny it food and it will gobble poison.

[ 44 ] Political accountability [ edit ] Oxford political scientists Petra Schleiter and Edward Morgan-Jones wrote that in monarchies, it is more common to hold elections than non-electoral replacements.

[ 45 ] Notable works [ edit ] Notable works arguing in favor of monarchy include Abbott, Tony (1995).

The Minimal Monarchy: And Why It Still Makes Sense For Australia Alighieri, Dante (c. 1312).

De Monarchia Aquinas, Thomas (1267).

De Regno, to the King of Cyprus Auslin, Michael (2014).

America Needs a King Balmes, Jaime (1850).

European Civilization: Protestantism and Catholicity Compared in their Effects on the Civilization of Europe [ note 1 ] Bellarmine, Robert (1588).

De Romano Pontifice, On the Roman Pontiff Bodin, Jean (1576).

The Six Books of the Republic Bogdanor, Vernon (1997).

The Monarchy and the Constitution Bossuet, Jacques-Bénigne (1709).

Politics Drawn from the Very Words of Holy Scripture Charles I of England (1649).

Eikon Basilike Coulombe, Charles A.

(2016).

Star-Spangled Crown: A Simple Guide to the American Monarchy Chateaubriand, François-René de (1814).

Of Buonaparte, and the Bourbons, and of the Necessity of Rallying Round Our Legitimate Princes Cram, Ralph Adams (1936).

Invitation to Monarchy Filmer, Robert (1680).

Patriarcha Hobbes, Thomas (1651).

Leviathan Hermann-Hoppe, Hans (2001).

Democracy: The God That Failed — (2014).

From Aristocracy to Monarchy to Democracy: A Tale of Moral and Economic Folly and Decay James VI and I (1598).

The True Law of Free Monarchies — (1599).

Basilikon Doron Jean, Count of Paris (2009).

Un Prince Français Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (1952).

Liberty or Equality: The Challenge of Our Times — (2000).

Monarchy and War Maistre, Joseph de (1797).

Considerations on France Pius VI (1793).

Pourquoi Notre Voix Scruton, Roger (1991).

A Focus of Loyalty Higher Than the State Ségur, Louis Gaston Adrien de (1871).

Vive le Roi!

Vegas Latapiè, Eugenio (1983).

Memorias politicas. El suicidio de la monarquia y la Segunda Republica Whittle, Peter (2011).

Monarchy Matters Support for monarchy [ edit ] Current monarchies [ edit ] This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Country Polling firm/source Sample size Percentage of supporters Date conducted Ref.

Antigua and Barbuda Lord Ashcroft Polls 510 45% February and March 2023 [ 46 ] Australia Essential 1,125 48% April 2023 [ 47 ] Belgium IVOX 1,000 58% September 2017 [ 48 ] Canada Nanos Research 1,001 48% June 2022 [ 49 ] Denmark Gallup 86% 2014 [ 50 ] Jamaica Lord Ashcroft Polls 510 40% February and March 2023 [ 46 ] Japan Mainichi Shimbun 74% April 2019 [ 51 ] Lesotho Afrobarometer 75% June 2018 [ 52 ] Morocco Le Monde 1,108 91% March 2009 [ 53 ] Netherlands EenVandaag 59% 2025 [ 54 ] New Zealand Lord Ashcroft Polls 2,012 44% February and March 2023 [ 55 ] Norway Nettavisen 20,000 85% 2022 Saint Vincent Government constitutional referendum 52,262 56.3% November 2009 Spain Spain 65.7% January 2024 [ 56 ] Sweden Novus 73% January 2023 [ 57 ] Thailand Suan Dusit Rajabhat University 5,700 75% October 2020 [ 58 ] Tuvalu Government constitutional referendum 1,939 64.9% April 2008 [ 59 ] United Kingdom Ipsos 2,166 81% May 2024 Former monarchies [ edit ] This section's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information . The reason given is: Some information in this section is more than 10 years old.

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( November 2022 ) See also: List of monarchy referendums The following is a list of former monarchies and their percentage of public support for monarchism.

Country Claimant or most recent royal house Polling firm/source Sample size Percentage of supporters Date conducted Ref.

Austria Habsburg-Lorraine [ note 2 ] [ note 2 ] 20% [ note 2 ] [ note 2 ] [ 60 ] Barbados Windsor University of the West Indies 500 12% November 2021 [ 61 ] Brazil Orléans-Braganza Círculo Monárquico Brasileiro 188 32% September 2019 [ 62 ] Croatia Habsburg-Lorraine [ h ] Consilium Regium Croaticum 1,759 41% 2019 [ 63 ] Czechia Habsburg-Lorraine [ h ] MEDIAN.EU 1,015 10% August 2021 [ 64 ] France Bourbon / Orléans / Bonaparte Le Figaro ~1,000 44% [ i ] September 2022 [ 65 ] Georgia Bagrationi Doctrina 560 approx.

30% July 2015 [ 66 ] Germany Hohenzollern IamExpat 1,041 14% [ j ] 2023 [ 67 ] Greece Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg Tatler 31.2% April 2023 [ 68 ] Hungary Habsburg-Lorraine [ h ] Azonnali 3,541 46% May 2021 [ 69 ] Iran Pahlavi Empirical Research and Forecasting Institute 2, 639 60.4% February 2023 [ 70 ] Italy Savoy Piepoli institute 15% 2018 [ 71 ] Libya Senussi Cambridge MENAF <200-300 approx.

50-55% February 2022 [ 72 ] Lithuania Urach Delfi 1,104 8.3% November 2006 [ 73 ] Mexico Iturbide / Habsburg-Lorraine Parametría 7.6% July 2014 [ 74 ] Nepal Gorkha Interdisciplinary Analysts 3,000 49% January 2008 [ 75 ] Poland Wettin wPolityce.pl 1,067 14% [ k ] April 2021 [ 76 ] Portugal Braganza-Coburg Marktest Group ~1,000 19.7% [ l ] September 2010 [ 77 ] Romania Romania Cotidianul 35.4% [ m ] December 2023 [ 78 ] Russia Holstein-Gottorp-Romanov Russian Public Opinion Research Center ~1,800 28% [ note 3 ] March 2017 [ 79 ] Serbia Karađorđević Blic 1,615 49.8% July 2015 [ 80 ] South Korea Yi Naver News 1,000 40.4% 2010 [ 81 ] Turkey Osman MetroPOLL 1,691 3% October 2023 [ 82 ] United States Brunswick-Lüneburg [ n ] YouGov 1,500 12% May 2023 [ 83 ] Notable monarchists [ edit ] Main article: List of monarchists Several notable public figures who advocated for monarchy or are monarchists include: Arts and entertainment [ edit ] Honoré de Balzac , French novelist & playwright [ 84 ] Fyodor Dostoevsky , Russian novelist & essayist Pedro Muñoz Seca , Spanish playwright George MacDonald , British theologian and writer C.S. Lewis , British theologian and writer J.R.R. Tolkien , British writer T.S. Eliot , American-British poet & writer Salvador Dalí , Spanish artist Hergé , Belgian cartoonist Éric Rohmer , French filmmaker [ 85 ] Yukio Mishima , Japanese author Joan Collins , English actress & author [ 86 ] Stephen Fry , English actor & author [ 87 ] Clergy [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas , Italian Catholic priest & theologian [ 88 ] Robert Bellarmine , Italian Cardinal & theologian [ 89 ] Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet , French Bishop & theologian [ 90 ] Jules Mazarin , Italian Cardinal & minister André-Hercule de Fleury , French Cardinal & minister Pius VI , Italian Pope & ruler of the Papal States [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Fabrizio Ruffo , Italian Cardinal & treasurer Ercole Consalvi , Italian Cardinal Secretary of State Pelagio Antonio de Labastida y Dávalos , Mexican Archbishop & Regent of the Second Mexican Empire Louis Gaston Adrien de Ségur , French Bishop & writer Louis Billot , French priest & theologian Pius XII , Italian Pope & sovereign of Vatican City [ 93 ] [ 94 ] József Mindszenty , Hungarian Cardinal & Prince-primate Philosophy [ edit ] Dante Alighieri , Italian poet & philosopher [ 95 ] Jean Bodin , French political philosopher Robert Filmer , English political theorist [ 96 ] Thomas Hobbes , English philosopher [ 97 ] Joseph de Maistre , Savoyard philosopher & writer [ 98 ] Juan Donoso Cortés , Spanish politician & political theologian Søren Kierkegaard , Danish philosopher & theologian [ 99 ] Charles Maurras , French author & philosopher [ 100 ] Kang Youwei , Chinese political thinker & reformer Ralph Adams Cram , American architect & writer [ 101 ] Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , Austrian political scientist & philosopher Vernon Bogdanor , British political scientist & historian [ 102 ] Roger Scruton , English philosopher & writer [ 103 ] Hans Hermann-Hoppe , German-American political theorist [ 104 ] Charles A. Coulombe , American historian & author Plinio Corrêa de Oliveira , Brazilian philosopher and writter Politics [ edit ] François-René de Chateaubriand , French historian & Ambassador [ 105 ] Manuel Belgrano , Argentinian politician Klemens von Metternich , Austrian Chancellor Miguel Miramón , Mexican President & military general Otto von Bismarck , German Chancellor Juan Vázquez de Mella , Spanish politician & political theorist Panagis Tsaldaris , Greek Prime Minister Winston Churchill , British Prime Minister of the U.K.

Călin Popescu-Tăriceanu , Romanian Prime Minister [ 106 ] Salome Zourabichvili , Georgian President [ 107 ] Tony Abbott , Australian Prime Minister [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Antônio Henrique Cunha Bueno , Brazilian politician Monarchist movements and parties [ edit ] Action Française Alfonsism Alliance Royale Australian Monarchist League Australians for Constitutional Monarchy Bonapartism Black-Yellow Alliance Carlism Cavalier Chouannerie Conservative-Monarchist Club Constantian Society Constitutionalist Party of Iran Druk Phuensum Tshogpa Hawaiian sovereignty movement [ note 4 ] Hovpartiet International Monarchist League Jacobitism Koruna Česká (party) Legality Movement Legitimism Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Loyalism Loyalist (American Revolution) Miguelist Monarchist League of Canada Monarchist Party of Russia Monarchy New Zealand Movement for the Restoration of the Kingdom of Serbia Nouvelle Action Royaliste Orléanism People's Alliance for Democracy Rastriya Prajatantra Party Royal Stuart Society Royalist Party Sanfedismo Serbian Renewal Movement Sonnō jōi Tradition und Leben Traditionalist Communion Ultra-royalist Criticism [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of monarchy Criticism of monarchy can be targeted against the general form of government — monarchy —or more specifically, to particular monarchical governments as controlled by hereditary royal families . In some cases, this criticism can be curtailed by legal restrictions and be considered criminal speech , as in lèse-majesté . Monarchies in Europe and their underlying concepts, such as the Divine Right of Kings , were often criticized during the Age of Enlightenment , which notably paved the way to the French Revolution and the proclamation of the abolition of the monarchy in France . Earlier, the American Revolution had seen the Patriots suppress the Loyalists and expel all royal officials. In this century, monarchies are present in the world in many forms with different degrees of royal power and involvement in civil affairs: Absolute monarchies in Brunei , Eswatini , Oman , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , the United Arab Emirates , and the Vatican City ; Constitutional monarchies in the United Kingdom and its sovereign's Commonwealth Realms , and in Belgium , Denmark , Japan , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Malaysia , Monaco , The Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden , Thailand , and others.

The twentieth century, beginning with the 1917 February Revolution in Russia and accelerated by two world wars , saw many European countries replace their monarchies with republics , while others replaced their absolute monarchies with constitutional monarchies . Reverse movements have also occurred, with brief returns of the monarchy in France under the Bourbon Restoration , the July Monarchy , and the Second French Empire , the Stuarts after the English Civil War and the Bourbons in Spain after the Franco dictatorship .

See also [ edit ] Dark Enlightenment List of dynasties Reactionary modernism Notes [ edit ] ^ Chapters LVIII-LXIV ^ a b c d Figures for Austria is the average percentage of supporters from several opinion polls taken prior to November 2018; as reported by EFE .

^ Among respondents, 22 per cent answered that they were not opposed to a monarchy in principle, but could not think of a person "worthy of the Russian throne", whereas 6 per cent believed there was.

^ Some activists within the sovereignty movement advocate for a restoration of the Hawaiian monarchy, while others push for an independent Hawaiian Republic.

^ While the Xia dynasty is typically considered to be the first orthodox Chinese dynasty, numerous sources including the Book of Documents mention two other dynasties that preceded the Xia: the "Tang" ( 唐 ) and the " Yu " ( 虞 ) dynasties.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The former is sometimes called the "Ancient Tang" ( 古唐 ) to distinguish it from other dynasties named "Tang".

[ 15 ] Should the historicity of these earlier dynasties be attested, Yu the Great would not have been the initiator of dynastic rule in China.

^ All attempts at restoring monarchical and dynastic rule in China following the Xinhai Revolution ended in failure. Hence, the abdication of the Xuantong Emperor in AD 1912 is typically regarded as the formal end of the Chinese monarchy .

^ In English, the use of the term Mikado ( 帝／御門 ) for the emperor was once common but is now considered obsolete.

[ 18 ] ^ Leviathan, 19.4, pp.124-5 ^ Leviathan, 19.5, p.125 ^ Leviathan, 19.6, p.125 ^ Leviathan, 19.7, p.125 ^ a b c as part of Austria-Hungary ^ The Figaro poll showed that 38% of French respondents said monarchy makes them dream. In addition, 55% believe that monarchy is not adapted to today’s society, while on the contrary 44% judge it to be timeless and still adapted to today’s society.

^ Whilst the percentage of people who supported the return of the Prussian monarchy was 8%. However, 14 percent were in favour, and among “right-wing voters”, 15 percent supported the idea of a royal family in general.

^ According to the survey, 14% supported the Monarchy and 57% were against it. 29% were unsure on the matter.

^ 37% of people who responded to the survey claimed Portugal would be worse as a Monarchy, 19.7% thought it would be better than the Republic and 43.3% were indifferent to it.

^ 54.7% of Romanians say they would vote against the monarchy and for maintaining the republic (compared to 41% in July 2013). 35.4% say they would vote in favor of the monarchy (compared to 27.2% in July 2013), and 9.9% do not know or do not answer (compared to 31.8% in July 2013).

^ in their capacity as monarchs of Great Britain References [ edit ] ^ Webster's Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language, 1989 edition, p. 924.

^ Bohn, H. G. (1849).

The Standard Library Cyclopedia of Political, Constitutional, Statistical and Forensic Knowledge . p. 640.

A republic , according to the modern usage of the word, signifies a political community which is not under monarchical government ... in which one person does not possess the entire sovereign power.

^ "Definition of Republic" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 2017-02-18 .

a government having a chief of state who is not a monarch ... a government in which supreme power resides in a body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by elected officers and representatives responsible to them and governing according to law ^ "The definition of republic" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2017-02-18 .

a state in which the supreme power rests in the body of citizens entitled to vote and is exercised by representatives chosen directly or indirectly by them. ... a state in which the head of government is not a monarch or other hereditary head of state.

^ "Sumerian King List" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2013 . Retrieved 7 April 2012 .

^ Conrad Phillip Kottak (1991).

Cultural Anthropology . McGraw-Hill. p. 124.

ISBN 978-0-07-035615-3 .

^ A. Adu Boahen; J. F. Ade Ajayi; Michael Tidy (1986).

Topics in West African History . Longman Group. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-582-58504-1 .

^ "Enlightenment" .

HISTORY . 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 2020-06-22 .

^ "A beginner's guide to the Age of Enlightenment (article)" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 2020-06-22 .

^ "Ethiopia - Haile Selassie, Imperialism, Revolution | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2025-05-27 . Retrieved 2025-05-28 .

^ Nadeau, Randall (2012).

The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Chinese Religions . John Wiley & Sons. p. 31.

ISBN 9781444361971 .

^ Yeo, Khiok-Khng (2008).

Musing with Confucius and Paul: Toward a Chinese Christian Theology . James Clarke & Company Limited. p. 24.

ISBN 9780227903308 .

^ Chao, Yuan-ling (2009).

Medicine and Society in Late Imperial China: A Study of Physicians in Suzhou, 1600–1850 . Peter Lang. p. 73.

ISBN 9781433103810 .

^ Wang, Shumin (2002).

"夏、商、周之前还有个虞朝" .

Hebei Academic Journal .

22 (1): 146– 147 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "远古时期的"古唐朝"？比夏朝还早1600年，如被证实历史或将改写" . 9 November 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 .

^ Skutsch, Carl (2013).

Encyclopedia of the World's Minorities . Routledge. p. 287.

ISBN 9781135193881 .

^ "Tennō" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 12 August 2021 .

^ Kanʼichi Asakawa.

The early institutional life of Japan: a study in the reform of 645 A.D.

. Tokyo: Shueisha (1903), p. 25. "We purposely avoid, in spite of its wide usage in foreign literature, the misleading term Mikado . If it be not for the natural curiosity of the races, which always seeks something novel and loves to call foreign things by foreign names, it is hard to understand why this obsolete and ambiguous word should so sedulously be retained. It originally meant not only the Sovereign, but also his house, the court, and even the State, and its use in historical writings causes many difficulties which it is unnecessary to discuss here in detail. The native Japanese employ the term neither in speech nor in writing. It might as well be dismissed with great advantage from sober literature as it has been for the official documents." ^ "最高裁判所判例集 事件番号 平成1(行ツ)126" .

Supreme Court of Japan . Retrieved August 10, 2020 .

^ Hoye, Timothy. (1999).

Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jinmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kinmei ." ^ Henshall, Kenneth (2013).

Historical Dictionary of Japan to 1945 . Scarecrow Press. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7872-3 .

^ Nussbaum, Louis-Frédéric . (2005).

" Kamakura-jidai " in Japan Encyclopedia , p. 459.

^ Totman, Conrad (1966). "Political Succession in The Tokugawa Bakufu: Abe Masahiro's Rise to Power, 1843–1845".

Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies .

26 : 102– 124.

doi : 10.2307/2718461 .

JSTOR 2718461 .

^ "Meiji Constitution | 1889, Japan" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2017-08-21 .

^ "The Constitution of Japan" .

Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet . Retrieved 8 July 2021 .

^ Oda, Hiroshi (2009). "Sources of Law".

Japanese Law . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199232185.001.1 .

ISBN 978-0-19-923218-5 .

^ Wasserman, Janek (2014).

"Österreichische Aktion: Monarchism, Authoritarianism, and the Unity of the Austrian Conservative Ideological Field during the First Republic" .

Central European History .

47 (1): 76– 104.

doi : 10.1017/S0008938914000636 .

ISSN 0008-9389 .

JSTOR 43280409 .

S2CID 145335762 .

^ Guyotjeannin, Olivier, ed. (1996).

Clovis chez les historiens (in French). Librairie Droz. pp. 241ff.

ISBN 9782600055925 .

^ Sewell, Elizabeth Missing (1876).

Popular History of France .

Longman . pp.

48– 49.

^ Asmuss, Burkhard (27 January 2023).

"Die Deutschnationale Volkspartei (DNVP)" [German National People's Party (DNVP)].

Deutsches Historisches Museum (in German) . Retrieved 30 May 2023 .

^ Gazzetta Ufficiale n. 134 del 20 giugno 1946 ^ Casanova, Julián (29 July 2010) [2007].

The Spanish Republic and Civil War . Translated by Douch, Martin. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (published 2010). p. 1.

ISBN 9781139490573 . Retrieved 10 September 2022 .

[...] the local elections of 12 April [...] turned into a plebiscite between Monarchy and republicanism. It was soon clear that the republicans had won in most of the provincial capitals. [...] Alfonso XIII abdicated, and a good many cities and towns proclaimed the Republic on 14 April 1931.

^ "BBC Mundo - América Latina - los miskitos luchan por su independencia" .

^ Hamilton, Alexander (1962). The Papers of Alexander Hamilton, Volume 9. New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-08903-1 ^ Krauel, Richard (October 1911).

"Prince Henry of Prussia and the Regency of the United States, 1786" .

The American Historical Review .

17 (1): 44– 51.

doi : 10.1086/ahr/17.1.44 .

^ Enciclopédia Barsa . Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil.

^ "Untitled Document" .

home1.gte.net . Archived from the original on 10 February 2001 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ Otto von Habsburg "Monarchy or Republic?" . ("Excerpted from The Conservative Tradition in European Thought, Copyright 1970 by Educational Resources Corporation.") ^ a b Bogdanor, Vernon (6 December 2000).

"The Guardian has got it wrong" .

The Guardian .

^ a b Feeney, Matthew (July 25, 2013).

"The Benefits of Monarchy" .

Reason magazine .

^ Orwell, George.

Spring 1944 Partisan Review ^ Liberty or Equality: The Challenge of Our Time . The Mises Institute. 2014. p. 10.

^ David Gordon , Review of Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Democracy: The God that Failed , "The Mises Review" of Ludwig von Mises Institute , Volume 8, Number 1, Spring 2002; Volume 8, Number 1.

^ C.S. Lewis (26 August 1943).

"Equality" .

The Spectator .

^ Matthews, Dylan (13 July 2013).

"Shut up, royal baby haters. Monarchy is awesome" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b "The monarchy: the view from the "Commonwealth realms" " .

Lord Ashcroft Polls . 5 May 2023.

^ "Support for a Republic" .

Essential Research . 15 May 2023.

^ "Kwart van de Belgen wil republiek in plaats van monarchie" .

HLN.be . 17 September 2017.

^ Otis, Daniel (1 June 2022).

"Majority of Canadians want Queen to apologize for residential schools: survey" .

Nanos Research .

^ "What do the Danes think of their Royal Family and what role does the Danish Monarchy have?" .

YourDanishLife . 7 January 2022.

^ "74% back emperor as symbol of state defined by current Constitution: Mainichi poll" .

Mainichi Daily News . 2019-05-03 . Retrieved 2023-06-24 .

^ " 'We need the king!' Lesotho fed up with politicians' mistakes" .

TimesLive . 11 June 2018.

^ "Government bans Le Monde opinion poll on royalty" . 8 March 2009.

^ "Steun voor de monarchie" .

EenVandaag (in Dutch) . Retrieved 2024-05-06 .

^ "The monarchy: the view from the "Commonwealth realms" " .

Lord Ashcroft Polls . 5 May 2023.

^ "Sociometric Survey (Jan 6): 58,6% support the Monarchy" .

Electomania (in Spanish). 2024-01-06 . Retrieved 2024-02-07 .

^ "TV4" . 2023.

^ Morris, James; Nyugen, Son (25 October 2020).

"Strength of support for the monarchy being seen this week as political unrest deepens into standoff" .

Thai Examiner .

^ "Tuvaluans vote against Republic" . 30 April 2008. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008.

^ "A century after Austrian-Hungarian Empire's fall, some nostalgic for monarchy" .

www.efe.com . EFE, S.A. 11 November 2018 . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ "Survey shows support for republic" .

Barbados Today . 21 December 2021.

^ "CMB Pesquisa de conhecimento e opinião pública" (in Portuguese). 27 September 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Thomas, Mark.

"Two-fifths of Croatians want a return to the monarchy" .

www.thedubrovniktimes.com . The Dubrovnik Times . Retrieved 26 January 2019 .

^ "Češi a monarchie - průzkum - Médium.cz" .

medium.seznam.cz (in Czech). 2023-03-22 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Keiger, John (2023-09-20).

"Why is France so fascinated by the royals?" .

The Spectator . Retrieved 2024-12-22 .

^ Kikacheishvili, Tamar (17 April 2017).

"Georgia: Five-Year-Old Prince Prepares to Reign" . Eurasianet . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ Wedia (23 March 2023).

"8 percent of Germans want a monarchy" .

IamExpat . Retrieved 2024-10-15 .

^ Zampounis, Christos (2023-03-06).

"As he celebrates his 57th birthday, Tatler asks; what does the future hold for Crown Prince Pavlos of Greece?" .

Tatler . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ "Győztek a Habsburgok: az Azonnali olvasóinak 46 százaléka újra királyságot szeretne | Azonnali" . 2023-08-28. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023 . Retrieved 2024-12-28 .

^ Life, Kayhan (2023-03-19).

"A Survey by a US-Based Research Institute Shows Iranians Support Reza Pahlavi" .

KAYHAN LIFE . Retrieved 2025-05-13 .

^ "Emanule Filiberto: "Politici? Sono dei parac***"". Occhio, il Savoia vuole fare il re" (in Italian) . Retrieved 3 December 2018 .

^ Cousins, Michel (2022-02-27).

"Research group calls for restoration of 1951 constitution and Senussi monarchy" .

LibyaHerald . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ "Apklausa: Lietuvos gyventojai nenorėtų monarchijos" .

Delfi (in Lithuanian) . Retrieved 2025-03-24 .

^ "¿Qué opinan los mexicanos de la Monarquía?" .

Parametría (in Spanish) . Retrieved 18 June 2021 .

^ Sengupta, Somini (3 April 2008).

"In Nepal, Long-Lived Monarchy Fades From View" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ "Sondaż "wPolityce": 14 proc. chciałoby w Polsce monarchii parlamentarnej, przeciw tej koncepcji 57 proc" .

wnp.pl (in Polish). 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 2024-12-27 .

^ "Jovens mais republicanos?" .

www.marktest.com (in Portuguese) . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ (I.R.) (2023-12-11).

"Sondaj INSCOP: Ce cred românii despre Monarhie" .

Cotidianul RO (in Romanian) . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ Galanina, Angelina (23 March 2017).

"Россияне против монархии" .

Izvestia (in Russian). National Media Group . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ "ANKETA Da li Srbija treba da bude monarhija?" .

Blic.rs (in Serbian). 2015-07-27 . Retrieved 2024-10-15 .

^ "황실 복원…찬성 41% vs 반대 23%" .

n.news.naver.com (in Korean) . Retrieved 2024-10-15 .

^ "MetroPOLL anketi: "Türkiye'nin nabzı, Atatürk, cumhuriyet ve laiklik diye atıyor" " .

medyascope.tv (in Turkish). November 2023 . Retrieved 2023-11-08 .

^ "Three in five Americans say it would be bad for the U.S. to have a monarchy" . YouGov. 5 May 2023.

^ "Balzac: A Fight Against Decandence and Materialism" .

Mtholyoke.edu . Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 26 November 2017 .

^ Brody, Richard (24 March 2021).

"Looking Behind Éric Rohmer's Cinematic Style" .

The New Yorker .

^ "Joan Collins so happy with husband" . 21 January 2012.

^ Stephen, Fry (30 June 2017).

"Happy Birthday, America. One Small Suggestion" .

The New York Times .

^ Aquinas, Thomas.

De Regno, to the King of Cyprus ^ Bellarmine, Robert.

On the Roman Pontiff .

^ Bossuet, Jacques-Bénigne.

Politics Drawn from the Very Words of Holy Scripture ^ Pius VI, Pourquoi Notre Voix ^ Coulombe, Charles A. (2003).

A History of the Popes: Vicars of Christ . MJF Books. p. 392.

^ White, Steven F. (2020).

Modern Italy's Founding Fathers: The Making of a Postwar Republic . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

108– 109.

^ Mammarealla, Giuseppe (1966).

Italy After Fascism A Political History 1943–1965 . Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 114.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Alighieri, Dante.

De Monarchia ^ Filmer, Robert (1680).

Patriarcha .

^ Sommerville, J.P. (1992).

Thomas Hobbes: Political Ideas in Historical Context . MacMillan. pp.

256– 324.

ISBN 978-0-333-49599-5 .

^ Beum, Robert (1997). "Ultra-Royalism Revisited", Modern Age , Vol. 39, No. 3, p. 305.

^ Garff, Joachim.

Søren Kierkegaard: A Biography . p. 487.

^ "Charles Maurras on the French Revolution · Liberty, Equality, Fraternity" .

Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media . Archived from the original on 6 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 April 2019 .

^ Cram, Ralph Adams (1936).

"Invitation to Monarchy" .

^ Bogdanor, Vernon (6 December 2000).

"The Guardian has got it wrong" .

The Guardian .

^ " 'A Focus of Loyalty Higher Than the State : The monarchy created peace in Central Europe, and its loss precipitated 70 years of conflict.' by Roger Scruton" .

Los Angeles Times . 1991-06-16.

^ Hermann-Hoppe, Hans.

Democracy: The God that Failed .

^ Chateubriand.

Of Buonaparte, and the Bourbons, and of the Necessity of Rallying Round Our Legitimate Princes ^ "Monarhia salvează PSD. Tăriceanu şi Bădălău susţin un referendum pe tema monarhiei. Când ar avea loc acesta" . 18 December 2017.

^ Civil Georgia (2007-10-08).

"Civil.Ge - Politicians Comment on Constitutional Monarchy Proposal" .

www.civil.ge .

^ Pearlman, Johnathan (7 September 2013).

"Ten things you didn't know about Tony Abbott" .

telegraph.co.uk . Telegraph Media Group Limited.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-12 . Retrieved 19 Nov 2013 .

^ Johnson, Carol; Wanna, John; Lee, Hsu-Ann (2015).

Abbott's Gambit: The 2013 Australian Federal Election . ANU Press. p. 281.

ISBN 978-1-9250-2209-4 .

v t e Monarchies Monarch Imperial, royal and noble ranks List of current sovereign monarchs List of current non-sovereign monarchs List of monarchy referendums Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary Non-sovereign Personal union Regency Topics Abdication Abolition of monarchy Aristocracy Criticism of monarchy Decolonization Democratization Dynasty Government Head of state Legitimacy (political) Oligarchy Order of succession Republicanism Self-proclaimed monarchy Sovereignty Titles Chhatrapati Emperor Khan King Queen regnant Pharaoh Prince regnant Raja Shah Sultan Tsar Current Africa Eswatini Lesotho Morocco list Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates list Europe Andorra Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City (Holy See) Oceania Tonga Commonwealth realms Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Africa Adamawa Ankole Aussa Bagirmi Barotseland Bornu Burundi Central Africa Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Gomma Gumma Islands of Refreshment Kaffa Kongo Libya Luba Madagascar Mali Maore Maravi Mwali Ndzuwani Ngazidja Rwanda Shilluk Tunisia Wituland Wassoulou Yeke Zanzibar Zimbabwe and other Americas Araucanía Aztec Brazil Haiti Inca Mexico Miskito Suriname Talamanca Trinidad Thirteen Colonies Asia Afghanistan Asir Bengal Bukhara Burma Cebu Chehab China Dapitan Hejaz Indonesia Iran ( Qajar ) Iraq Jabal Shammar Kathiri Khiva Korea Kumul Kurdistan Laos Maguindanao Mahra Maldives Manchukuo Mongolia Najran Nepal Qu'aiti Ryukyu Sarawak Shan Sikkim Sri Lanka Sip Song Chau Tai Sulu Syria Tibet Taiwan Upper Asir Upper Yafa Vietnam Yemen Emirates of South Arabia South Arabia Europe Albania Aragon Asturias Austria Austria-Hungary Bavaria Bosnia Brittany Bulgaria Catalonia Cilicia Corsica Crimea Cyprus Finland France Galicia Georgia Germany Granada Greece Hanover Hungary Iceland Imereti Ireland Italy Kartli-Kakheti Lithuania Majorca Man Moldavia Montenegro Navarre Neuchâtel Ottoman Empire Papal States Piedmont-Sardinia Poland–Lithuania Portugal Prussia Romania Russia Samos Savoy Saxony Scotland Serbia Tavolara Tuscany Two Sicilies United Baltic Duchy Valencia Württemberg Yugoslavia Oceania Abemama Bora Bora Easter Island Fiji Hawaii Huahine Mangareva Niuē-Fekai Nuku Hiva Raiatea Rapa Iti Rarotonga Rimatara Rurutu Tahiti Tahuata Commonwealth realms Barbados Ceylon (Sri Lanka) Fiji The Gambia Ghana Guyana India ( British Raj , princely states ) Irish Free State / Ireland Kenya Malawi Malta Mauritius Nigeria Pakistan Rhodesia Sierra Leone South Africa Tanganyika Trinidad and Tobago Uganda v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ggmxk
Cached time: 20250817051609
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.814 seconds
Real time usage: 2.085 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20841/1000000
Revision size: 83622/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 584547/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 48984/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 89/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 632945/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.870/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19722922/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1513.669      1 -total
 37.17%  562.561      3 Template:Reflist
 13.32%  201.587      6 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.06%  197.758     47 Template:Cite_web
 12.04%  182.216     22 Template:Cite_book
 11.94%  180.661     85 Template:Flaglist
  9.37%  141.833      3 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
  7.04%  106.537      1 Template:Monarchism
  6.37%   96.351     16 Template:Efn
  5.70%   86.226      7 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37980916:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051609 and revision id 1306013389. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monarchism&oldid=1306013389 " Category : Monarchism Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1: unfit URL CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Pages with Japanese IPA Articles containing French-language text Dynamic lists Articles with obsolete information from November 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 11:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monarchism 50 languages Add topic

