Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophical work 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Antonio Labriola 31 languages Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски مصرى Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Marxist theoretician and philosopher (1843–1904) Not to be confused with Arturo Labriola .

Antonio Labriola Antonio Labriola Born Antonio Maria Marziale Labriòla ( 1843-07-02 ) 2 July 1843 Cassino , Papal States Died 12 February 1904 (1904-02-12) (aged 60) Rome , Kingdom of Italy Family Teresa Labriola (daughter) Education Alma mater University of Naples Federico II Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Marxism Notable ideas Marxist theory as a theory critical of ideology Marxism as a philosophy of praxis Antonio Labriola ( Italian: [anˈtɔːnjo labriˈɔːla] ; 2 July 1843 – 12 February 1904) was an Italian Marxist theoretician and philosopher . Although an academic philosopher and never an active member of any Marxist political party, his thought exerted influence on many political theorists in Italy during the early 20th century, including the founder of the Italian Liberal Party , Benedetto Croce , as well as the leaders of the Italian Communist Party , Antonio Gramsci and Amadeo Bordiga . He also influenced the Russian revolutionary and Soviet politician Leon Trotsky .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Labriola was born in Cassino (then in the Papal States ), the son of a schoolteacher. In 1861, he entered the University of Naples . Upon graduating, he remained in Naples and became a schoolteacher. During this period, he pursued an interest in philosophy, history and ethnography . The early 1870s saw Labriola take up journalism , and his writings from this time expressed liberal and anticlerical views.

In 1874, Labriola was appointed as a professor in Rome , where he would spend the rest of his life teaching, writing, and debating. Although he had been critical of liberalism since 1873, his move towards Marxism was gradual, and he did not explicitly express a socialist viewpoint until 1889. He died in Rome on 2 February 1904.

[ 2 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Heavily influenced by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Johann Friedrich Herbart , Labriola's approach to Marxist theory was more open-ended than that of theorists such as Karl Kautsky . He saw Marxism not as a final, self-sufficient schematisation of history, but rather as a collection of pointers to the understanding of human affairs.

These pointers needed to be somewhat imprecise if Marxism was to take into account the complicated social processes and variety of forces at work in history. Marxist theory was to be understood as a theory critical of ideology , [ 3 ] in that it sees no truths as everlasting, and was ready to drop its own ideas if experience should so dictate. His description of Marxism as a "philosophy of praxis " would appear again in Gramsci's Prison Notebooks .

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Trotsky, Leon .

My Life (PDF) . p. 91 . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ "Antonio Labriola e la sua Università" . 10 December 2006.

^ Jan Rehmann, Theories of Ideology: The Powers of Alienation and Subjection , BRILL, 2013, p. 62.

^ Petrovic, Gajo (1991). "Praxis". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 438.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

External links [ edit ] Antonio Labriola Archive at Marxists Internet Archive Works by Antonio Labriola at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Antonio Labriola at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antonio_Labriola&oldid=1303455261 " Categories : 1843 births 1904 deaths People from Cassino Italian Marxists Italian socialists Marxist theorists University of Naples Federico II alumni Burials in the Protestant Cemetery, Rome 19th-century Italian philosophers Academic staff of the Sapienza University of Rome Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 03:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antonio Labriola 31 languages Add topic

