Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Formication 9 languages العربية Español Euskara Français 한국어 کٲشُر Português Simple English Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Abnormal sensation that bugs are crawling on or under the skin Not to be confused with Fornication .

Medical condition Formication Specialty Psychiatry , neurology Formication is the sensation resembling that of small insects crawling on (or under ) the skin, in the absence of actual insects. It is one specific form of a set of sensations known as paresthesias , which also include the more common prickling, tingling sensation known as pins and needles. Formication is a well-documented symptom which has numerous possible causes. The word is derived from formica , the Latin word for ant .

Formication may sometimes be experienced as feelings of itchiness , tingling, pins and needles, burning, or even pain. When formication is perceived as itchiness, it may trigger the scratch reflex , and, because of this, some people who experience the sensation are at risk of causing skin damage through excessive scratching.

In some cases, static electricity can attract particulates to the skin and can also cause body hair to move, giving a sensation like insects crawling over the skin.

[ 1 ] However, in many cases no external trigger creates the sensation.

In rare cases, individuals become convinced the sensation is due to the presence of real insects on or under the skin. Such patients have what is known as delusional parasitosis . They believe their skin is inhabited by, or under attack by, small insects or similar parasites, despite repeated reassurances from physicians, pest control experts, and entomologists .

[ 2 ] Causes [ edit ] Causes of formication include normal states such as onset of menopause (i.e. hormone withdrawal). Other causes are medical conditions such as pesticide exposure , [ 3 ] mercury poisoning , diabetic neuropathy , skin cancer , syphilis , Lyme disease , hypocalcaemia , or herpes zoster (shingles) and neurocysticercosis .

[ 2 ] Formication can be a result of stimulant intoxication or withdrawal from methamphetamine , Datura , cocaine , [ 4 ] or alcohol in alcoholics (i.e.

delirium tremens ), and is often accompanied by visual hallucinations of insects.

[ 2 ] It can also occur as a symptom of benzodiazepine withdrawal , withdrawal from medication such as SSRI / SNRI antidepressants and tramadol ; and as a side effect of opioid analgesics.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Formication is etymologically derived from the Latin word formica , meaning " ant ", precisely because of this similarity in sensation to that of crawling insects. The term has been in use for several hundred years.  In the 1797 edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica , a description of the condition raphania includes the symptom: ...a formication, or sensation as of ants or other small insects creeping on the parts.

[ 5 ] Described again in an instructional text from 1890: A variety of itching, often encountered in the eczema of elderly people, is formication; this is described as exactly like the crawling of myriads of animals over the skin. It is probably due to the successive irritation of nerve fibrils in the skin. At times patients who suffer from it will scarcely be persuaded that it is not due to insects. Yielding to the temptation to scratch invariably makes the disease worse.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Delusional parasitosis Antipruritics – anti-itch drugs Morgellons References [ edit ] ^ Potter, Mike.

"INVISIBLE ITCHES: Insect and Non-Insect Causes" .

ENTFACT-58 . University of Kentucky . Retrieved 2013-12-13 .

^ a b c Hinkle, Nancy C (2000).

"Delusory Parasitosis" (PDF) .

American Entomologist .

46 (1): 17– 25.

doi : 10.1093/ae/46.1.17 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-21.

^ Vijverberg, H. P.; Van Den Bercken, J (1990).

"Neurotoxicological effects and the mode of action of pyrethroid insecticides" (PDF) .

Critical Reviews in Toxicology .

21 (2): 105– 126.

doi : 10.3109/10408449009089875 .

hdl : 1874/210650 .

PMID 1964560 .

S2CID 27614110 .

^ Rusyniak, Daniel E. (2011).

"Neurologic manifestations of chronic methamphetamine abuse" .

Neurologic Clinics .

29 (3): 641– 655.

doi : 10.1016/j.ncl.2011.05.004 .

PMC 3148451 .

PMID 21803215 .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica , 1797, p. 260 ^ Jamieson, William Allan (1894) Diseases of the Skin: A Manual for Practitioners and Students . Pentland External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : R20.2 ICD - 9-CM : 782.0 DiseasesDB : 24182 v t e Signs and symptoms relating to skin and subcutaneous tissue Disturbances of skin sensation Hypoesthesia Paresthesia Formication Hyperesthesia Hypoalgesia Hyperalgesia Circulation Cyanosis Pallor Livedo Livedo reticularis Flushing Petechia Blanching Edema Peripheral edema Anasarca Other Rash Desquamation Induration Diaphoresis Mass Neck mass Skin Asboe-Hansen sign Auspitz's sign Borsari's sign Braverman's sign Crowe sign Dennie–Morgan fold Darier's sign Fitzpatrick's sign Florid cutaneous papillomatosis Gottron's sign Hutchinson's sign Janeway lesion Kerr's sign Koebner's phenomenon Koplik's spots Leser-Trelat sign Nikolsky's sign Pastia's sign Russell's sign Wickham striae Wolf's isotopic response Munro's microabscess Nails Aldrich-Mees' lines Beau's lines Muehrcke's lines Terry's nails v t e Delusional disorders General Cotard's syndrome Cryptic pregnancy Delusional companion syndrome Erotomania Folie à deux (Shared delusional disorder) Glass delusion Grandiose delusions Ideas and delusions of reference Idée fixe Clinical lycanthropy Monothematic delusion Paranoid anxiety Persecutory delusion Reduplicative paramnesia Religious delusion Somatoparaphrenia Thought broadcasting Thought insertion Thought withdrawal Truman Show delusion Delusional misidentification Capgras delusion Fregoli delusion Intermetamorphosis Mirrored-self misidentification Syndrome of subjective doubles Delusional parasitosis Formication Matchbox sign Morgellons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formication&oldid=1274974199 " Categories : Hallucinations Symptoms and signs of mental disorders Substance dependence Delusional parasitosis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Formication 9 languages Add topic

