Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Teachings 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Cratippus of Pergamon 12 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Magyar Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher Cratippus of Pergamon ( Ancient Greek : Κράτιππος ), was a leading Peripatetic philosopher of the 1st century BC who taught at Mytilene and Athens . The only aspects of his teachings which are known to us are what Cicero records concerning divination .

Life [ edit ] Cratippus was a contemporary and friend of Cicero who had a very high opinion of him, for he declared Cratippus to be the most distinguished of the Peripatetics that he had known, [ 1 ] and thought him at least equal to the greatest of his school.

[ 2 ] Cratippus lived for a time at Mytilene, and accompanied Pompey in his flight after the Battle of Pharsalia , endeavouring to comfort and rouse him by philosophical arguments.

[ 3 ] Several eminent Romans, such as M. Marcellus and Cicero himself, were taught by him, and in 44 BC Cicero's son was his pupil at Athens , and was tenderly attached to him.

[ 4 ] Young Cicero seems also to have visited Asia in his company.

[ 5 ] When Julius Caesar was at the head of the Roman republic, Cicero obtained from him Roman citizenship for Cratippus, and also induced the council of the Areopagus at Athens to invite the philosopher to remain in the city and to continue his instructions in philosophy.

[ 6 ] Although Cicero speaks of him as the leading philosopher of the Peripatetic school , [ 7 ] it is not certain if he was the scholarch .

[ 8 ] After the murder of Caesar, Brutus , while staying at Athens, also attended the lectures of Cratippus.

[ 9 ] Teachings [ edit ] Although Cicero had a high opinion of the knowledge and talent of Cratippus, his philosophical opinions are unknown, apart from allusions to his opinions on divination , on which he seems to have written a work. Cicero states that Cratippus believed in dreams and supernatural inspiration ( Latin : furor ) but that he rejected all other kinds of divination.

[ 10 ] He seems to have held that, while motion, sense and appetite cannot exist apart from the body, thought reaches its greatest power when most free from bodily influence, and that divination is due to the direct action of the divine mind on that part of the human soul which is not dependent on the body.

References [ edit ] ^ Cicero, de Officiis , iii. 2 ^ Cicero, De Divinatione , i. 3.

^ Plutarch, Pomp.

75; comp. Aelian, Varia Historia , vii. 21.

^ Cicero, Brut.

31, ad Fam.

xii. 16, xvi. 21, de Officiis , i. 1, ii. 2, 7.

^ Cicero, Ad Fam.

xii. 16.

^ Plutarch, Cicero , 24.

^ Cicero, Tim.

1, cf.

de Officiis , iii. 2 ^ H. B. Gottschalk, (1987), Aristotelian Philosophy in the Roman World from the Time of Cicero to the End of the Second Century AD , in W. Haase (ed.), ANRW: Geschichte und Kultur Roms im Spiegel der neueren Forschung , page 1096. Walter de Gruyter ^ Plutarch, Brutus , 24.

^ Cicero, De Divinatione , i. 3, 32, 50, 70, 71, ii. 48, 52; Tertullian, de Anim.

46.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

"Cratippus (2)" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cratippus_of_Pergamon&oldid=1260063214 " Categories : Hellenistic-era philosophers from Anatolia Roman-era Peripatetic philosophers 1st-century BC Greek philosophers Roman-era philosophers in Athens Ancient Lesbos People from Pergamon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 17:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cratippus of Pergamon 12 languages Add topic

