Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Three types of user interfaces 2 UI design vs. UX design 3 Design thinking Toggle Design thinking subsection 3.1 EDIPT 4 Usability testing 5 Requirements Toggle Requirements subsection 5.1 Seven dialogue principles 5.2 Seven presentation attributes 5.3 Usability 6 Research 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents User interface design 23 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Македонски 日本語 Português Simple English Српски / srpski ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Planned operator–machine interaction The graphical user interface is presented (displayed) on the computer screen. It is the result of processed user input and usually the primary interface for human-machine interaction. The touch user interfaces popular on small mobile devices are an overlay of the visual output to the visual input.

User interface (UI) design or user interface engineering is the design of user interfaces for machines and software , such as computers , home appliances , mobile devices , and other electronic devices , with the focus on maximizing usability and the user experience . In computer or software design, user interface (UI) design primarily focuses on information architecture. It is the process of building interfaces that clearly communicate to the user what's important. UI design refers to graphical user interfaces and other forms of interface design. The goal of user interface design is to make the user 's interaction as simple and efficient as possible, in terms of accomplishing user goals ( user-centered design ). User-centered design is typically accomplished through the execution of modern design thinking which involves empathizing with the target audience, defining a problem statement, ideating potential solutions, prototyping wireframes , and testing prototypes in order to refine final interface mockups .

User interfaces are the points of interaction between users and designs.

Three types of user interfaces [ edit ] Graphical user interfaces (GUIs) Users interact with visual representations on a computer's screen. The desktop is an example of a GUI.

Interfaces controlled through voice Users interact with these through their voices. Most smart assistants, such as Siri on smartphones or Alexa on Amazon devices, use voice control.

Interactive interfaces utilizing gestures Users interact with 3D design environments through their bodies, e.g., in virtual reality (VR) games.

Interface design is involved in a wide range of projects, from computer systems, to cars, to commercial planes; all of these projects involve much of the same basic human interactions yet also require some unique skills and knowledge. As a result, designers tend to specialize in certain types of projects and have skills centered on their expertise, whether it is software design , user research, web design , or industrial design .

Good user interface design facilitates finishing the task at hand without drawing unnecessary attention to itself.

Graphic design and typography are utilized to support its usability , influencing how the user performs certain interactions and improving the aesthetic appeal of the design; design aesthetics may enhance or detract from the ability of users to use the functions of the interface.

[ 1 ] The design process must balance technical functionality and visual elements (e.g., mental model ) to create a system that is not only operational but also usable and adaptable to changing user needs.

UI design vs. UX design [ edit ] Compared to UX design , UI design is more about the surface and overall look of a design. User interface design is a craft in which designers perform an important function in creating the user experience. UI design should keep users informed about what is happening, giving appropriate feedback in a timely manner. The visual look and feel of UI design sets the tone for the user experience.

[ 2 ] On the other hand, the term UX design refers to the entire process of creating a user experience.

Don Norman and Jakob Nielsen said: It's important to distinguish the total user experience from the user interface (UI), even though the UI is obviously an extremely important part of the design. As an example, consider a website with movie reviews. Even if the UI for finding a film is perfect, the UX will be poor for a user who wants information about a small independent release if the underlying database only contains movies from the major studios.

[ 3 ] Design thinking [ edit ] Printable template for mobile and desktop app design ( PDF ) User interface design requires a good understanding of user needs. It mainly focuses on the needs of the platform and its user expectations. There are several phases and processes in the user interface design, some of which are more demanded upon than others, depending on the project.

[ 4 ] The modern design thinking framework was created in 2004 by David M. Kelley , the founder of Stanford’s d.school, formally known as the Hasso Plattner Institute of Design .

[ 5 ] EDIPT is a common acronym used to describe Kelley’s design thinking framework—it stands for empathize, define, ideate, prototype, and test.

[ 6 ] Notably, the EDIPT framework is non-linear, therefore a UI designer may jump from one stage to another when developing a user-centric solution. Iteration is a common practice in the design thinking process; successful solutions often require testing and tweaking to ensure that the product fulfills user needs.

[ 7 ] EDIPT [ edit ] Empathize Conducting user research to better understand the needs and pain points of the target audience. UI designers should avoid developing solutions based on personal beliefs and instead seek to understand the unique perspectives of various users. Qualitative data is often gathered in the form of semi-structured interviews .

[ 8 ] Common areas of interest include: What would the user want the system to do?

How would the system fit in with the user's normal workflow or daily activities?

How technically savvy is the user and what similar systems does the user already use?

What interface aesthetics and functionalities styles appeal to the user?

Define Solidifying a problem statement that focuses on user needs and desires; effective problem statements are typically one sentence long and include the user, their specific need, and their desired outcome or goal.

Ideate Brainstorming potential solutions to address the refined problem statement. The proposed solutions should ideally align with the stakeholders' feasibility and viability criteria while maintaining user desirability standards.

Prototype Designing potential solutions of varying fidelity (low, mid, and high) while applying user experience principles and methodologies. Prototyping is an iterative process where UI designers should explore multiple design solutions rather than settling on the initial concept.

Test Presenting the prototypes to the target audience to gather feedback and gain insights for improvement. Based on the results, UI designers may need to revisit earlier stages of the design process to enhance the prototype and user experience .

Usability testing [ edit ] The Nielsen Norman Group , co-founded by Jakob Nielsen and Don Norman in 1998, promotes user experience and interface design education. Jakob Nielsen pioneered the interface usability movement and created the "10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design." [ 9 ] Usability is aimed at defining an interface’s quality when considering ease of use; an interface with low usability will burden a user and hinder them from achieving their goals, resulting in the dismissal of the interface. To enhance usability, user experience researchers may conduct usability testing —a process that evaluates how users interact with an interface. Usability testing can provide insight into user pain points by illustrating how efficiently a user can complete a task without error, highlighting areas for design improvement.

[ 10 ] Usability inspection Letting an evaluator inspect a user interface. This is generally considered to be cheaper to implement than usability testing (see step below), and can be used early on in the development process since it can be used to evaluate prototypes or specifications for the system, which usually cannot be tested on users. Some common usability inspection methods include cognitive walkthrough , which focuses the simplicity to accomplish tasks with the system for new users, heuristic evaluation , in which a set of heuristics are used to identify usability problems in the UI design, and pluralistic walkthrough , in which a selected group of people step through a task scenario and discuss usability issues.

Usability testing Testing of the prototypes on an actual user—often using a technique called think aloud protocol where the user is asked to talk about their thoughts during the experience. User interface design testing allows the designer to understand the reception of the design from the viewer's standpoint, and thus facilitates creating successful applications.

Requirements [ edit ] Updated Wikipedia desktop interface sketch for Wikimania poster The dynamic characteristics of a system are described in terms of the dialogue requirements contained in seven principles of part 10 of the ergonomics standard, the ISO 9241 . This standard establishes a framework of ergonomic "principles" for the dialogue techniques with high-level definitions and illustrative applications and examples of the principles. The principles of the dialogue represent the dynamic aspects of the interface and can be mostly regarded as the "feel" of the interface.

Seven dialogue principles [ edit ] Suitability for the task The dialogue is suitable for a task when it supports the user in the effective and efficient completion of the task.

Self-descriptiveness The dialogue is self-descriptive when each dialogue step is immediately comprehensible through feedback from the system or is explained to the user on request.

Controllability The dialogue is controllable when the user is able to initiate and control the direction and pace of the interaction until the point at which the goal has been met.

Conformity with user expectations The dialogue conforms with user expectations when it is consistent and corresponds to the user characteristics, such as task knowledge, education, experience, and to commonly accepted conventions.

Error tolerance The dialogue is error-tolerant if, despite evident errors in input, the intended result may be achieved with either no or minimal action by the user.

Suitability for individualization The dialogue is capable of individualization when the interface software can be modified to suit the task needs, individual preferences, and skills of the user.

Suitability for learning The dialogue is suitable for learning when it supports and guides the user in learning to use the system.

The concept of usability is defined of the ISO 9241 standard by effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction of the user.

Part 11 gives the following definition of usability: Usability is measured by the extent to which the intended goals of use of the overall system are achieved (effectiveness).

The resources that have to be expended to achieve the intended goals (efficiency).

The extent to which the user finds the overall system acceptable (satisfaction).

Effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction can be seen as quality factors of usability. To evaluate these factors, they need to be decomposed into sub-factors, and finally, into usability measures.

The information presented is described in Part 12 of the ISO 9241 standard for the organization of information (arrangement, alignment, grouping, labels, location), for the display of graphical objects, and for the coding of information (abbreviation, colour, size, shape, visual cues) by seven attributes. The "attributes of presented information" represent the static aspects of the interface and can be generally regarded as the "look" of the interface. The attributes are detailed in the recommendations given in the standard. Each of the recommendations supports one or more of the seven attributes.

Seven presentation attributes [ edit ] Clarity The information content is conveyed quickly and accurately.

Discriminability The displayed information can be distinguished accurately.

Conciseness Users are not overloaded with extraneous information.

Consistency A unique design, conformity with user's expectation.

Detectability The user's attention is directed towards information required.

Legibility Information is easy to read.

Comprehensibility The meaning is clearly understandable, unambiguous, interpretable, and recognizable.

Usability [ edit ] The user guidance in Part 13 of the ISO 9241 standard describes that the user guidance information should be readily distinguishable from other displayed information and should be specific for the current context of use.

User guidance can be given by the following five means: Prompts indicating explicitly (specific prompts) or implicitly (generic prompts) that the system is available for input.

Feedback informing about the user's input timely, perceptible, and non-intrusive.

Status information indicating the continuing state of the application, the system's hardware and software components, and the user's activities.

Error management including error prevention, error correction, user support for error management, and error messages.

On-line help for system-initiated and user-initiated requests with specific information for the current context of use.

Research [ edit ] User interface design has been a topic of considerable research, including on its aesthetics .

[ 11 ] Standards have been developed as far back as the 1980s for defining the usability of software products.
One of the structural bases has become the IFIP user interface reference model.

The model proposes four dimensions to structure the user interface: The input/output dimension (the look) The dialogue dimension (the feel) The technical or functional dimension (the access to tools and services) The organizational dimension (the communication and co-operation support) This model has greatly influenced the development of the international standard ISO 9241 describing the interface design requirements for usability.
The desire to understand application-specific UI issues early in software development, even as an application was being developed, led to research on GUI rapid prototyping tools that might offer convincing simulations of how an actual application might behave in production use.

[ 12 ] Some of this research has shown that a wide variety of programming tasks for GUI-based software can, in fact, be specified through means other than writing program code.

[ 13 ] Research in recent years is strongly motivated by the increasing variety of devices that can, by virtue of Moore's law , host very complex interfaces.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about User interfaces Chief experience officer (CXO) Cognitive dimensions Discoverability Experience design Gender HCI Human interface guidelines Human-computer interaction Icon design Information architecture Interaction design Interaction design pattern Interaction Flow Modeling Language ( IFML ) Interaction technique Knowledge visualization Look and feel Mobile interaction Natural mapping (interface design) New Interfaces for Musical Expression Participatory design Principles of user interface design Process-centered design Progressive disclosure T Layout User experience design User-centered design References [ edit ] ^ Norman, D. A. (2002).

"Emotion & Design: Attractive things work better" .

Interactions Magazine, ix (4) . pp.

36– 42. Archived from the original on Mar 28, 2019 . Retrieved 20 April 2014 – via jnd.org.

^ Roth, Robert E. (April 17, 2017).

"User Interface and User Experience (UI/UX) Design" .

Geographic Information Science & Technology Body of Knowledge .

2017 (Q2).

doi : 10.22224/gistbok/2017.2.5 .

^ "The Definition of User Experience (UX)" .

Nielsen Norman Group . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ Wolf, Lauren (23 May 2012).

"6 Tips for Designing an Optimal User Interface for Your Digital Event" . INXPO. Archived from the original on 16 June 2013 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ Dam, Rikke Friis; Siang, Teo Yu (2024-10-01).

"The History of Design Thinking" .

The Interaction Design Foundation . Retrieved 2024-10-01 .

^ "The Stanford Design Thinking Process – Make:Iterate" . 2022-12-15 . Retrieved 2024-10-10 .

^ Dam, Rikke Friis (2024-10-01).

"The 5 Stages in the Design Thinking Process" .

The Interaction Design Foundation . Retrieved 2024-10-01 .

^ Ann Blandford.

"Semi-structured qualitative studies" .

The Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction, 2nd Ed . Interaction Design Foundation . Retrieved 20 April 2014 .

^ "10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface Design" .

Nielsen Norman Group . Retrieved 2024-10-09 .

^ "Usability 101: Introduction to Usability" .

Nielsen Norman Group . Retrieved 2024-10-09 .

^ "The role of context in perceptions of the aesthetics of web pages over time" . International Journal of Human–Computer Studies. 2009-01-05 . Retrieved 2009-04-02 .

^ "The HUMANOID model of interface design" . Proceedings CHI'92. 1992.

^ "Creating user interfaces using programming by example, visual programming, and constraints" . ACM. 1990-04-11 . Retrieved 2009-04-02 .

^ "Past, present, and future of user interface software tools" . ACM. 2000-03-01 . Retrieved 2009-04-02 .

v t e User interfaces Natural-language user interfaces Chatbot Dialogue system Voice user interfaces Conversational user interface Virtual assistant Voice search Graphical user interfaces Widgets Zooming user interface Touch user interfaces Multi-touch Tangible user interface 3D user interfaces Augmented and virtual reality Finger tracking Positional tracking Other user interfaces Text-based user interface Natural user interface Multimodal user interface v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=User_interface_design&oldid=1287146956 " Categories : Usability User interfaces Graphic design Industrial design Information architecture Design Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 08:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents User interface design 23 languages Add topic

