Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 2.1 Controversy and usage deprecation 3 Present-day 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Tribe 94 languages العربية Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tribal societies ) Human social group For other uses, see Tribe (disambiguation) .

"Tribal" redirects here. For other uses, see Tribal (disambiguation) .

"Tribals" redirects here. For the ancient Thracian tribe, see Triballi .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tribe" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Political and legal anthropology Basic concepts Status and rank Ascribed status Achieved status Social status Caste Age grade / Age set Leveling mechanism Leadership Big man Patriarchy Matriarchy Elder Pantribal sodalities Chief Paramount chief Polities Band society Segmentary lineage Tribe Chiefdom Petty kingdom House society Ethnic group Theatre state Law and custom Customary law Legal culture Ritual warfare Case studies Acephelous Societies without hierarchical leaders African Political Systems Papuan Big man system The Art of Not Being Governed State Non-western state systems Negara Mandala Technology, Tradition, and the State in Africa Legal systems Kapu Colonialism and resistance Europe and the People Without History Cargo cult Major theorists E. Adamson Hoebel Georges Balandier F. G. Bailey Fredrik Barth Jeremy Boissevain Robert L. Carneiro Henri J. M. Claessen Jean Comaroff John Comaroff Pierre Clastres E. E. Evans-Pritchard Wolfgang Fikentscher Meyer Fortes Morton Fried Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges Ernest Gellner David Graeber Lesley Gill Ulf Hannerz Thomas Blom Hansen Ted C. Lewellen Edmund Leach Ralph Linton Elizabeth Mertz Sidney Mintz Sally Falk Moore Rodney Needham Marshall Sahlins James C. Scott Elman Service Aidan Southall Jonathan Spencer Bjorn Thomassen Douglas R. White Eric Wolf Related articles Circumscription theory Legal anthropology Left–right paradigm State formation Political economy in anthropology Network Analysis and Ethnographic Problems Journals Political and Legal Anthropology Review Journal of Legal Anthropology Journal of Law and Society Social and cultural anthropology v t e Tribal war on the plains.

Comanche (right) trying to lance an Osage warrior. Painting by George Catlin , 1834 The term tribe is used in many different contexts to refer to a category of human social group . The predominant worldwide use of the term in English is in the discipline of anthropology . The definition is contested, in part due to conflicting theoretical understandings of social and kinship structures, and also reflecting the problematic application of this concept to extremely diverse human societies. Its concept is often contrasted by anthropologists with other social and kinship groups, being hierarchically larger than a lineage or clan , but smaller than a chiefdom , ethnicity , nation or state . These terms are similarly disputed. In some cases tribes have legal recognition and some degree of political autonomy  from national or federal government, but this legalistic usage of the term may conflict with anthropological definitions.

In the United States (US), Native American tribes are legally considered to have "domestic dependent nation" status within the territorial United States, with a government-to-government relationship with the federal government.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The modern English word tribe stems from Middle English tribu , which ultimately derives from Latin tribus . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , it remains unclear if this form is the result of a borrowing from a Romance language source (such as Old French tribu ) or if the form is a result of borrowing directly from Latin (the Middle English plural tribuz 1250 may be a direct representation of Latin plural tribūs ). Modern English tribe may also be a result of a common pattern wherein English borrows nouns directly from Latin and drops suffixes, including -us . Latin tribus is held to derive from the Proto-Indo-European compound * tri-dʰh₁u/o- ('rendered in three, tripartite division'; compare with Umbrian trifu 'trinity, district', Sanskrit trídha 'threefold').

[ 2 ] Classification [ edit ] Considerable debate has accompanied efforts to define and characterize tribes. In the popular imagination, tribes reflect a primordial social structure from which all subsequent civilizations and states developed.

Anthropologist Elman Service presented [ 3 ] a system of classification for societies in all human cultures, based on the evolution of social inequality and the role of the state . This system of classification contains four categories: Hunter-gatherer bands that are generally egalitarian Tribal societies with some limited instances of social rank and prestige Stratified tribal societies led by chieftains (see Chiefdom ) Civilizations , with complex social hierarchies and organized, institutional governments Tribes are therefore considered to be a political unit formed from an organisation of families (including clans and lineages) based on social or ideological solidarity. Membership of a tribe may be understood as being based on factors such as kinship ("clan"), ethnicity ("race"), language, dwelling place, political group, religious beliefs, oral tradition and/or cultural practices .

Archaeologists continue to explore the development of pre-state tribes. Current research suggests that tribal structures constituted one type of adaptation to situations providing plentiful yet unpredictable resources. Such structures proved flexible enough to coordinate production and distribution of food in times of scarcity, without limiting or constraining people during times of surplus.

Anthropologist Morton Fried argued in 1967 that bands organized into tribes in order to resist the violence and exploitation of early kingdoms and states. He wrote: In fact, there is no absolute necessity for a tribal stage as defined by Sahlins and Service, no necessity, that is, for such a stage to appear in the transit from a single settlement with embedded political organization, to a complex-state structured polity. Such a developmental process could have gone on within a unit that we may conceptualize as a city-state, such a unit as Jericho might have become in its later stages … tribalism can be viewed as reaction to the formation of complex political structure rather than a necessary preliminary stage in its evolution.

[ 4 ] Controversy and usage deprecation [ edit ] The term "tribe" was in common use in the field of anthropology until the late 1950s and 1960s. The continued use of the term has attracted controversy among anthropologists and other academics active in the social sciences with scholars of anthropological and ethnohistorical research challenging the utility of the concept. In 1970, anthropologist J. Clyde Mitchell wrote: The tribe, a long respected category of analysis in anthropology, has recently been the object of some scrutiny by anthropologists ... Doubts about the utility of the tribe as an analytical category have almost certainly arisen out of the rapid involvement of peoples, even in the remotest parts of the globe, in political, economic and sometimes direct social relationship with industrial nations. The doubts, however, are based ultimately on the definition and meaning which different scholars give to the term 'tribe', its adjective 'tribal', and its abstract form 'tribalism'.

[ 5 ] Despite the membership boundaries for a tribe being conceptually simple, in reality they are often vague and subject to change over time. In his 1975 study, The Notion of the Tribe ,  Fried provided numerous examples of tribes that encompassed members who spoke different languages and practiced different rituals, or who shared languages and rituals with members of other tribes.  Similarly, he provided examples of tribes in which people followed different political leaders, or followed the same leaders as members of other tribes.  He concluded that tribes in general are characterized by fluid boundaries, heterogeneity and dynamism, and are not parochial.

[ 6 ] Part of the difficulty with the term is that it seeks to construct and apply a common conceptual framework across diverse cultures and peoples. Different anthropologists studying different peoples therefore draw conflicting conclusions about the nature, structure and practices of tribes. Writing on the Kurdish peoples, anthropologist Martin van Bruinessen argued, "the terms of standard anthropological usage, 'tribe', 'clan' and 'lineage' appear to be a straitjacket that ill fits the social reality of Kurdistan".

[ 7 ] There are further negative connotations of the term "tribe" that have reduced its use. Writing in 2013, scholar Matthew Ortoleva noted that "like the word Indian , [t]ribe is a word that has connotations of colonialism." [ 8 ] Survival International says "It is important to make the distinction between tribal and indigenous because tribal peoples have a special status acknowledged in international law as well as problems in addition to those faced by the wider category of indigenous peoples." [ 9 ] Present-day [ edit ] See also: Pashtun tribes , Kurdish tribes , Albanian tribes , Tribes of Yemen , Arab tribes of Algeria , India tribal belt , List of federally recognized tribes in the contiguous United States , and Iwi A map of uncontacted tribes , around the start of the 21st century Few tribes today remain isolated from the development of the modern state system. Tribes have lost their legitimacy to conduct traditional functions, such as tithing , delivering justice and defending territory, with these being replaced by states functions and institutions, such as taxation, law courts and the military. Most have suffered decline and loss of cultural identity. Some have adapted to the new political context and transformed their culture and practices in order to survive, whilst others have secured legal rights and protections.

Fried proposed that most surviving tribes do not have their origin in pre-state tribes, but rather in pre-state bands. Such "secondary" tribes, he suggested, developed as modern products of state expansion. Bands comprise small, mobile, and fluid social formations with weak leadership . They do not generate surpluses, pay no taxes, and support no standing army.  Fried argued that secondary tribes develop in one of two ways. First, states could set them up as means to extend administrative and economic influence in their hinterland, where direct political control costs too much. States would encourage (or require) people on their frontiers to form more clearly bounded and centralized polities, because such polities could begin producing surpluses and taxes, and would have a leadership responsive to the needs of neighboring states (the so-called tribes of the United States or British India provide good examples of this). The British favored the label "aboriginal tribe" for some communities.

Pashtuns in Afghanistan and Pakistan form the world's largest tribal society , comprising over 60 million people and between 350 and 400 tribes and clans.

India adopted a republican constitution in 1950, after three years of debate in its Constituent Assembly. During the debate, Jaipal Singh, a member of Munda tribe from Central India advocated for special provisions for the ' Adibasi ' -- a translation into Hindi of 'aboriginal'. His arguments proved persuasive. These communities were to have seats in the legislatures and positions in government employment 'reserved' for them.

[ 10 ] Each of the assembly members prepared a list of communities that deserved special protections. These names were listed in a "Schedule" (appendix) to the Constitution. So these came to be called the 'Scheduled Tribes', often abbreviated to ST.

[ 11 ] Second, bands could form "secondary" tribes as a means to defend against state expansion. Members of bands would form more clearly bounded and centralized polities, because such polities could begin producing surpluses that could support a standing army that could fight against states, and they would have a leadership that could co-ordinate economic production and military activities.

In the Native American tribes of North America, tribes are considered sovereign nations , that have retained their sovereignty or been granted legal recognition by the federal government.

[ 1 ] [ 12 ] Yemen is notable as the most tribal nation in the Arab world , largely due to the significant influence of tribal leaders and their deep integration into various aspects of the state.

[ 13 ] Estimates vary, with approximately 200 tribes in Yemen, although some reports list more than 400.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Shahsevan Adivasi Tribes of Arabia Band society Ethnic religion Federally recognized tribes in the United States Gens Matrilineality Meenas Micronation New Tribal Revolution Nomad Pantribal sodalities Patrilineality Segmentary society Social group Stateless society Tribal chief Tribal name Tribal sovereignty Tribal warfare Tribalism Neotribalism Anarcho-primitivism Tribe (Internet) Twelve Tribes of Israel Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "FAQ About Native Americans" . 16 June 2014 . Retrieved August 21, 2022 .

^ de Vaan, Michiel (2008).

Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages . Leiden · Boston. p. 629.

ISBN 978-90-04-16797-1 .

^ Service, Elman Rogers (1962).

Primitive social organization : an evolutionary perspective . Random House.

OCLC 318447878 .

[ page needed ] ^ Fried, Morton H. (1967).

The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology . New York: Random House. pp.

169– 70.

^ Mitchell, Clyde J. (1970). "Tribe and Social Change in South Central Africa: A Situational Approach" in Gutkind, Peter C. W. Editor.

The Passing of Tribal Man in Africa , p. 83.

Brill .

^ Morton H. Fried (1972).

The Notion of Tribe .  Cummings Publishing Company [ page needed ] ^ Bruinessen, Martin van (1992).

Agha, shaikh, and state : the social and political structures of Kurdistan . Zed Books.

OCLC 555395702 .

[ page needed ] ^ Ortoleva, Matthew (2013). "We Face East" in Goggin, Peter N. Editor.

Environmental Rhetoric and Ecologies of Place , p. 95.

Routledge .

ISBN 9781135922658 ^ "Terminology - Survival International" .

^ Guha, Ramachandra (2008).

India After Gandhi: The History of the World's Largest Democracy (paperback ed.). New York: Harper Collins. pp.

126– 128.

ISBN 9780060958589 .

^ Choudhry, Sujit (2016).

The Oxford Handbook of the Indian Constitution . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

720– 724.

ISBN 9780198704898 .

^ Robert J. McCarthy, The Bureau of Indian Affairs and the Federal Trust Obligation to American Indians, 19 BYU J. PUB. L. 1 (December, 2004) ^ J. E. Peterson, Tribes and Politics in Yemen p.1 ^ "Zaydi Islam" .

www.globalsecurity.org . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ الجزيرة نت Archived 19 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine References [ edit ] Benveniste, Émile (1973).

Indo-European Language and Society , translated by Elizabeth Palmer. London: Faber and Faber.

ISBN 0-87024-250-4 .

Benveniste, Émile (1935).

Origines de la formation des noms en indo-européen .

Fried, Morton H. (1975).

The Notion of Tribe . Cummings Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-8465-1548-2 .

Helm, June, ed., (1968).

Essays on the Problem of Tribe, Proceedings, American Ethnological Society. Seattle: University of Washington Press.

[ ISBN missing ] James, Paul (2006).

Globalism, Nationalism, Tribalism: Bringing Theory Back In . London: Sage Publications.

James, Paul (2001).

"Relating Global Tensions: Modern Tribalism and Postmodern Nationalism" .

Communal/Plural .

9 (1): 11– 31.

doi : 10.1080/13207870124780 .

hdl : 1885/41671 .

Nagy, Gregory (1990).

Greek Mythology and Poetics , Cornell University Press. Chapter 12, beginning on p. 276, explores the meaning of the word origin and social context of a tribe in ancient Greece and beyond.

Sutton, Imre (1975).

Indian Land Tenure: Bibliographical Essays and a Guide to the Literature . Clearwater, NY: Tribe. pp. 101–02, 180–82, 186–87, 191–93.

[ ISBN missing ] Renfrew, Colin & Paul G. Bahn (2008).

Archaeology: Theories, Methods and Practice . New York: Thames and Hudson [ ISBN missing ] External links [ edit ] Look up tribe or tribal in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐cntm5
Cached time: 20250814215707
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.659 seconds
Real time usage: 0.845 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2927/1000000
Revision size: 17189/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 107554/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12435/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77500/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.456/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19913592/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  721.575      1 -total
 27.83%  200.816      1 Template:Reflist
 14.08%  101.590      6 Template:Lang
 11.41%   82.316      3 Template:Cite_web
 10.89%   78.544      1 Template:Political_anthropology
 10.65%   76.835      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.62%   76.642      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.12%   73.056      1 Template:Short_description
  7.46%   53.816      3 Template:Page_needed
  7.12%   51.382      4 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45413:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215707 and revision id 1299461176. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tribe&oldid=1299461176 " Categories : Tribes Ethnology Self-sustainability Political anthropology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2020 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Pages with missing ISBNs This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tribe 94 languages Add topic

