Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Accomplishments Toggle Accomplishments subsection 2.1 Philosophy 2.2 Astronomy 2.3 Optics 2.4 Medicine 2.5 Chemistry 2.6 Mathematics 2.7 Cryptography 2.8 Meteorology 2.9 Music theory 3 Philosophical thought Toggle Philosophical thought subsection 3.1 Influences 3.2 Metaphysics 3.3 Epistemology 3.4 The soul and the afterlife 3.5 The relationship between revelation and philosophy 3.6 Critics and patrons 4 Legacy 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 6.1 English translations 6.2 Works about al-Kindi 7 External links Toggle the table of contents al-Kindi 71 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa کٲشُر Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Muslim Arab philosopher, mathematician and physician (c. 801–873) Not to be confused with Abd al-Masih ibn Ishaq al-Kindi .

For the surname, see al-Kindi (surname) .

al-Kindi al-Kindi on Iraqi stamp from 1962 Born c.

801 Kufa , Abbasid Caliphate Died c.

873 (aged approximately 72) Baghdad , Abbasid Caliphate Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age Region Islamic philosophy School Aristotelianism [ 1 ] Main interests Philosophy , Islamic theology ( kalam ), logic , ethics , mathematics , cryptography , physics , chemistry , psychology , pharmacology , medicine , metaphysics , cosmology , astrology , music theory Notable works Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages , Epistle on Informative Parts on Music , De radiis , De aspectibus Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Mu'tazila [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Abū Yūsuf Yaʻqūb ibn ʼIsḥāq aṣ-Ṣabbāḥ al-Kindī ( / æ l ˈ k ɪ n d i / ; Arabic : أبو يوسف يعقوب بن إسحاق الصبّاح الكندي ; Latin : Alkindus ; c.

801–873 AD ) was an Arab Muslim polymath active as a philosopher , mathematician , physician , and music theorist . Al-Kindi was the first of the Islamic peripatetic philosophers , and is hailed as the "father of Arab philosophy ".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Al-Kindi was born in Kufa and educated in Baghdad .

[ 7 ] He became a prominent figure in the House of Wisdom , and a number of Abbasid Caliphs appointed him to oversee the translation of Greek scientific and philosophical texts into the Arabic language . This contact with "the philosophy of the ancients" (as Hellenistic philosophy was often referred to by Muslim scholars) had a profound effect on him, as he synthesized, adapted and promoted Hellenistic and Peripatetic philosophy in the Muslim world .

[ 8 ] He subsequently wrote hundreds of original treatises of his own on a range of subjects ranging from metaphysics , ethics, logic and psychology , to medicine, pharmacology , [ 9 ] mathematics, astronomy , astrology and optics , and further afield to more practical topics like perfumes, swords, jewels, glass, dyes, zoology, tides, mirrors, meteorology and earthquakes .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In the field of mathematics , al-Kindi played an important role in introducing Hindu numerals to the Islamic world, and their further development into Arabic numerals along with al-Khwarizmi which eventually was adopted by the rest of the world.

[ 12 ] Al-Kindi was also one of the fathers of cryptography .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Building on the work of al-Khalil (717–786), [ 15 ] Al-Kindi's book entitled Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages gave rise to the birth of cryptanalysis , was the earliest known use of statistical inference , [ 16 ] and introduced several new methods of breaking ciphers, notably frequency analysis .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] He was able to create a scale that would enable doctors to gauge the effectiveness of their medication by combining his knowledge of mathematics and medicine.

[ 19 ] The central theme underpinning al-Kindi's philosophical writings is the compatibility between philosophy and other "orthodox" Islamic sciences, particularly theology, and many of his works deal with subjects that theology had an immediate interest in. These include the nature of God, the soul and prophetic knowledge .

[ 20 ] Early life [ edit ] Al-Kindi was born in Kufa to an aristocratic family of the Arabian tribe of the Kinda , descended from the chieftain al-Ash'ath ibn Qays , a contemporary of Muhammad .

[ 21 ] The family belonged to the most prominent families of the tribal nobility of Kufa in the early Islamic period, until it lost much of its power following the revolt of Abd al-Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al-Ash'ath .

[ 22 ] His father Ishaq was the governor of Basra and al-Kindi received his preliminary education there. He later went to complete his studies in Baghdad, where he was patronized by the Abbasid caliphs al-Ma'mun ( r.

813–833 ) and al-Mu'tasim ( r.

833–842 ). On account of his learning and aptitude for study, al-Ma'mun appointed him to the House of Wisdom , a recently established center for the translation of Greek philosophical and scientific texts, in Baghdad. He was also well known for his beautiful calligraphy , and at one point was employed as a calligrapher by Caliph al-Mutawakkil ( r.

847–861 ).

[ 23 ] When al-Ma'mun died, his brother, al-Mu'tasim became caliph. Al-Kindi's position would be enhanced under al-Mu'tasim, who appointed him as a tutor to his son. But on the accession of al-Wathiq ( r.

842–847 ), and especially of al-Mutawakkil, al-Kindi's star waned.  There are various theories concerning this: some attribute al-Kindi's downfall to scholarly rivalries at the House of Wisdom ; others refer to al-Mutawakkil's often violent persecution of unorthodox Muslims (as well as of non-Muslims); at one point al-Kindi was beaten and his library temporarily confiscated.

Henry Corbin , an authority on Islamic studies, says that in 873, al-Kindi died "a lonely man", in Baghdad during the reign of al-Mu'tamid ( r.

870–892 ).

[ 23 ] After his death, al-Kindi's philosophical works quickly fell into obscurity; many were lost even to later Islamic scholars and historians. Felix Klein-Franke suggests several reasons for this: aside from the militant orthodoxy of al-Mutawakkil, the Mongols also destroyed countless libraries during their invasion of Persia and Mesopotamia . However, he says the most probable cause of this was that his writings never found popularity amongst subsequent influential philosophers such as al-Farabi and Avicenna , who ultimately overshadowed him.

[ 24 ] His philosophical career peaked under al-Mu'tasim, to whom al-Kindi dedicated his most famous work, On First Philosophy , and whose son Ahmad was tutored by al-Kindi.

Accomplishments [ edit ] According to Arab bibliographer Ibn al-Nadim , al-Kindi wrote at least two hundred and sixty books, contributing heavily to geometry (thirty-two books), medicine and philosophy (twenty-two books each), logic (nine books), and physics (twelve books).

[ 25 ] Although most of his books have been lost over the centuries, a few have survived in the form of Latin translations by Gerard of Cremona , and others have been rediscovered in Arabic manuscripts; most importantly, twenty-four of his lost works were located in the mid-twentieth century in a Turkish library.

[ 26 ] Philosophy [ edit ] His greatest contribution to the development of Islamic philosophy was his efforts to make Greek thought both accessible and acceptable to a Muslim audience. Al-Kindi carried out this mission from the House of Wisdom (Bayt al-Hikma), an institute of translation and learning patronized by the Abbasid Caliphs, in Baghdad.

[ 23 ] As well as translating many important texts, much of what was to become standard Arabic philosophical vocabulary originated with al-Kindi; indeed, if it had not been for him, the work of philosophers like al-Farabi , Avicenna , and al-Ghazali might not have been possible.

[ 27 ] In his writings, one of al-Kindi's central concerns was to demonstrate the compatibility between philosophy and natural theology on the one hand, and revealed or speculative theology on the other (though in fact he rejected speculative theology). Despite this, he did make clear that he believed revelation was a superior source of knowledge to reason because it guaranteed matters of faith that reason could not uncover. And while his philosophical approach was not always original, and was even considered clumsy by later thinkers (mainly because he was the first philosopher writing in the Arabic language), he successfully incorporated Aristotelian and (especially) neo-Platonist thought into an Islamic philosophical framework. This was an important factor in the introduction and popularization of Greek philosophy in the Muslim intellectual world.

[ 28 ] Astronomy [ edit ] Liber novem iudicum in iudiciis astrorum , 1509 Al-Kindi took his view of the Solar System from Ptolemy , who placed the Earth at the centre of a series of concentric spheres, in which the known heavenly bodies (the Moon, Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and the stars) are embedded. In one of his treatises on the subject, he says that these bodies are rational entities, whose circular motion is in obedience to and worship of God. Their role, al-Kindi believes, is to act as instruments for divine providence. He furnishes empirical evidence as proof for this assertion; different seasons are marked by particular arrangements of the planets and stars (most notably the Sun); the appearance and manner of people varies according to the arrangement of heavenly bodies situated above their homeland.

[ 29 ] However, he is ambiguous when it comes to the actual process by which the heavenly bodies affect the material world. One theory he posits in his works is from Aristotle, who conceived that the movement of these bodies causes friction in the sub-lunar region, which stirs up the primary elements of earth, fire, air and water, and these combine to produce everything in the material world. An alternative view found in the treatise On Rays ( De radiis ) is that the planets exercise their influence in straight lines; but this treatise, written by a Latin author, probably around the middle of the 13th century, is apocryphal.

[ 30 ] In each of these, two fundamentally different views of physical interaction are presented; action by contact and action at a distance. This dichotomy is duplicated in his writings on optics .

[ 31 ] Some of the notable astrological works by al-Kindi include: [ 32 ] The Book of the Judgement of the Stars , including The Forty Chapters , on questions and elections.

On the Stellar Rays (spurious) Several epistles on weather and meteorology, including De mutatione temporum , ("On the Changing of the Weather").

Treatise on the Judgement of Eclipses.

Treatise on the Dominion of the Arabs and its Duration (used to predict the end of Arab rule).

The Choices of Days (on elections).

On the Revolutions of the Years (on mundane astrology and natal revolutions).

De Signis Astronomiae Applicitis as Mediciam 'On the Signs of Astronomy as applied to Medicine' Treatise on the Spirituality of the Planets .

Optics [ edit ] De radiis , manuscript, 17th century. Cambridge, Trinity College Library , Medieval manuscripts, MS R.15.17 (937).

Al-Kindi was the first major writer on optics since antiquity.

Roger Bacon placed him in the first rank after Ptolemy as a writer on the topic.

[ 33 ] In the apocryphal work known as De radiis stellarum , is developed the theory "that everything in the world ... emits rays in every direction, which fill the whole world." [ 34 ] This theory of the active power of rays had an influence on later scholars such as Ibn al-Haytham , Robert Grosseteste and Roger Bacon .

[ 35 ] Two major theories of optics appear in the writings of al-Kindi: Aristotelian and Euclidean . Aristotle had believed that in order for the eye to perceive an object, both the eye and the object must be in contact with a transparent medium (such as air) that is filled with light. When these criteria are met, the "sensible form" of the object is transmitted through the medium to the eye. On the other hand, Euclid proposed that vision occurred in straight lines when "rays" from the eye reached an illuminated object and were reflected back. As with his theories on Astrology, the dichotomy of contact and distance is present in al-Kindi's writings on this subject as well.

The factor which al-Kindi relied upon to determine which of these theories was most correct was how adequately each one explained the experience of seeing. For example, Aristotle's theory was unable to account for why the angle at which an individual sees an object affects his perception of it. For example, why a circle viewed from the side will appear as a line. According to Aristotle, the complete sensible form of a circle should be transmitted to the eye and it should appear as a circle. On the other hand, Euclidean optics provided a geometric model that was able to account for this, as well as the length of shadows and reflections in mirrors, because Euclid believed that the visual "rays" could only travel in straight lines. For this reason, al-Kindi considered the latter preponderant.

[ 36 ] Al-Kindi's primary optical treatise "De aspectibus" was later translated into Latin. This work, along with Alhazen 's Optics and the Arabic translations of Ptolemy and Euclid's Optics , were the main Arabic texts to affect the development of optical investigations in Europe, most notably those of Robert Grosseteste , Vitello and Roger Bacon .

[ 37 ] Medicine [ edit ] There are more than thirty treatises attributed to al-Kindi in the field of medicine, in which he was chiefly influenced by the ideas of Galen .

[ 38 ] His most important work in this field is probably De Gradibus , in which he demonstrates the application of mathematics to medicine, particularly in the field of pharmacology. For example, he developed a mathematical scale to quantify the strength of a drug, and a system (based on the phases of the moon) that would allow a doctor to determine in advance the most critical days of a patient's illness.

[ 19 ] According to Plinio Prioreschi, this was the first attempt at serious quantification in medicine.

[ 39 ] Chemistry [ edit ] Al-Kindi denied the possibility of transmuting base metals into precious metals such as gold and silver, a position that was later attacked by the Persian alchemist and physician Abu Bakr al-Razi ( c.

865 – c.

925 ).

[ 40 ] One work attributed to al-Kindi, variously known as the Kitāb al-Taraffuq fī l-ʿiṭr ("The Book of Gentleness on Perfume") or the Kitāb Kīmiyāʾ al-ʿiṭr wa-l-taṣʿīdāt ("The Book of the Chemistry of Perfume and Distillations"), contains one of the earliest known references to the distillation of wine.

[ 41 ] The work also describes the distillation process for extracting rose oils , and provides recipes for 107 different kinds of perfumes.

[ 42 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Al-Kindi authored works on a number of important mathematical subjects, including arithmetic, geometry, the Hindu numbers, the harmony of numbers, lines and multiplication with numbers, relative quantities, measuring proportion and time, and numerical procedures and cancellation.

[ 12 ] He also wrote four volumes, On the Use of the Hindu Numerals ( Arabic : كتاب في استعمال الأعداد الهندية Kitāb fī Isti`māl al-'A`dād al-Hindīyyah ) which contributed greatly to diffusion of the Hindu system of numeration in the Middle-East and the West. In geometry, among other works, he wrote on the theory of parallels. Also related to geometry were two works on optics. One of the ways in which he made use of mathematics as a philosopher was to attempt to disprove the eternity of the world by demonstrating that actual infinity is a mathematical and logical absurdity.

[ 43 ] Cryptography [ edit ] The first page of al-Kindi's manuscript "On Deciphering Cryptographic Messages", containing the oldest known description of cryptanalysis by frequency analysis .

Al-Kindi is credited with developing a method whereby variations in the frequency of the occurrence of letters could be analyzed and exploited to break ciphers (i.e. cryptanalysis by frequency analysis ).

[ 18 ] His book on this topic is Risāla fī Istikhrāj al-Kutub al-Mu'ammāh (رسالة في استخراج الكتب المعماة; literally: On Extracting Obscured Correspondence , more contemporarily: On Decrypting Encrypted Correspondence ). In his treatise on cryptanalysis, he wrote: One way to solve an encrypted message, if we know its language, is to find a different plaintext of the same language long enough to fill one sheet or so, and then we count the occurrences of each letter. We call the most frequently occurring letter the "first", the next most occurring letter the "second", the following most occurring letter the "third", and so on, until we account for all the different letters in the plaintext sample. Then we look at the cipher text we want to solve and we also classify its symbols. We find the most occurring symbol and change it to the form of the "first" letter of the plaintext sample, the next most common symbol is changed to the form of the "second" letter, and the following most common symbol is changed to the form of the "third" letter, and so on, until we account for all symbols of the cryptogram we want to solve.

[ 44 ] Al-Kindi was influenced by the work of al-Khalil (717–786), who wrote the Book of Cryptographic Messages , which contains the first use of permutations and combinations to list all possible Arabic words with and without vowels.

[ 15 ] Meteorology [ edit ] In a treatise entitled as Risala fi l-Illa al-Failali l-Madd wa l-Fazr ( Treatise on the Efficient Cause of the Flow and Ebb ), al-Kindi presents a theory on tides which "depends on the changes which take place in bodies owing to the rise and fall of temperature." [ 45 ] In order to support his argument, he gave a description of a scientific experiment as follows: One can also observe by the senses... how in consequence of extreme cold air changes into water. To do this, one takes a glass bottle, fills it completely with snow, and closes its end carefully. Then one determines its weight by weighing. One places it in a container... which has previously been weighed. On the surface of the bottle the air changes into water, and appears upon it like the drops on large porous pitchers, so that a considerable amount of water gradually collects inside the container. One then weighs the bottle, the water and the container, and finds their weight greater than previously, which proves the change. [...] Some foolish persons are of opinion that the snow exudes through the glass. This is impossible. There is no process by which water or snow can be made to pass through glass.

In explaining the natural cause of the wind , and the difference for its directions based on time and location, he wrote: [ 46 ] When the sun is in its northern declination northerly places will heat up and it will be cold towards the south. Then the northern air will expand in a southerly direction because of the heat due to the contraction of the southern air. Therefore most of the summer winds are merits and most of the winter winds are not.

Music theory [ edit ] Al-Kindi was the first theoretician of music in the Arab-Islamic world whose works have come down to us. He transferred the Greek tonal system to the Arabic lute. Although he used tone letters (i.e. the Arabic alphabet), he also transferred the Greek tonal names to Arabic.

[ 47 ] He added a fifth string to the 'ud . He is known to have written treatises on music theory .

[ 48 ] The known indexes list a varying number of writings attributed to him, but only four have survived and can be attributed to him with certainty: [ 49 ] Stringed Instruments from One String to Ten Strings .

Epistle on Informative Parts on Music .

Epistle on Modes and Tones .

Epistle on the Knowledge of the Composition of Melodies .

His works include discussions on the therapeutic value of music [ 50 ] and what he regarded as "cosmological connections" of music.

[ 51 ] Philosophical thought [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Influences [ edit ] While Muslim intellectuals were already acquainted with Greek philosophy (especially logic ), al-Kindi is credited with being the first real Muslim philosopher .

[ 8 ] His own thought was largely influenced by the Neo-Platonic philosophy of Proclus , Plotinus and John Philoponus , amongst others, although he does appear to have borrowed ideas from other Hellenistic schools as well.

[ 52 ] He makes many references to Aristotle in his writings, but these are often unwittingly re-interpreted in a Neo-Platonic framework. This trend is most obvious in areas such as metaphysics and the nature of God as a causal entity.

[ 53 ] Experts have suggested that he was influenced by the Mutazilite school of theology, because of the mutual concern both he and they demonstrated for maintaining the singularity ( tawhid ) of God. A minority view however holds that such agreements are considered incidental.

[ 9 ] Metaphysics [ edit ] According to al-Kindi, the goal of metaphysics is knowledge of God. For this reason, he does not make a clear distinction between philosophy and theology, because he believes they are both concerned with the same subject. Later philosophers, particularly al-Farabi and Avicenna , would strongly disagree with him on this issue, by saying that metaphysics is actually concerned with being qua being, and as such, the nature of God is purely incidental.

[ 20 ] Central to al-Kindi's understanding of metaphysics is God's absolute oneness , which he considers an attribute uniquely associated with God (and therefore not shared with anything else). By this he means that while we may think of any existent thing as being "one", it is in fact both "one" and many". For example, he says that while a body is one, it is also composed of many different parts. A person might say "I see an elephant", by which he means "I see one elephant", but the term 'elephant' refers to a species of animal that contains many. Therefore, only God is absolutely one, both in being and in concept, lacking any multiplicity whatsoever. Some feel this understanding entails a very rigorous negative theology because it implies that any description which can be predicated to anything else, cannot be said about God.

[ 9 ] [ 54 ] In addition to absolute oneness, al-Kindi also described God as the Creator. This means that He acts as both a final and efficient cause. Unlike later Muslim Neo-Platonic philosophers (who asserted that the universe existed as a result of God's existence "overflowing", which is a passive act), al-Kindi conceived of God as an active agent. In fact, of God as the agent, because all other intermediary agencies are contingent upon Him.

[ 55 ] The key idea here is that God "acts" through created intermediaries, which in turn "act" on one another – through a chain of cause and effect – to produce the desired result. In reality, these intermediary agents do not "act" at all, they are merely a conduit for God's own action.

[ 53 ] This is especially significant in the development of Islamic philosophy, as it portrayed the "first cause" and "unmoved mover" of Aristotelian philosophy as compatible with the concept of God according to Islamic revelation.

[ 56 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle were highly respected in the medieval Islamic world.

Al-Kindi theorized that there was a separate, incorporeal and universal intellect (known as the "First Intellect"). It was the first of God's creation and the intermediary through which all other things came into creation. Aside from its obvious metaphysical importance, it was also crucial to al-Kindi's epistemology , which was influenced by Platonic realism .

[ 57 ] According to Plato, everything that exists in the material world corresponds to certain universal forms in the heavenly realm. These forms are really abstract concepts such as a species, quality or relation, which apply to all physical objects and beings. For example, a red apple has the quality of "redness" derived from the appropriate universal. However, al-Kindi says that human intellects are only potentially able to comprehend these. This potential is actualized by the First Intellect, which is perpetually thinking about all of the universals. He argues that the external agency of this intellect is necessary by saying that human beings cannot arrive at a universal concept merely through perception. In other words, an intellect cannot understand the species of a thing simply by examining one or more of its instances. According to him, this will only yield an inferior "sensible form", and not the universal form which we desire. The universal form can only be attained through contemplation and actualization by the First Intellect.

[ 58 ] The analogy he provides to explain his theory is that of wood and fire. Wood, he argues, is potentially hot (just as a human is potentially thinking about a universal), and therefore requires something else which is already hot (such as fire) to actualize this. This means that for the human intellect to think about something, the First Intellect must already be thinking about it. Therefore, he says that the First Intellect must always be thinking about everything. Once the human intellect comprehends a universal by this process, it becomes part of the individual's "acquired intellect" and can be thought about whenever he or she wishes.

[ 59 ] The soul and the afterlife [ edit ] Al-Kindi says that the soul is a simple, immaterial substance, which is related to the material world only because of its faculties which operate through the physical body. To explain the nature of our worldly existence, he (borrowing from Epictetus ) compares it to a ship which has, during the course of its ocean voyage, temporarily anchored itself at an island and allowed its passengers to disembark. The implicit warning is that those passengers who linger too long on the island may be left behind when the ship sets sail again. Here, al-Kindi displays a stoic concept, that we must not become attached to material things (represented by the island), as they will invariably be taken away from us (when the ship sets sail again). He then connects this with a Neo-Platonist idea, by saying that our soul can be directed towards the pursuit of desire or the pursuit of intellect; the former will tie it to the body, so that when the body dies, it will also die, but the latter will free it from the body and allow it to survive "in the light of the Creator" in a realm of pure intelligence.

[ 60 ] The relationship between revelation and philosophy [ edit ] In the view of al-Kindi, prophecy and philosophy were two different routes to arrive at the truth. He contrasts the two positions in four ways. Firstly, while a person must undergo a long period of training and study to become a philosopher, prophecy is bestowed upon someone by God. Secondly, the philosopher must arrive at the truth by his own devices (and with great difficulty), whereas the prophet has the truth revealed to him by God. Thirdly, the understanding of the prophet – being divinely revealed – is clearer and more comprehensive than that of the philosopher. Fourthly, the way in which the prophet is able to express this understanding to the ordinary people is superior. Therefore, al-Kindi says the prophet is superior in two fields: the ease and certainty with which he receives the truth, and the way in which he presents it. However, the crucial implication is that the content of the prophet's and the philosopher's knowledge is the same . This, says Adamson, demonstrates how limited the superiority al-Kindi afforded to prophecy was.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] In addition to this, al-Kindi adopted a naturalistic view of prophetic visions. He argued that, through the faculty of "imagination" as conceived of in Aristotelian philosophy, certain "pure" and well-prepared souls, were able to receive information about future events. Significantly, he does not attribute such visions or dreams to revelation from God, but instead explains that imagination enables human beings to receive the "form" of something without needing to perceive the physical entity to which it refers. Therefore, it would seem to imply that anyone who has purified themselves would be able to receive such visions. It is precisely this idea, amongst other naturalistic explanations of prophetic miracles that al-Ghazali attacks in his Incoherence of the Philosophers .

[ 63 ] Critics and patrons [ edit ] While al-Kindi appreciated the usefulness of philosophy in answering questions of a religious nature, there would be many Islamic thinkers who were not as enthusiastic about its potential. But it would be incorrect to assume that they opposed philosophy simply because it was a "foreign science".

Oliver Leaman , an expert on Islamic philosophy, points out that the objections of notable theologians are rarely directed at philosophy itself, but rather at the conclusions the philosophers arrived at. Even al-Ghazali , who is famous for his critique of the philosophers, was himself an expert in philosophy and logic . And his criticism was that they arrived at theologically erroneous conclusions. The three most serious of these, in his view, were believing in the co-eternity of the universe with God, denying the bodily resurrection, and asserting that God only has knowledge of abstract universals, not of particular things (not all philosophers subscribed to these same views).

[ 64 ] During his life, al-Kindi was fortunate enough to enjoy the patronage of the pro- Mutazilite Caliphs al-Ma'mun and al-Mu'tasim , which meant he could carry out his philosophical speculations with relative ease. In his own time, al-Kindi would be criticized for extolling the "intellect" as being the most immanent creation in proximity to God, which was commonly held to be the position of the angels.

[ 65 ] He also engaged in disputations with certain Mutazilites, whom he attacked for their belief in atoms, as not all Mutazilites accepted the belief of atomism.

[ 66 ] But the real role of al-Kindi in the conflict between philosophers and theologians would be to prepare the ground for debate. His works, says Deborah Black , contained all the seeds of future controversy that would be fully realized in al-Ghazali's Incoherence of the Philosophers .

[ 67 ] Legacy [ edit ] Al-Kindi was a master of many different areas of thought and was held to be one of the greatest philosophers. His influence in the fields of physics, mathematics, medicine, philosophy, and music were far-reaching and lasted for several centuries.

Ibn al-Nadim in his Kitab al-Fihrist praised al-Kindi and his work stating: The best man of his time, unique in his knowledge of all the ancient sciences. He is called the Philosopher of the Arabs. His books deal with different sciences, such as logic, philosophy, geometry, arithmetic, astronomy, etc. We have connected him with the natural philosophers because of his prominence in Science.

[ 68 ] Al-Kindi's major contribution was his establishment of philosophy in the Islamic world and his efforts in trying to harmonize the philosophical investigation along with the Islamic theology and creed. The philosophical texts which were translated under his supervision would become the standard texts in the Islamic world for centuries to come, even after his influence has been eclipsed by later Philosophers.

[ 69 ] Al-Kindi was also an important figure in medieval Europe . Several of his books got translated into Latin influencing Western authors like Robert Grosseteste and Roger Bacon . The Italian Renaissance scholar Geralomo Cardano (1501–1575) considered him one of the twelve greatest minds.

[ 70 ] In 1986, the Royal Commission for Riyadh City inaugurated the Al Kindi Plaza in the Diplomatic Quarter district of Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

References [ edit ] ^ Klein-Frank, F.

Al-Kindi . In Leaman, O & Nasr, H (2001).

History of Islamic Philosophy . London: Routledge. p 165 ^ L. Ivry, Alfred (1976).

"al-Kindī and the Muʿtazila: A Philosophical and Political Reevaluation" .

The Philosophical Quarterly . 25/26: 69– 85.

doi : 10.2307/1580657 .

JSTOR 1580657 .

^ Hasan Abasi, Hossein Abadi (2020). "The Concept of God in Al-Kindi's Reflections".

New Intellectual Research .

5 (9).

doi : 10.22081/NIR.2020.56605.1188 .

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2006).

Islamic philosophy from its origin to the present: philosophy in the land of prophecy . State University of New York. pp.

137– 138.

ISBN 978-0-7914-6799-2 .

^ Abboud, Tony (2006).

Al-Kindi: the father of Arab philosophy . Rosen.

ISBN 978-1-4042-0511-6 .

^ Greenberg, Yudit Kornberg (2008).

Encyclopedia of love in world religions . Vol. 1. ABC-CLIO. p. 405.

ISBN 978-1-85109-980-1 .

^ "Al-Kindi biography" .

www-groups.dcs.st-and.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 26 October 2007.

^ a b Klein-Franke 2001 , p. 165.

^ a b c Corbin 1993 , p. 155.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 33.

^ Adamson 2007 , p. 7.

^ a b "Abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Sabbah Al-Kindi" . Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 October 2007 .

^ "The man who cracked the Kama Sutra code" .

The Telegraph . 4 October 2000.

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022.

^ Borda, Monica (2011).

Fundamentals in Information Theory and Coding . Springer. p. 122.

Al Kindi, an Arab scientist from 9th century is considered the father of cryptology, his book on this subject being, at this moment, the oldest available.

^ a b Broemeling, Lyle D. (1 November 2011). "An Account of Early Statistical Inference in Arab Cryptology".

The American Statistician .

65 (4): 255– 257.

doi : 10.1198/tas.2011.10191 .

S2CID 123537702 .

^ Broemeling, Lyle D. (2011). "An Account of Early Statistical Inference in Arab Cryptology".

The American Statistician .

65 (4): 255– 257.

doi : 10.1198/tas.2011.10191 .

S2CID 123537702 .

^ "Al-Kindi Distinguished Statistics Lectures" .

Statistics at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology .

The lectures are named after Al-Kindi (801–873 CE), a prominent figure in the House of Wisdom, whose book entitled "Manuscript on Deciphering Cryptographic Messages" is believed to be the earliest writing on statistics. In his book, Al-Kindi gave a detailed description on how to decipher encrypted messages using statistics and frequency analysis. This text arguably gave rise to the birth of both statistics and cryptanalysis.

^ a b Singh, Simon (2000).

The Code Book . New York City: Anchor Books. pp.

14–20 .

ISBN 9780385495325 .

^ a b Klein-Franke 2001 , p. 172.

^ a b Adamson 2005 , p. 34.

^ Abboud, Tony (15 January 2006).

Al Kindi: The Father of Arab Philosophy . The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc.

ISBN 9781404205116 .

^ Crone, Patricia (1980).

Slaves on Horses: The Evolution of the Islamic Polity . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

110– 111.

ISBN 0-521-52940-9 .

^ a b c Corbin 1993 , p. 154.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , p. 166.

^ Corbin 1993 , pp. 154–155.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , pp. 172–173.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 32-33.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , pp. 166–167.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 42.

^ Matton, Sylvain (Winter 2023). "An Irradiation of Latin Grammarians, or The De radiis is not by al-Kindī".

Magic, Ritual, and Witchcraft .

17 (3): 437– 455.

doi : 10.1353/mrw.2023.0005 .

S2CID 258054985 .

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 43.

^ Dykes, Benjamin N. (2011).

The Forty Chapters of Al-Kindī: Traditional Horary and Electional Astrology . Minneapolis: Cazimi Press. pp.

5– 6.

^ Deming, David (2012).

Science and Technology in World History, Volume 2: Early Christianity, the Rise of Islam and the Middle Ages . McFarland. p. 92.

^ Lindberg, David C. (1976).

Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler . Chicago: University of Chicago. p. 19.

OCLC 463202962 .

^ Lindberg, David C. (Winter 1971). "Alkindi's Critique of Euclid's Theory of Vision".

Isis .

62 (4): 469–489 [471].

doi : 10.1086/350790 .

PMID 4948770 .

S2CID 40895875 .

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 45.

^ Szulakowska, Urszula (2000).

The Alchemy of Light: Geometry and Optics in Late Renaissance Alchemical Illustration . Brill. p. 29.

In the West, optics was developed by fourteenth century scholastics such as Bacon, Witelo, Ockham and Pecham following Arabian models, in particular, those of Alhazen's Optics and Al-kindi's De radiis stellarum.

^ Prioreschi 2002 .

^ Prioreschi 1996 , p. 230.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , pp. 173–174.

^ al-Hassan, Ahmad Y.

(2001). "Alchemy, chemistry and chemical technology". In al-Hassan, Ahmad Y. (ed.).

Science and Technology in Islam: Technology and Applied Sciences . UNESCO. pp.

41– 84.

ISBN 9789231038310 .

pp. 65-69; al-Hassan, Ahmad Y.

(2009). "Alcohol and the Distillation of Wine in Arabic Sources from the 8th Century".

Studies in al-Kimya': Critical Issues in Latin and Arabic Alchemy and Chemistry . Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlag. pp.

283– 298.

(same content also available on the author's website ). See also Garbers, Karl (1948).

Kitāb Kīmiyā' al-'Iṭr Wat-Taṣ'īdāt: Buch über die Chemie des Parfüms und die Destillationen von Ya'qūb b. Isḥāq al-Kindī. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der arabischen Parfümgeschichte und Drogenkunde aus de 9. Jahrh . Vol. P.C. Abhandlungen für die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 30. Leipzig: Brockhaus.

.

^ al-Hassan 2001 , p. 69.

^ Al-Allaf, M.

"Al-Kindi's Mathematical Metaphysics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 January 2007 . Retrieved 12 January 2007 .

^ Cozzens, Margaret; Miller, Steven J. (2013).

The Mathematics of Encryption: An Elementary Introduction . American Mathematical Society. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0821883211 .

^ Prioreschi 2002 , p. 17.

^ Al-Jubouri, I. M. N. (2004).

History of Islamic Philosophy: With View of Greek Philosophy and Early History of Islam . Authors on Line Ltd.

ISBN 9780755210114 .

^ Schewe, Stephanie (2018).

Al-Kindī und die Wirkung der Musik. 'Das Buch der Chordophone von den einsaitigen bis zu den zehnsaitigen' (Kitāb al-muṣawwitāt al-watariyya min ḏāt al-watar al-wāḥid ilā ḏāt al-ʿašarat al-autār) . Frankfurt: Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science. pp.

144– 156.

^ Stanton, Andrea L.; Seybolt, Peter J.; Ramsamy, Edward; Elliott, Carolyn M., eds. (2012).

Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia .

SAGE Publications . p. 87.

ISBN 978-1412981767 .

^ Schewe, Stephanie (2018).

Al-Kindī und die Wirkung der Musik. 'Das Buch der Chordophone von den einsaitigen bis zu den zehnsaitigen' (Kitāb al-muṣawwitāt al-watariyya min ḏāt al-watar al-wāḥid ilā ḏāt al-ʿašarat al-autār) . Frankfurt: Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science. pp.

6– 27.

^ Shehadi, Fadlou (1995).

Philosophies of Music in Medieval Islam . Leiden: Brill. p. 35.

ISBN 978-9004101289 .

^ Turner, Howard R. (28 July 2010).

Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated Introduction (3rd pbk. print. ed.). University of Texas Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 978-0292781498 .

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 37.

^ a b Adamson 2005 , p. 36.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 35.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , p. 167.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 39.

^ Klein-Franke 2001 , p. 168.

^ Adamson 2005 , pp. 40–41.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 40.

^ Adamson 2005 , pp. 41–42.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 46-47.

^ Corbin 1993 , p. 156.

^ Adamson 2005 , p. 47.

^ Leaman, Oliver (1999).

A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy . Polity Press. p.

21 .

ISBN 978-0-7456-1961-3 .

^ Black, p168 [ full citation needed ] ^ Black, p169 [ full citation needed ] ^ Black, p171 [ full citation needed ] ^ "Al-Kindi | Muslim Heritage" .

muslimheritage.com . 6 May 2007.

^ Adamson, Peter (2018). "Al-Kindi".

Al-Kindi – The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Sarton, George (1927).

Introduction to the History of Science . Carnegie Institution of Washington.

Bibliography [ edit ] English translations [ edit ] Adamson, Peter; Pormann, Peter E., eds. (2012).

The Philosophical Works of al-Kindī . New York: Oxford University Press.

Farmer, Henry George (1955–56). "Al-Kindi on the 'Ethos' of Rhythm, Colour, and Perfume".

Transactions of the Glasgow University Oriental Society .

16 . Glasgow: Glasgow University Oriental Society.

Works about al-Kindi [ edit ] Adamson, Peter (2007).

Al-Kindī . Oxford University Press US.

ISBN 978-0-19-518142-5 . Retrieved 22 May 2011 .

Adamson, Peter (2005). "Al-Kindī and the reception of Greek philosophy". In Adamson, Peter; Taylor, Richard C. (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

32– 51.

doi : 10.1017/CCOL0521817439.003 .

ISBN 978-0-521-81743-1 .

Arrington, Robert L.

, ed. (2001).

A Companion to the Philosophers . Oxford: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-22967-4 .

Corbin, Henry (1993).

History of Islamic Philosophy . London: Keagan Paul.

ISBN 9781135198886 .

Klein-Franke, Felix (2001).

"Al-Kindi" . In Leaman, Oliver; Nasr, Hossein (eds.).

History of Islamic Philosophy . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415131599 .

Prioreschi, Plinio (2002).

"Al-Kindi, A Precursor of the Scientific Revolution" (PDF) .

Journal of the International Society for the History of Islamic Medicine .

2 : 17– 19.

Prioreschi, Plinio (1996). "Medicine: al-Kindi".

A History of Medicine: Byzantine and Islamic medicine . Vol. 4. Omaha: Horatius Press. pp.

227– 235.

Schewe, Stephanie (2018).

Al-Kindī und die Wirkung der Musik. 'Das Buch der Chordophone von den einsaitigen bis zu den zehnsaitigen' (Kitāb al-muṣawwitāt al-watariyya min ḏāt al-watar al-wāḥid ilā ḏāt al-ʿašarat al-autār) . Frankfurt: Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science.

ISBN 978-3-8298-5015-5 .

External links [ edit ] Adamson, Peter.

"Al-Kindi" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Cooper, Glen M. (2007).

"Kindī: Abū Yūsuf Yaʿqūb ibn Isḥāq al-Kindī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

635– 6.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) Alkindus (Bibliotheca Augustana) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Yusuf Yaqub ibn Ishaq al-Sabbah Al-Kindi" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Al-Kindi – Famous Muslims Al-Kindi's website – Islamic Philosophy Online Dr. Mashhad Al-Allaf DOC – Three texts by Al Kindi in the Islamic Philosophy section Benjamnin N. Dyke's translation of Al-Kindi's Forty Chapters with PDF extracts from the Introduction and main text Texts on Wikisource: " al-Kindi, Abu Yusuf Ya'ḳub ibn Isḥak ".

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

" Kindī ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

" Kindi, Abu Yusuf Ya'kub Ibn Ishak Al- ".

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Links to related articles v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) v t e Islamic theology Fields Theologians Books Fields Aqidah Eschatology Ethics Kalam Philosophy ‘Aql Education Logic Peace Science Astronomy Cosmology Physics Sufism Cosmology Metaphysics Philosophy Theologians Ash'arism ( al-Ash'ari ) Al-Bayhaqi Al-Baqillani Al-Juwayni Al-Qushayri Al-Shahrastani Al-Ghazali Al-Taftazani Al-Maziri Ibn Furak Ibn Abi Zayd al-Qayrawani Zakariyya al-Ansari Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini Ibn Aqil Ibn Tumart Abdul Qadir Gilani Abu al-Walid al-Baji Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi Ibn al-Jawzi Qadi Ayyad Ahmad al-Rifa'i Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Sayf al-Din al-Amidi Izz al-Din ibn 'Abd al-Salam Taqi al-Din al-Subki Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi Abu Hayyan al-Gharnati Al-Baydawi Ibn Khaldun Ibn Arafa Abd al-Rahman al-Tha'alibi Ibn Hajar al-Haytami Al-Sha'rani Jalal al-Din al-Dawani Al-Maqqari al-Tilmisani Abd al-Rahman al-Fasi Ibn Ashir Al-Bahūtī Muhammad Mayyara Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi 'Illish Ibrahim al-Bajuri Abdullah ibn Alawi al-Haddad Ahmad al-Dardir Muhammad Arafa al-Desouki Ahmad Zayni Dahlan Said Nursî Early Sunni Abū Ḥanīfah al-Nu'mān ibn Thābit ( Hanafiyah ) Malik ibn Anas ( Maliki ) Al-Shafi'i ( Shafi‘i ) Maturidism ( Al-Maturidi ) Al-Hakim al-Samarqandi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Bazdawi Abu al-Yusr al-Bazdawi Abu al-Mu'in al-Nasafi Abu Ishaq al-Saffar al-Bukhari Abu al-Layth al-Samarqandi 'Ala' al-Din al-Bukhari Al-Sharif al-Jurjani Akmal al-Din al-Babarti Jamal al-Din al-Ghaznawi Nur al-Din al-Sabuni Najm al-Din 'Umar al-Nasafi Siraj al-Din al-Ushi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Khidr Bey Ibn Kemal Ali Qushji Ali al-Qari Al-Maydani Ahmad Sirhindi Anwar Shah Kashmiri Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Shah Abdul Aziz Khalil Ahmad Saharanpuri Zakariyya Kandhlawi Rahmatullah Kairanawi Murtada al-Zabidi Abd al-Ghani al-Nabulsi Muhammad Abu Zahra Kanthapuram A. P. Aboobacker Musliyar Rumi Mu'attila Al-Ja'd ibn Dirham Mu'jbira Abū Muḥrīz Jahm ibn Ṣafwān ar-Rāsibī as-Samarqāndī at-Tirmidhī Jahmīyya Abū Abdirrahmān Bishr ibn Ghiyāth ibn Abī Karīma al-Marīsī al-Baghdādī Mu'jassimā Abu’l-Hassan Muqātil ibn Sulaymān ibn Bashīr al-Azdī al- |Balkhī (Muqātilīyya) Abū Muḥāmmad (Abū’l-Hākem) Heshām ibn Sālem al-Jawālikī al- Juzjanī al- Kūfī Jawālikīyya Rum Abdals Ibn Karram ( Karramiyya ) Murji'ah Abū Marwān Gaylān ibn Mūslīm ad- Dimashqī an- Nabati al-Qībtī ( Murjī - Qadariyah ) Mu'tazila ( Wasil ibn 'Ata' ) Abū Ishāq Ibrāhīm ibn Sayyār ibn Hāni’ an-Nazzām (Nazzāmīyya) Abū Bakr Abdurrahmān ibn Kaysān al-Asāmm Abū Mūsā Isā ibn Subeyh (Sabīh) al-Murdār al-Bāsrī (Murdārīyya) Hīshām ibn Amr al-Fuwātī ash-Shaybānī (Hīshāmīyya) Abū Sahl Abbād ibn Sulaimān (Salmān) as-Sāymarī Abū Alī Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb ibn Sallām al-Jubbā'ī (Jubbāīyya) Abū’l-Hūsayn Abdūrrāhīm ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Uthmān al-Hayyāt (Hayyātīyya) Ja'far ibn Harb Ja'far ibn Mūbassīr Abū Uthmān Amr ibn Bhār ibn Māhbūb al-Jāhiz al-Kinānī (Jāhizīyya) Al-Qadi 'Abd al-Jabbar Abu al-Husayn al-Basri Al-Zamakhshari Amr ibn Ubayd Ibn Abi'l-Hadid Sahib ibn Abbad Abū Amr Ḍirār ibn Amr al-Gatafānī al-Kūfī (Ḍirārīyya) Najjārīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh al-Husayn ibn Muḥāmmad ibn ʿAbdillāh an-Najjār ar-Rāzī Abū Amr (Abū Yahyā) Hāfs al-Fard Muḥāmmad ibn ʿĪsā (Burgūsīyya) Abū ʿAbdallāh Ibnū’z-Zā‘farānī (Zā‘farānīyya) Mustadrakīyya Salafi Theologians Ibn Taymiyyah Ibnul Qayyim Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Wahhabism Al-Shawkani Rashid Rida Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Muqbil bin Hadi al-Wadi'i Al-Albani Saleh Al-Fawzan Rabee al-Madkhali Madkhalism Syed Nazeer Husain Ahl-i Hadith Siddiq Hasan Khan Zubair Ali Zai Safar Al-Hawali Sahwa movement Salman al-Ouda Osama bin Laden Salafi Jihadism Ahmad ibn Umar al-Hazimi Hazimism Yasir Qadhi Post-Salafism Twelver Shi'ism Twelve Imams Ali Hasan ibn Ali Husayn ibn Ali Ali al-Sajjad Muhammad al-Baqir Ja'far al-Sadiq Musa al-Kazim Ali al-Rida Muhammad al-Jawad Ali al-Hadi Hasan al-Askari Muhammad al-Mahdi Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid Sharif al-Murtaza Shaykh Tusi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Allamah Al-Hilli Mohammad-Baqer Majlesi Zurarah ibn A'yan Hisham ibn Hakam Agha Zia ol Din Araghi Ja'far Sobhani Ruhollah Khomeini Wilayat al-faqih Isma'ili Shi'ism Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani Al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Naysaburi Abu'l-Fawaris Ahmad ibn Ya'qub Tayyibi Ismā'īlī doctrine Dhu'ayb ibn Musa Hassan Ala Dhikrihi's Salam Idris Imad al-Din Ali ibn Muhammad ibn al-Walid Zaydi Shi'ism Abu'l-Jarud al-Hamdani Ahmad ibn Isa ibn Zayd Al-Qasim al-Rassi Al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya Al-Mansur al-Qasim Key books Sunni books Asas al-Taqdis Al-Baz al-Ashhab Al-Farq bayn al-Firaq Al-Milal wa al-Nihal Al-Irshad Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah Al-Sawad al-A'zam Kitab al-Tawhid Tabsirat al-Adilla Masnavi Fihi Ma Fihi Divan-i Shams-i Tabrizi The Moderation in Belief Shia books Eʿteqādātal-Emāmīya Al-Amali Al-Khisal Awail Al Maqalat Tashih al-I'tiqad Tajrid al-I'tiqad Independent Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Kitab al-Majmu of Alawis Malfūzāt of Ahmadiyya Umm al-kitab of Musta'li Isma'ilism Early Muslim scholars List of contemporary Muslim scholars of Islam Islamic schools and branches Sunni Islam Ahl al-Hadith ( Atharism ) Kullabiyya Ibn Kullab Hanbalis Ahmad ibn Hanbal Al-Qadi Abu Ya'la Khwaja Abdullah Ansari Zahiris Dawud al-Zahiri Salafism Ahl-i Hadith Syed Nazeer Husain / Siddiq Hasan Khan Wahhabism Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Ibn Baz Al-Uthaymin Al-Albani Other Salafi trends Jihadism Madkhalism Sahwa Salafi Modernism Muhammad bin Dawud Maqrizi Ahl ar-Ra'y ( Ilm al-Kalam ) Ash'arism Malikis Shafi'is Abdullah al-Harari – Al-Ahbash Maturidism Hanafis Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi / Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Muhammad Qasim Nanautavi / Rashid Ahmad Gangohi – Deobandi Shia Islam Zaydism Zayd ibn Ali Jarudiyya Batriyya Imamate Alid dynasties of northern Iran Hasan al-Utrush Yahya ibn Umar Imams of Yemen Extinct Zaydi Shi'a sects Dukayniyya Khalafiyya Imami Mahdiist Shi'ite Sects in Islam Imami Twelver Theology of Twelvers Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhism Qizilbash Sheikh Haydar / Shah Ismail / Pir Sultan / Kul Nesîmî – Safavid Islam Ghulat al-Khaṣībī / ibn Nusayr – Alawites Astarabadi (Naimi) / Imadaddin Nasimi – Hurufism / Bektashism Baktāshism Demir Bābā – Alians Bābā Rexheb – Hārābātīs Imami Isma'ilism Fathite Abdallah al-Aftah Batiniyyah Hamdan Qarmat – Sevener Qarmatians Hamza / Baha al-Din al-Muqtana / ad-Darazi – Druzes Fatimids Musta'li Tayyibi Alavi Dawoodi Sulaymani Hafizi Nasir Khusraw al-Qubadiani – Badakhshan Alevism Nizari Hassan-i Sabbah – Assassins Aga Khans – Nizaris / Khojas Pir Sadardin – Satpanth Kaysanites Shia Mukhtār Abū ʿAmra Kaysān Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah – Hashimiyya Hārbīyya ʿAbd Allāh ibn al-Hārb ibn al-Kindi Janāhiyya Abdallah ibn Mu'awiya Hārithīyya Riyāhīyya Sam‘ānīyya Bayān ibn Sam‘ān Rezāmīyya Abu Muslim Sunpadh Muḥammirah Khurramites Babak Mazyar al-Muqanna Ishaq al-Turk Khashabiyya Shia Other Mahdists An-Nafs Az-Zakiyyah Hurufiyya Maḥmūd Pasīkhānī – Nuktawiyya Shayki Nuqta-yi Ula – Bábīyya Tawussite Shia ʿAjlan ibn Nawus Waqifite Shia Muhakkima ( Arbitration ) Kharijites Ajardi Abd al-Karīm ibn Adjrād Maymunīyyah Sa'labīyyah Azariqa Nafi ibn al-Azraq al-Hānafī al-Handhalī Bayhasīyyah Abu Bayhas al-Hāytham ibn Jābir Najdat Najdah ibn 'Amir al-Hānafī Sufri Abu Qurra Abū Yazīd Mukhallad ibn Kayrād al- Nukkari Ibadism 'Abdullāh ibn Ibāḍ al-Tamimi Jābir ibn Zayd Abu Qudama Yazid ibn Fandin al- Ifrani Abd Allah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi Wahbiyyah Azzabas Murji'ah ( Hasan ibn Muḥāmmad ibn al- Hanafiyyah ) Karrāmīyya Abū ʿAbdillāh Muḥāmmad ibn Karrām ibn Arrāk ibn Huzāba ibn al-Barā’ as-Sijjī ʿĀbidīyya (ʿUthmān al-ʿĀbid) Dhīmmīyya Hakāiqīyya Haisamīyya (Abū ʿAbdallāh Muhammad ibn al-Haisam) Hīdīyya (Hīd ibn Saif) Ishāqīyya (Abū Yaʿqūb Ishāq ibn Mahmashādh) Maʿīyya Muhājirīyya (Ibrāhīm ibn Muhājir) Nūnīyya Razīnīyya Sauwāqīyya Sūramīyya Tarā'ifīyya (Ahmad ibn ʿAbdūs at-Tarā'ifī) Tūnīyya (Abū Bakr ibn ʿAbdallāh) Wāhidīyya Zarībīyya Other sects Gaylānīyya Gaylān ibn Marwān Yūnusīyya Yūnus ibn Awn an-Namīrī Gassānīyya Gassān al-Kūfī Tūmanīyya Abū Muāz at-Tūmanī Sawbānīyya Abū Sawbān al-Murjī Sālehīyya Sāleh ibn Umar Shamrīyya Abū Shamr Ubaydīyya Ubayd al-Mūktaib Ziyādīyya Muhammad ibn Ziyād al-Kūfī Other Murjīs Al-Harith ibn Surayj Sa'id ibn Jubayr Hammād ibn Abū Sūlaimān Muhārīb ibn Dithār Sābit Kutna Awn ibn Abdullāh Mūsā ibn Abū Kasīr Umar ibn Zar Salm ibn Sālem Hālaf ibn Ayyūb Ibrāhim ibn Yousūf Nusayr ibn Yahyā Ahmad ibn Hārb Amr ibn Murrah Mu'shabbiha Tamsīl Jawārībīyya Dāwūd al-Jawāribî Hāshwīyya Hulmānīyya Abū Hulmān al- Fārisī ad- Dimashqī Qalandariyya Barak Baba Tajsīm Khaṭṭābiyya Abu al-Khattab Bāzīghiyya Bāzīgh ibn Mūsā Muʿāmmarīyya Muʿāmmar ibn Ahmar ʿIjlīyya/Umayrīyya Umayr ibn Bayān al-ʿIjlī Mufaḍḍaliyya al-Mufaddal ibn Umar al-Ju'fi Ghurābīyya Mānsūrīyya Abū Mānsūr al-ʿIjlī Mughīrīyya Abū Abdillāh Mugīre ibn Sāīd al-ʿIjlī el-Bajalī Mukhāmmīsa Namiriya ‘Ulyanīyya/'Alyaīyya Saba'īyya Abdullah ibn Saba' Qadariyah ( Ma'bad al-Juhani ) Alevism Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar – Malamatiyya / Qalandariyya Baba Ishak – Babai revolt Balım Sultan – Bektashi Order Galip Hassan Kuscuoglu – Galibi Order Muʿtazila ( Rationalism ) Mā’marīyya Abū Amr (Abū Mu‘tamīr) Muāmmar ibn Abbād as-Sūlamī Bishriyya Abū Sahl Bīshr ibn al-Mu‘tamīr al-Hilālī al-Baghdādī Abū Abdi’l-Lāh Ahmad ibn Abī Du'ad Faraj ibn Carīr ibn Mâlik al-Iyādī Bahshamiyya Abū Hāshīm Abdu’s-Salām ibn Muḥāmmad ibn Abdi’l-Wahhāb al-Jubbā'ī Huzaylīyya Abū’l-Huzayl Muḥāmmad ibn al-Huzayl ibn Abdillāh al-Allāf al-Abdī al-Bāsrī Abū Ma‘n Sūmāma ibn Ashras an-Nūmayrī al-Bāsrī al-Baghdādī Ikhshīdiyya Nazzāmīyya Ali al-Aswarī Abū Bakr Muḥāmmad ibn Abdillāh ibn Shabīb al-Basrī Hābītīyya Ahmad ibn Hābīt Sumamīyya Sumāma ibn Ashras Kā‘bīyya Abū’l-Kāsīm Abdullāh ibn Ahmad ibn Māhmūd al-Balhī al-Kā‘bī Quranism Ahle Qur'an Kala Kato United Submitters International Rashad Khalifa Edip Yüksel Independent Muslim beliefs Messianism Ahmadiyya Mirza Ghulam Qadiani Lahori Kabbalist Dönmes Sabbatai Zevi – Sabbatean Mahdavīyya Muhammad Jaunpuri / Bandagi Mian Syed Khundmir – Zikris Nation of Islam Wallace Fard Muhammad 's doctrine Modernism Modernist Salafism Muhammad Abduh Muhammad Asad Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani Rashid Rida Other Islamic modernists Taṣawwuf Tariqah Ahmed Raza Khan – Barelvi Hilmi Tunahan – Süleymancı Ahmad al-Rifa'i – Rifa`i Other orders Tawassul Other beliefs Sadaqah Sunnah Taqwa Tawakkul Tewafuq Thawab Other scholars of Sunni schools of jurisprudence : Hanafi Hanbali Maliki Shafi'i Zahiri v t e Medieval Perso-Arab music Arab music Persian traditional music Origins Achaemenid Karnay Parthian gōsān Rhoptron Sasanian Bamshad Barbad Nagisa Umayyad Ṭuways Nashit Sa'ib Khathir Ibn Misjaḥ al-Gharid Hunain al-Hiri Algharid Ibn Surayj Ma'bad Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Ibn Muhriz Malik al-Ta'i Qiyan Atika bint Shuhda Azza al-Mayla Djamila/Jamila Hababah Ubayda Abbasid Siyat Ibn Jami Ibrahim al-Mawsili Ulayya bint al-Mahdi Yaḥya al-Makki Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi Mansour Zalzal Mukhariq Ishaq al-Mawsili Allawayh al-Asar Amr ibn Banah Jahzah Ibn al-Tahhan Qiyan Irfan Mahbubah Milh Al-Attara Inan bint Abdallah Shāriyah Faḍl al-Shāʻirah Arib al-Ma'muniyya Sarirah al-Ra’iqiyya Andalusian-Arab Ziryab Avempace Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Theorists‎ Al-Kindi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Farabi Ziryab Avicenna Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani Avempace Safi al-Din al-Urmawi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Kurr Abu Ahmad Monajjem Works Kitab al-Aghani Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir Related Islamic Golden Age Hind bint Utba v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Netherlands Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐s64m4
Cached time: 20250818102803
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.655 seconds
Real time usage: 1.922 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13238/1000000
Revision size: 51628/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 804483/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 182463/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 271325/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.947/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23737079/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1477.197      1 -total
 24.28%  358.688      1 Template:Reflist
 16.42%  242.564      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.24%  195.641     30 Template:Cite_book
 10.68%  157.807      1 Template:Navboxes
 10.50%  155.053     34 Template:Navbox
  9.59%  141.623     40 Template:Sfn
  7.85%  115.976      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
  7.84%  115.834      8 Template:Cite_journal
  7.41%  109.495      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:272065:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818102803 and revision id 1304516139. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Kindi&oldid=1304516139 " Categories : 800s births 873 deaths 9th-century Arab people 9th-century astrologers 9th-century mathematicians 9th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate 9th-century philosophers 9th-century physicians 9th-century writers Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Arabic-language commentators on Aristotle Aristotelian philosophers Epistemologists History of cryptography History of medicine History of pharmacy Intellectual history Medieval Islamic philosophers Kinda Astrologers of the medieval Islamic world Astronomers from the Abbasid Caliphate Metaphysicians Metaphysics writers Music theorists of the medieval Islamic world Ontologists People from Kufa Philosophers of art Philosophers of education Philosophers of logic Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of medicine Philosophers of psychology Philosophers of religion Philosophers of science Philosophers from the Abbasid Caliphate Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Physicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Medieval cryptographers Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2018 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 No local image but image on Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1: abbreviated year range Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 13:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents al-Kindi 71 languages Add topic

