Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Consumer capitalism 6 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Condition in which consumer demand is manipulated through mass-marketing The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Consumer capitalism is a theoretical economic and social political condition in which consumer demand is manipulated in a deliberate and coordinated way on a very large scale through mass-marketing techniques, to the advantage of sellers.

This theory is controversial. It suggests manipulation of consumer demand so potent that it has a coercive effect, amounts to a departure from free-market capitalism , and has an adverse effect on society in general. According to one source, the power of such 'manipulation' is not straightforward. It depends upon a new kind of individualism - projective individualism , where persons use consumer capitalism to project the kind of person who they want to be.

[ 1 ] Some use the phrase as shorthand for the broader idea that the interests of other non-business entities (governments, religions, the military, educational institutions) are intertwined with corporate business interests, and that those entities also participate in the management of social expectations through mass media .

Harold Wilhite, a Professor of Social Anthropology and Research, emphasizes that understanding capitalism is crucial for grasping the roots of unsustainable consumption . In his 2016 book The Political Economy of Low Carbon Transformation , he places capitalism at the core of his analysis. Drawing from thinkers such as Karl Marx , David Harvey , and Thomas Piketty , Wilhite examines how the foundational elements of capitalism — economic growth , individual ownership , marketization , product differentiation , and turnover — hinder sustainability transformations and fuel increasing consumption. He delves further into the societal impacts of capitalism’s growth imperative, arguing that it not only shapes systems of provision but also fosters cultures and habits of perpetual consumption growth.

[ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] The origins of consumer capitalism [ 3 ] are found in the development of American department stores from the mid 19th Century, notably the advertising and marketing innovations at Wanamaker's in Philadelphia .

[ 4 ] Author William Leach describes a deliberate, coordinated effort among American ' captains of industry ' to detach consumer demand from 'needs' (which can be satisfied) to 'wants' (which may remain unsatisfied).  This cultural shift represented by the department store is also explored in Émile Zola 's 1883 novel Au Bonheur des Dames , which describes the workings and the appeal of a fictionalized version of Le Bon Marché .

In 1919 Edward Bernays began his career as the 'father of public relations ' and successfully applied the developing principles of psychology, sociology and motivational research to manipulate public opinion in favor of products like cigarettes, soap, and Calvin Coolidge .  New techniques of mechanical reproduction developed in these decades improved the channels of mass-market communication and its manipulative power.  This development was described as early as the 1920s by Walter Benjamin and related members of the Frankfurt School , who foresaw the commercial, societal and political implications.

[ citation needed ] In business history, the mid-1920s saw Alfred P. Sloan stimulating increased demand for General Motors products by instituting the annual model year change and planned obsolescence , a move that changed the dynamics of the largest industrial enterprise in the world, away from technological innovation and towards satisfying market expectations.

Criticism [ edit ] A criticism of consumer capitalism has been made by the French philosopher Bernard Stiegler . He argues that capitalism today is governed not by production but by consumption, and that the techniques used to create consumer behavior amount to the destruction of psychic and collective individuation . The diversion of libidinal energy toward the consumption of consumer products, Stiegler argues, results in an addictive cycle, leading to hyperconsumption, the exhaustion of desire, and the reign of symbolic misery.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalism Consumerism Conspicuous consumption Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Keeping up with the Joneses References [ edit ] ^ James, Paul ; Scerri, Andy (2012).

"Globalizing Consumption and the Deferral of a Politics of Consequence" .

Globalizations .

9 (2): 225– 240.

Bibcode : 2012Glob....9..225J .

doi : 10.1080/14747731.2012.658249 .

S2CID 67761604 .

^ Hansen, Arve (2023).

Capitalism, Consumption, and the Transformation of Everyday Life: The Political Economy of Social Practices . Springer Nature. pp.

27– 54.

ISBN 9783031110696 .

^ Silla, Cesare (2018).

The Rise of Consumer Capitalism in America, 1880-1930 . London-New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781315399645 .

^ Leach, William (1993).

Land of Desire . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 9780307761149 .

^ Stiegler discusses consumer capitalism in his article The Disaffected Individual . His response to the situation can be discerned by reading the manifesto of his political group, Ars Industrialis .

v t e Consumerism the philosophy of and activism for consumer protection Concepts Consumerism Consumer Anti-consumerism Consumer capitalism Consumer privacy Consumer protection Consumer revolution Consumer welfare standard Ethical consumerism Informed consumer Activism Consumer activism Consumer Bill of Rights Consumer complaint Consumer education Consumer movement Collaborative consumption United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection Fields of study Consumer math Euthenics Home economics Key players Consumer organizations list Consumers' Association Ellen Swallow Richards Ralph Nader Esther Peterson Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Consumer_capitalism&oldid=1281991975 " Categories : Capitalism Demand Cultural studies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 23 March 2025, at 18:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Consumer capitalism 6 languages Add topic

