Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and traditions 2 Architecture 3 The Lowell House Bells 4 Notable alumni 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lowell House Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′15″N 71°07′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37078°N 71.11818°W ﻿ / 42.37078; -71.11818 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the publishing house, see Lowell House (publisher) .

Residential House of Harvard College This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lowell House" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lowell House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University Shield Location 10 Holyoke Place Coordinates 42°22′15″N 71°07′05″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37078°N 71.11818°W ﻿ / 42.37078; -71.11818 Motto Occasionem Cognosce ("Recognize Opportunity") ( Latin ) Established 1930 Named for Abbott Lawrence Lowell and the Lowell family Colours Blue, White Sister college Pierson College Faculty Deans David Laibson and Nina Zipser Undergraduates 400 Called Lowellians Website www .lowell .harvard .edu Lowell House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University , located at 10 Holyoke Place facing Mount Auburn Street between Harvard Yard and the Charles River . Officially, it is named for the Lowell family , but the letters ALL above the main gate reference Abbott Lawrence Lowell , Harvard's president at the time of construction. Its neo-Georgian design, centered on two landscaped courtyards, received the 1938 Harleston Parker Medal . Lowell House is simultaneously close to the Yard, Harvard Square , and other Harvard "River" houses. Its blue-capped bell tower is a local landmark.

History and traditions [ edit ] Lowell House bell tower in autumn.

Lowell was one of the first Houses built in the realization of President Lowell's goal of providing on-campus accommodations for every Harvard College student throughout his career at the college. ( See Harvard College house system .

) Its first Master, [ 1 ] was Mathematics Department chairman Julian Lowell Coolidge , who also instituted Monday-night high table.

[ 1 ] Historian Elliott Perkins was the first to hold the position of Resident Dean (until recently known as the Allston Burr Senior Tutor ) then was Master from 1942 to 1963. Classicist Zeph Stewart was the third Master, and William and Mary Lee Bossert served from 1975 to 1998. In 1998, Diana Eck and Dorothy Austin became the first same-sex couple to be house masters (during their tenure, the term "master" was replaced with "faculty dean").  The current faculty deans of Lowell House are David Laibson and Nina Zipser.

[ 2 ] Lowell's sister college at Yale University is Pierson College .

House traditions include Tea on Thursday afternoons, a May Day Waltz at dawn on the Weeks Footbridge , high table, [ 1 ] and the annual Lowell House Opera mounted in the dining hall. Springtime brings the Bacchanalia Formal, often with a live swing band in the courtyard.

For each Arts First event, the first weekend in May, there is a courtyard performance of the 1812 Overture , during which those not part of the official orchestral ensemble are encouraged to assist on kazoos; in lieu of cannon, hydrogen-filled balloons are ignited by the House chemistry tutor; and until recently (see below) the performance would climax with the role originally scored by Tchaikovsky for authentic Russian zvon (a "bell" in the Slovakina language or "bell sound" in Russian), being played (appropriately enough) by Lowell's own authentic Russian zvon.

There is a winter holiday dinner, and various sophomore, senior, and faculty [ 1 ] dinners take place throughout the year. Language tables and special-interest tables are common features of everyday lunches and dinners. Many House events are organized by Lowell's "House Committee" of elected undergraduates from within the House. The committee operates separately from the Harvard Undergraduate Association, to organize student events and manage funding. The HoCo, as with the other student government organizations in other Houses, is funded by the College and the HUA.

Lowell House was the residence of Silas ( Method Man ) and Jamal ( Redman ) in the 2001 comedy How High .

As part of Harvard's House Renewal Project, Lowell House closed for renovation in the summer of 2017; work was completed in the summer of 2019.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Architecture [ edit ] Designed by the firm of Coolidge Shepley Bulfinch and Abbott and constructed in 1930 for $3.62 million, [ 7 ] the House was named for the prominent Lowell family , closely identified with Harvard since John Lowell graduated in 1721. The busts of President Abbott Lawrence Lowell (1909–1933) and poet James Russell Lowell , are featured in the main courtyard. In the Dining Hall are portraits of Lowell and his wife Anna Parker Lowell; his sister, poet Amy Lowell ; his brother, astronomer Percival Lowell ; and his grandfather John Amory Lowell .

Prior to the 1996 transition to randomized House assignments, Lowell's central location, picturesque courtyard, elegant dining hall, and charming traditions made it a popular housing choice.

[ citation needed ] The Lowell House arms are those of the Lowell family, [ 1 ] blazoned: Shield: sable, a dexter hand couped at the wrist grasping three darts, one in pale and two in saltire, all in argent. The crest is a stag's head cabossed, between the attires a pheon azure. The motto is Occasionem Cognosce ("Recognise Opportunity")  (In more prosaic terms, a shield with a black field displays a right hand cut off at the wrist and grasping three arrows, one vertical and two crossed diagonally, in silver. Above is a stag's head mounted behind the ear, and between its antlers is a barbed, broad arrowhead in blue.  The house colors are blue and white.

The Lowell House Bells [ edit ] Lowell House's bell tower and two courtyards, with Malkin Athletic Center at upper left For three-quarters of a century, Lowell House's bell tower was home to a set of authentic Russian zvon , one of the few complete sets of pre-revolutionary Russian bells surviving anywhere. The eighteen bells were bought in Russia around 1930 by Thomas Whittemore with the financial aid of millionaire Chicago plumbing magnate Charles R. Crane ‍—‌who reportedly paid merely their value as scrap‍—‌just as they were to be melted down by Soviet authorities.  Crane donated them to Harvard in 1930 just as plans for Lowell House were nearing completion.

[ 8 ] Like those seen today on Dunster and Eliot Houses, Lowell's tower was originally meant to be a clock -tower‍—‌Lowell's in particular is reminiscent of Philadelphia's Independence Hall , although it was actually modeled after a Dutch church. With word of Crane's gift, the planned tower was changed to the blue-capped bell tower seen today.
(One of the eighteen bells did not harmonize with the others, so was hung in the Harvard Business School 's Baker Library.) The bells originally hung in Moscow's Danilov Monastery (now the seat of the Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church) and were installed with the help, at first, of musician Konstantin Konstantinovich Saradzhev , and Vsevolod Andronoff, a former resident of the monastery [ 8 ] They range in weight from 22 pounds (10 kg) to 26,700 pounds (12,100 kg, and known to Lowell House students as "Mother Earth"). The bells are consecrated, and are of great significance to the Russian Orthodox Church, in the liturgy of which bells play an important role.

At Lowell, the bells were usually rung on Sundays at 1pm by resident Klappermeisters. After the annual Harvard–Yale football game , Harvard's score would sometimes be proclaimed on the "Mother Earth," with Yale 's score tolled on the "Bell of Pestilence, Famine, and Despair." With the reopening of the Danilov Monastery, it was suggested that the bells be returned to their original home.  At Harvard's June 2008 Commencement, they sounded for the last time at Lowell House, after which the bell tower was partially dismantled so that the bells could be withdrawn. In their places were hung newly cast near-replica bells obtained with the financial assistance of the Link of Times Foundation, created by Russian industrialist Viktor Vekselberg .

[ 9 ] The now-departed bells may still be heard on the Lowell House Virtual Bell Tower . The bells sound Sunday afternoons during term time, and at special events such as commencement .

Notable alumni [ edit ] Lowell House courtyard in winter.

Notable former residents and alumni of Lowell House include: John Ashmead , American author and scholar (Room N44) John Berendt , American author (Room M31) Harry Blackmun , justice of the United States Supreme Court (Room C12) Priscilla Chan , American philanthropist and doctor (Room A52) Michael Crichton , American author and producer (Room D42) Matt Damon , actor and philanthropist (Room D42) Philip F. Gura , American literature scholar (Room J52) Walter Isaacson , magazine editor, CNN CEO, and foundation president (Room K22) Nicholas Kristof , journalist (Room E31) Ned Lamont , 89th Governor of Connecticut (Room C21) Vanessa Lann , composer and pianist (Room N35) Tom Lehrer , singer and songwriter (Room R13) Alan Jay Lerner , lyricist and librettist (Room D41) Robert Lowell , sixth Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry to the Library of Congress (Room L12) Anthony Lewis , intellectual and former columnist for The New York Times (Room O21) Empress Masako , wife of Emperor Naruhito of Japan (Room E11) Natalie Portman , Academy Award-winning actress (Room I43) Frank Rich , columnist for The New York Times (Room O34) Ryan Max Riley , skier on the United States Ski Team (Room M21) David Souter , justice of the United States Supreme Court (Room C32) Subramanian Swamy , Indian politician, economist and ex-professor at Harvard & IIT (former resident tutor) John Updike , novelist, poet, and literary critic (Room K22) David Vitter , Republican senator from Louisiana (Room M41) Chris Wallace , journalist (Room J32) Andrew Weil , author and physician (Room D14) Kristen Welker , television journalist for NBC News Christian Wolff , composer (Room B24) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "History" .

harvard.edu . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ "Faculty Deans of Lowell House" .

lowell.harvard.edu .

Archived from the original on 2020-09-13 . Retrieved 2020-09-13 .

^ "Unveiling Lowell House renewal" .

The Harvard Gazette . March 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2018 .

^ Delwiche, Noah (3 May 2015).

"Harvard Will Renovate Lowell House in 2017-2018" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 1 July 2018 .

^ Furigay, Junina (2 March 2017).

"Lowell House Renovation Designs Include New Common Spaces" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 1 July 2018 .

^ "Harvard's Lowell House unveils its new renovation" .

Harvard Gazette . 2019-09-06 . Retrieved 2020-09-13 .

^ Lowell House History, retrieved from the official House website Archived 2010-06-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Luis Campos, Amiable Discord: The Rescue and Return of Harvard's Russian Bells , Harvard University Press, forthcoming ^ Elif Batuman, "The Bells", The New Yorker , April 27, 2009, pp. 28-29; for complete details, see Luis Campos, Amiable Discord: The Rescue and Return of Harvard's Russian Bells , Harvard University Press, forthcoming External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lowell House .

Lowell House Lowell House Committee Lowell House Opera , established in 1938, New England's oldest opera company Photographic views of Lowell House, 1929-1967: an inventory v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lowell_House&oldid=1297040313 " Categories : Harvard Houses 1930 establishments in Massachusetts Lowell family Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2018 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 20:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lowell House Add languages Add topic

