Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy 2 Anatomy 3 Palaeobiology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nakalipithecus 26 languages Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extinct species of ape Nakalipithecus Temporal range: Tortonian , 9.9–9.8 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N ↓ Top and side views of the Nakalipithecus holotype , a jawbone and the molars Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Primates Suborder: Haplorhini Infraorder: Simiiformes Superfamily: Hominoidea Family: Hominidae Genus: † Nakalipithecus Kunimatsu et al., 2007 Species: † N. nakayamai Binomial name † Nakalipithecus nakayamai Kunimatsu et al., 2007 Nakalipithecus nakayamai , sometimes referred to as the Nakali ape , [ 1 ] is an extinct species of great ape from Nakali , Kenya from about 9.9–9.8 million years ago during the Late Miocene . It is known from a right jawbone with 3 molars and from 11 isolated teeth. The jawbone specimen is presumed female as the teeth are similar in size to those of female gorillas and orangutans . Compared to other great apes, the canines are short, the enamel is thin, and the molars are flatter.

Nakalipithecus seems to have inhabited a sclerophyllous woodland environment.

Taxonomy [ edit ] Hominidae Kenyapithecus Nakalipithecus (as a stem hominid ) Nakalipithecus (as a stem gorilla) Chororapithecus Gorillas Chimpanzee Bonobo Ardipithecus Australopithecus Homo ( humans ) Two hypotheses on Nakalipithecus taxonomy [ 2 ] Hominin timeline This box: view talk edit −10 — – −9 — – −8 — – −7 — – −6 — – −5 — – −4 — – −3 — – −2 — – −1 — – 0 — Miocene Pliocene Pleistocene Hominini Nakalipithecus Samburupithecus Ouranopithecus ( Ou. turkae ) ( Ou. macedoniensis ) Chororapithecus Oreopithecus Sivapithecus Sahelanthropus Graecopithecus Orrorin ( O. praegens ) ( O. tugenensis ) Ardipithecus ( Ar. kadabba ) ( Ar. ramidus ) Australopithecus ( Au. africanus ) ( Au. afarensis ) ( Au. anamensis ) H. habilis ( H. rudolfensis ) ( Au. garhi ) H. erectus ( H. antecessor ) ( H. ergaster ) ( Au. sediba ) H. heidelbergensis Homo sapiens Neanderthals Denisovans ← Earlier apes ← Gorilla split ← Chimpanzee split ← Earliest bipedal ← Earliest sign of Ardipithecus ← Earliest sign of Australopithecus ← Earliest stone tools ← Earliest sign of Homo ← Dispersal beyond Africa ← Earliest fire / cooking ← Earliest rock art ← Earliest clothes ← Modern humans H o m i n i d s P a r a n t h r o p u s ( million years ago ) Nakalipithecus was first described from a right jawbone, the holotype KNM-NA46400, and eleven isolated teeth excavated in 2005 by a team of Japanese and Kenyan researchers in mud flow deposits in the Nakali area of northern Kenya's former Rift Valley Province , hence the genus name Nakalipithecus ("Nakali ape"). The species name is in honour of the late Japanese geologist Katsuhiro Nakayama who worked on the expedition. The specimen dates to about 9.9–9.8 million years ago in the Late Miocene . The specimens are housed by the National Museums of Kenya . The holotype preserves all 3 lower molars , and the isolated teeth are: a left first incisor , a right first incisor, a right canine , a right third upper premolar , a left third upper premolar, a right left fourth upper premolar, a left fourth upper premolar, a right first upper molar, a right third upper molar, a left third upper molar, and a left fourth lower premolar.

[ 3 ] It is debated if great apes evolved in Africa or Eurasia given the abundance of early fossil apes species in the latter and the paucity in the former, despite all modern great apes except the orangutan being known from Africa. The first Miocene African ape, Samburupithecus , was discovered in 1982.

[ 4 ] It is unclear how Nakalipithecus is related to other apes. It is possible these Late Miocene African apes were stem great apes closely related to the last common ancestor of all modern African apes, which existed about 9–8 million years ago.

[ 3 ] Nakalipithecus and the 9 million year old Greek Ouranopithecus macedoniensis exhibit many similarities with each other, but Nakalipithecus has more basal (primitive) traits, which could indicate that it was the ancestor or closely related to the ancestor of Ouranopithecus .

Ouranopithecus , in turn, is postulated to be closely related to australopithecines and the human line. This would show that apes evolved in Africa. However, evidence of common ancestry can also be interpreted as convergent evolution , with similar dental adaptations caused by inhabiting a similar environment, though Ouranopithecus seems to have consumed more hard objects than Nakalipithecus .

[ 3 ] A 2017 study on deciduous fourth premolars—deciduous teeth are less affected by environmental factors as they soon fall out and are replaced by permanent teeth—found that Nakalipithecus and later African apes (including australopithecines) shared more similarities with each other than to Eurasian apes, though drew no clear conclusion on the Nakalipithecus – Ouranopithecus relationship.

[ 5 ] Nakalipithecus has also been proposed to have been the ancestor to the 8 million year old Chororapithecus , which possibly represents an early member of the gorilla line; if both of these are correct, then Nakalipithecus could potentially represent an early gorilla.

[ 2 ] Anatomy [ edit ] Nakalipithecus has an overall large size, with teeth similar in size to those of female gorillas and orangutans. The specimen is thus presumed female. The Samburupithecus specimen was also about the same size. Unlike other apes, the canines are short, and as long as they are wide—about 10.7 mm × 10.5 mm (0.42 in × 0.41 in) in height and width respectively. For comparison, the left first incisor is 10.8 mm × 8.6 mm (0.43 in × 0.34 in). The premolars are elongated, and the protoconid (the cusp on the tongue side) of the third premolar is oriented more cheekwards, which is a distinguishing characteristic of Miocene African apes from Miocene Eurasian apes. Compared to African apes contemporary with Nakalipithecus , the tooth enamel on the molars is thinner, and the cusps (which project outward from the tooth) are less inflated, creating a wider basin. In the holotype, the first, second, and third molars are 15.6 mm × 14 mm (0.61 in × 0.55 in), 16.2 mm × 15.8 mm (0.64 in × 0.62 in), and 19.5 mm × 15.1 mm (0.77 in × 0.59 in), respectively. Like modern and some contemporary apes, but unlike earlier East African apes, the first molar is relatively large, with a first molar to second molar ratio of 85%. Like Ouranopithecus and early Sivapithecus ( Sivapithecus is known from the Indian subcontinent ), but unlike most contemporary and future apes, the third molar was much larger than the second, with a third molar to second molar ratio of 115%, though this ratio is smaller than that of the later Southeast Asian Khoratpithecus . The mandible is less robust (heavily built) than those of contemporary Eurasian Miocene apes, except for Ouranopithecus .

[ 3 ] Palaeobiology [ edit ] During the Late Miocene, East Africa, the Sahara , the Middle East, and Southern Europe all appear to have been predominantly seasonal sclerophyllous evergreen woodland environments. Nakali appears to have been dominated by C3 (forest) plants.

Nakalipithecus is known from the Upper Beds, which comprise lakeside or riverine deposits.

[ 3 ] Climate change caused the expansion of grasslands in Africa from 10–7 million years ago, likely fragmenting populations of forest-dwelling primates, leading to extinction.

[ 6 ] Nakali has also yielded a black rhino specimen, [ 7 ] the pig Nyanzachoerus , an antelope , the hippo Kenyapotamus , the rhino Kenyatherium , the giraffe Palaeotragus , [ 8 ] the horse Hipparion , [ 9 ] the elephant-like proboscideans Deinotherium and (possibly) Choerolophodon , [ 8 ] and the colobine monkey Microcolobus .

[ 10 ] The third premolar of a small nyanzapithecine ape was also found in Nakali, [ 11 ] [ 6 ] and Samburupithecus was nearly contemporaneous with Nakalipithecus , and was discovered 60 km (37 mi) to the north of Nakali.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Timeline of human evolution Afropithecus Anoiapithecus Danuvius Dryopithecus Graecopithecus Hispanopithecus Khoratpithecus Lufengpithecus Oreopithecus Pierolapithecus Sivapithecus References [ edit ] ^ Kiarie, Maina.

"Nakalipithecus" .

Enzi Museum . Retrieved 8 August 2023 .

^ a b Katoh, S.; Beyene, Y.; Itaya, T.; et al. (2016). "New geological and palaeontological age constraint for the gorilla–human lineage split".

Nature .

530 (7589): 215– 218.

Bibcode : 2016Natur.530..215K .

doi : 10.1038/nature16510 .

PMID 26863981 .

S2CID 205247254 .

^ a b c d e f Kunimatsu, Y.; Nakatsukasa, M.; Sawada, Y.; Sakai, T. (2007).

"A new Late Miocene great ape from Kenya and its implications for the origins of African great apes and humans" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

104 (49): 19220– 19225.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..10419220K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0706190104 .

PMC 2148271 .

PMID 18024593 .

^ Yasui, Kinya; Nakano, Yoshihiko; Ishida, Hidemi (March 1987).

"Excavation at the Fossil-Hominoid-Bearing Locality, Site-SH22 in the Samburu Hills, Northern Kenya" .

African Study Monographs. Supplementary Issue .

5 : 169– 174.

doi : 10.14989/68329 .

ISSN 0286-9667 .

^ Morita, W.; Morimoto, N.; Kunimatsu, Y.; et al. (2017). "A morphometric mapping analysis of lower fourth deciduous premolar in hominoids: Implications for phylogenetic relationship between Nakalipithecus and Ouranopithecus ".

Comptes Rendus Palevol .

116 ( 5– 6): 655– 669.

Bibcode : 2017CRPal..16..655M .

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2016.10.004 .

hdl : 2115/71435 .

^ a b Kunimatsu, Y.; Sawada, Y.; Sakai, T.; et al. (2017).

"The latest occurrence of the nyanzapithecines from the early Late Miocene Nakali Formation in Kenya, East Africa" .

Anthropological Science .

125 (2): 45– 51.

doi : 10.1537/ase.170126 .

^ Handa, N.; Nakatsukasa., M.; Kunimatsu, Y.; Nakaya, H. (2019). "Additional specimens of Diceros (Perissodactyla, Rhinocerotidae) from the Upper Miocene Nakali Formation in Nakali, central Kenya".

Historical Biology .

31 (2): 262– 273.

doi : 10.1080/08912963.2017.1362560 .

S2CID 135074081 .

^ a b Benefit, B. R.; Pickford, M. (1986). "Miocene fossil cercopithecoids from Kenya".

Physical Journal of Anthropology .

69 (4): 441– 464.

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.1330690404 .

^ Nakaya, H.; Uno, K.; Fukuchi, A.; et al. (13 September 2010).

Late Miocene paleoenvironment of hominoids—mesowear analysis of fossil ungulate cheek teeth from northern Kenya .

International Primatological Society . Vol. 26.

doi : 10.14907/primate.26.0.147.0 . 147.

^ Nakatsukasa, M.; Mbua, E.; Sawada, Y.; et al. (2010). "Earliest colobine skeletons from Nakali, Kenya".

Physical Journal of Anthropology .

143 (3): 365– 382.

doi : 10.1002/ajpa.21327 .

PMID 20949609 .

^ Kunimatsu, Y.; Nakatsukasa, M.; Sawada, Y. (2016).

"A second hominoid species in the early Late Miocene fauna of Nakali (Kenya)" .

Anthropological Science .

124 (2): 75– 83.

doi : 10.1537/ase.160331 .

External links [ edit ] Human Timeline (Interactive) – Smithsonian , National Museum of Natural History (August 2016).

"Mama, Is That You? Possible Ape Ancestor Found" .

Discovery News . Version of 2007-NOV-12. Retrieved 2007-NOV-13. Contains photo of fossil.

v t e Human evolution Taxonomy ( Hominins ) Last common ancestors Chimpanzee–human Gorilla–human Orangutan–human Gibbon–human Australopithecines Nakalipithecus Orrorin Sahelanthropus Kenyanthropus Ardipithecus A. kadabba A. ramidus Australopithecus A. afarensis A. africanus A. anamensis A. bahrelghazali A. deyiremeda A. garhi A. sediba Paranthropus P. aethiopicus P. boisei P. robustus Humans and proto-humans ( Homo ) Proto-humans H. gautengensis (?) H. habilis H. naledi H. rudolfensis (?) Homo erectus H. e. erectus H. e. georgicus H. e. lantianensis H. e. nankinensis H. e. pekinensis H. e. soloensis H. e. tautavelensis H. e. yuanmouensis Archaic humans H. antecessor Denisovans H. ergaster (?) H. floresiensis H. heidelbergensis H. longi (?) H. luzonensis H. neanderthalensis H. rhodesiensis (?) Modern humans Homo sapiens H. s. sapiens (archaic homo sapiens, anatomically modern humans) Jebel Irhoud H. s. idaltu Cro-Magnon Manot people Tam Pa Ling Red Deer Cave people Ancestors Homo habilis → Homo ergaster / Homo erectus (→ Homo antecessor ) ?

→ Homo heidelbergensis → archaic Homo sapiens → Homo sapiens Models General models Hunting Gathering Endurance running Aquatic ape Sexual selection Self-domestication Specific models Diet Cooking Expensive tissue Shore-based Drugs Drunken monkey Evolutionary models of human drug use Stoned ape theory Behavior Killer ape Cooperative eye Life history Grandmother Patriarch Topics Bipedalism Skeleton Muscles Skin color Hair Thermoregulation Speech Language Intelligence Gender roles Origin of modern humans Recent African origin Multiregional origin Archaic admixture Behavioral modernity Early migrations Recent evolution Timelines Human evolution Human prehistory Human timeline Others Theorists Books Fossils Evolutionary anthropology Paleoanthropology Human evolutionary developmental biology Category Commons Evolutionary biology Portal v t e Haplorhini Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Primates Haplorhini † " Omomyidae " Altanius ?

Altiatlasius ?

Bownomomys Kohatius Microchoerinae Indusomys Melaneremia Microchoerus Nannopithex Necrolemur Paraloris Pseudoloris Quercyloris Vectipithex " Anaptomorphinae " Absarokius Anaptomorphus Anemorhysis Arapahovius Aycrossia Chlororhysis Gazinius Pseudotetonius Sphacorhysis Strigorhysis Tatmanius Teilhardina Tetonius Tetonoides Trogolemur Walshina " Omomyinae " Ageitodendron Asiomomys Brontomomys Chipetaia Chumashius Diablomomys Dyseolemur Ekwiiyemakius Gunnelltarsius Hemiacodon Jemezius Loveina Macrotarsius Nesomomys Omomys Ourayia Rooneyia Shoshonius Steinius Stockia Uintanius Utahia Washakius Wyomomys Yaquius Tarkadectinae Tarka Tarkadectes Tarkops Tarsiiformes † Archicebus † Afrotarsiidae ?

† " Omomyidae " ?

Tarsiidae Carlito Cephalopachus † Hesperotarsius † Oligotarsius Tarsius † Xanthorhysis ?

Simiiformes see below↓ Simiiformes Simiiformes † Altiatlasius ?

† Amamria † Aseanpithecus † Nosmips ?

† Phileosimias ?

† Afrotarsiidae ?

Afrasia Afrotarsius † Eosimiidae Bahinia Eosimias Phenacopithecus † Amphipithecidae Amphipithecus Bugtipithecus ?

Ganlea Krabia Myanmarpithecus Pondaungia Siamopithecus † Parapithecoidea Arsinoea Biretia Proteopithecidae Proteopithecus Serapia Parapithecidae Abuqatrania Apidium Parapithecus Qatrania Ucayalipithecus Platyrrhini † Parvimico † Perupithecus † Szalatavus † Canaanimico † Branisella † Lagonimico Aotidae Aotus † Tremacebus Pitheciidae † Antillothrix Cacajao Callicebus † Carlocebus † Cebupithecia Cheracebus Chiropotes † Homunculus † Insulacebus † Mazzonicebus † Miocallicebus † Nuciruptor Pithecia Plecturocebus † Proteropithecia † Soriacebus † Xenothrix Atelidae Alouatta Ateles Brachyteles † Caipora † Cartelles † Chilecebus Lagothrix † Mohanamico Oreonax † Paralouatta † Protopithecus † Solimoea † Stirtonia Cebidae † Acrecebus Cebus † Dolichocebus † Killikaike † Panamacebus † Patasola Saimiri Sapajus Callitrichidae Callimico Callithrix Cebuella Leontocebus Leontopithecus Mico † Micodon Saguinus Catarrhini see below↓ Catarrhini Catarrhini † Micropithecus † Saadanius † Oligopithecidae Catopithecus Oligopithecus Talahpithecus † Propliopithecidae Aegyptopithecus Propliopithecus † Pliopithecoidea Krishnapithecus Paidopithex † Kapi Pliopithecidae Epipliopithecus Pliopithecus Dionysopithecidae Dionysopithecus Platodontopithecus Crouzeliidae Anapithecus Barberapithecus Crouzelia Egarapithecus Fanchangia Laccopithecus Plesiopliopithecus Pliobates Cercopithecoidea † Alophe † Victoriapithecidae Noropithecus Nsungwepithecus ?

Prohylobates ?

Victoriapithecus Zaltanpithecus Colobinae † Cercopithecoides Colobus † Dolichopithecus † Kuseracolobus † Libypithecus † Mesopithecus † Microcolobus Nasalis † Paracolobus † Parapresbytis Piliocolobus Presbytis Procolobus Pygathrix † Rhinocolobus Rhinopithecus † Sawecolobus Semnopithecus Simias Trachypithecus Cercopithecinae Cercopithecini Allenopithecus Allochrocebus Cercopithecus Chlorocebus Erythrocebus Miopithecus † Nanopithecus Papionini Cercocebus † Dinopithecus † Gorgopithecus Lophocebus Macaca Mandrillus Papio † Paradolichopithecus † Parapapio † Pliopapio † Procercocebus † Procynocephalus Rungwecebus † Soromandrillus Theropithecus Hominoidea see below↓ Hominoidea Hominoidea † Afropithecus † Ekembo † Equatorius † Griphopithecus † Kamoyapithecus ?

† Kenyapithecus † Morotopithecus † Nacholapithecus † Otavipithecus † Proconsul † Samburupithecus † Dendropithecidae Dendropithecus Micropithecus ?

Nyanzapithecus Oreopithecus ?

Rangwapithecus Rukwapithecus Simiolus Turkanapithecus Hylobatidae † Bunopithecus Hoolock Hylobates † Junzi Nomascus Symphalangus † Yuanmoupithecus Hominidae † Buronius † Graecopithecus † Nakalipithecus † Ouranopithecus Ponginae † Ankarapithecus † Gigantopithecus † Indopithecus † Khoratpithecus † Lufengpithecus † Meganthropus Pongo † Sivapithecus Homininae † Dryopithecini Anoiapithecus Danuvius Dryopithecus Hispanopithecus ?

Pierolapithecus ?

Rudapithecus Gorillini † Chororapithecus ?

Gorilla † Nakalipithecus ?

Hominini Pan Hominina † Ardipithecus ?

† Australopithecus † Graecopithecus ?

Homo † Kenyanthropus † Orrorin ?

† Sahelanthropus ?

† Paranthropus Portals : Evolutionary biology Paleontology Science Taxon identifiers Nakalipithecus nakayamai Wikidata : Q134742 GBIF : 9258177 ZooBank : 57904F7B-9DDD-4670-A9EE-5BBE4A0F81FA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nakalipithecus&oldid=1299736169 " Categories : Hominidae Miocene primates of Africa Prehistoric apes Fossil taxa described in 2007 Monotypic prehistoric primate genera Great Rift Valley Tooth taxa Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 03:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nakalipithecus 26 languages Add topic

