Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage 2 Function 3 Design 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Eaves 28 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Gàidhlig 한국어 हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Македонски 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Português کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tyap Українська 粵語 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Protruding structure For other uses, see Eaves (disambiguation) .

Eaves overhang, shown here with a bracket system of modillions The eaves are the edges of the roof which overhang the face of a wall and, normally, project beyond the side of a building. The eaves form an overhang to throw water clear of the walls and may be highly decorated as part of an architectural style , such as the Chinese dougong bracket systems.

Etymology and usage [ edit ] According to the Oxford English Dictionary , eaves is derived from the Old English efes (singular), meaning "edge", and consequently forms both the singular and plural of the word.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This Old English word is itself of Germanic origin, related to the German dialect Obsen , and also probably to over .

[ 3 ] The Merriam-Webster dictionary lists the word as eave but notes that it is "usually used in plural".

[ 4 ] Function [ edit ] The primary function of the eaves is to keep rain water off the walls and to prevent the ingress of water at the junction where the roof meets the wall.  The eaves may also protect a pathway around the building from the rain, prevent erosion of the footings, and reduce splatter on the wall from rain as it hits the ground.

The secondary function is to control solar penetration as a form of passive solar building design ; the eaves overhang can be designed to adjust the building's solar gain to suit the local climate, the latitude, and orientation of the building.

[ 5 ] The eaves overhang may also shelter openings to ventilate the roof space.

[ 6 ] Design [ edit ] Italianate eaves with decorative support brackets Aesthetic, traditional, or purely decorative considerations may prevail over the strictly functional requirements of the eaves. The Arts and Crafts Movement influenced the American Craftsman tradition, which has very wide eaves with decorative brackets technically called modillions , for which there is not necessarily a real functional need; likewise the Italian-style eaves.

The eaves may terminate in a fascia , a board running the length of the eaves under the tiles or roof sheets to cap off and protect the exposed rafter ends and to provide grounds on which to fix gutters.  At the gables the eaves may extend beyond the gable end wall by projecting the purlins and are usually capped off by bargeboards to protect the wall and the purlin ends. The overhang at the gable is referred to as a gable overhang, as opposed to eave overhang, or they both may be referred to as overhang.

The underside of the eaves may be filled with a horizontal soffit fixed at right angles to the wall, the soffit may be decorative but it also has the function of sealing the gap between the rafters from vermin and weather.

Eaves must be designed for local wind speeds as the overhang can significantly increase the wind loading on the roof.

[ 7 ] The line on the ground under the outer edge of the eaves is the eavesdrip , or dripline, and in typical building planning regulations defines the extent of the building and cannot oversail the property boundary.

See also [ edit ] Chhajja Gargoyle Leader head Lookout (architecture) Overhang (architecture) References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Eaves" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 840.

^ Eaves. def. 1a.

Oxford English Dictionary Second Edition on CD-ROM (v. 4.0) © Oxford University Press 2009 ^ "Eaves | Definition of Eaves by Oxford Dictionary on Lexico.com also meaning of Eaves" .

Lexico Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 5 August 2020 .

^ "Eave" .

Merriam-Webster Online .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 20 June 2014 .

^ External moisture – a guide to using the risk matrix (PDF) . Department of Building and Housing New Zealand. 2005. p. 8.

^ "HOME CLINIC; Making Eaves Inspection a Routine" .

The New York Times . 26 November 2000 . Retrieved 17 May 2011 .

^ "Certain Home Shapes And Roofs Hold Up Best In Hurricane Says NJIT Professor" .

AZoBuild . 20 June 2007 . Retrieved 17 May 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Look up eaves in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Eaves at Wikimedia Commons v t e Roofs Roof shapes Arched roof Barrel roof Board roof Bochka roof Bow roof Butterfly roof Clerestory Conical roof Dome Flat roof Gable roof Gablet roof Gambrel roof Half-hipped roof Hip roof Onion dome Mansard roof Pavilion roof Rhombic roof Ridged roof Saddle roof Sawtooth roof Shed roof Tented roof Roof elements Air conditioning unit Attic Catslide Chimney Collar beam Dormer Eaves Flashing Gable Green roof Gutter Hanging beam Joist Lightning rod Loft Purlin Rafter Ridge vent Roof batten Roof garden Roofline Roof ridge Roof sheeting Roof tiles Roof truss Roof window Shingles Skylight Soffit Solar panels Spire Weathervane Wind brace Authority control databases : National Germany United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eaves&oldid=1285303791 " Categories : Architectural elements Roofs Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2017 This page was last edited on 12 April 2025, at 22:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eaves 28 languages Add topic

