Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic rights 2 Difference between criminal and civil cases 3 Differences between civil law and common law systems 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Criminal procedure 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Adjudication process in criminal law "Criminal case" redirects here. For game, see Criminal Case (video game) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Criminal procedure" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Criminal procedure Criminal trials and convictions Rights of the accused Appeal Bail Double jeopardy 2 Exclusionary rule 1 Fair trial Jury trial Trial as an adult Presumption of innocence Pre-trial Counsel Self-incrimination Rights of the victim Clearance rate Criminal justice Right to an effective remedy Speedy trial Victims' rights Verdict Acquittal Conviction Conviction rate Guilt Not proven 3 Directed verdict Sentencing Custodial Disparity Discharge Guidelines Totality 5, 6 Mandatory Periodic Dangerous offender 4, 5 Capital punishment Execution warrant Cruel and unusual punishment Imprisonment Life Indefinite Legal remedy Loss of rights Reparation Restitution Reform Suspended Three-strikes law Zero tolerance Post-sentencing Criminal justice Exoneration Parole Probation Habitual offender Life licence 6 Miscarriage of justice Pardon Recidivism Rehabilitation Restorative justice Sex offender registry Sexually violent predator laws 1 Tariff 6 Related areas of law Civil procedure Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Portals Law portal 1 US courts 2 Not in English/Welsh courts 3 Scottish courts 4 English/Welsh courts 5 Canadian courts 6 UK courts v t e Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Criminal procedure is the adjudication process of the criminal law . While criminal procedure differs dramatically by jurisdiction, the process generally begins with a formal criminal charge with the person on trial either being free on bail or incarcerated , and results in the conviction or acquittal of the defendant . Criminal procedure can be either in form of inquisitorial or adversarial criminal procedure.

[ 1 ] Basic rights [ edit ] Currently, in many countries with a democratic system and the rule of law, criminal procedure puts the burden of proof on the prosecution – that is, it is up to the prosecution to prove that the defendant is guilty beyond any reasonable doubt, as opposed to having the defence prove that they are innocent, and any doubt is resolved in favor of the defendant. This provision, known as the presumption of innocence , is required, for example, in the 46 countries that are members of the Council of Europe , under Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights , and it is included in other human rights documents. However, in practice, it operates somewhat differently in different countries. These basic rights also include the right of the defendant to know the offence for which they have been arrested or charged, and the right to appear before a judicial official within a specified time after arrest. Many jurisdictions also allow the defendant the right to legal counsel and provide any defendant who cannot afford their own lawyer with a lawyer paid for at the public expense.

Difference between criminal and civil cases [ edit ] Countries using the common law tend to make a clear distinction between civil and criminal procedures. For example, an English criminal court may force a convicted accused to pay a fine to the Crown as punishment for the crime, and sometimes to pay the legal costs of the prosecution , but does not normally order the convicted accused to pay any compensation to the victim of the crime. The victim must pursue their claim for compensation in a civil, not a criminal, action.

[ 2 ] In countries using the continental civil law system , such as France and Italy , the victim of a crime (known as the "injured party") may be awarded damages by a criminal court judge .

The standards of proof are higher in a criminal action than in a civil one since the loser risks not only financial penalties but also being sent to prison (or, in some countries, execution). In English law , the prosecution must prove the guilt of a criminal "beyond reasonable doubt", while the plaintiff in a civil action is required to prove his case "on the balance of probabilities".

[ 2 ] "Beyond reasonable doubt" is not defined for the jury which decides the verdict, but it has been said by appeal courts that proving guilt beyond reasonable doubt requires the prosecution to exclude any reasonable hypothesis consistent with innocence: Plomp v. R . In a civil case , however, the court simply weighs the evidence and decides what is most probable.

Criminal and civil procedure are different. Although some systems, including the English , allow a private citizen to bring a criminal prosecution against another citizen , criminal actions are nearly always started by the state .

Civil actions , on the other hand, are usually started by individuals .

In Anglo-American law, the party bringing a criminal action (that is, in most cases, the state) is called the prosecution , but the party bringing a civil action is the plaintiff . In a civil action the other party is known as the defendant .  In a criminal case, the private party may be known as the defendant or the accused .  A criminal case in the United States against a person named Ms. Sanchez would be entitled United States v.

(short for versus , or against) Sanchez if initiated by the federal government; if brought by a state, the case would typically be called State v. Sanchez or People v. Sanchez.

In the United Kingdom, the criminal case would be styled R.

(short for Rex or Regina, that is, the King or Queen ) v. Sanchez.

In both the United States and the United Kingdom, a civil action between Ms. Sanchez and a Mr. Smith would be Sanchez v. Smith if started by Sanchez and Smith v. Sanchez if begun by Smith.

Evidence given at a criminal trial is not necessarily admissible in a civil action about the same matter, just as evidence given in a civil cause is not necessarily admissible on a criminal trial. For example, the victim of a road accident does not directly benefit if the driver who injured him is found guilty of the crime of careless driving. He still has to prove his case in a civil action.

[ 2 ] In fact he may be able to prove his civil case even when the driver is found not guilty in the criminal trial. If the accused has given evidence on his trial he may be cross-examined on those statements in a subsequent civil action regardless of the criminal verdict.

Once the plaintiff has shown that the defendant is liable, the main argument in a civil court is about the amount of money , or damages , which the defendant should pay to the plaintiff.

[ 2 ] Differences between civil law and common law systems [ edit ] The majority of civil law jurisdictions ('civil law' as a type of law system, not as opposed to criminal law) follow an inquisitorial system of adjudication, in which judges undertake an active investigation of the claims by examining the evidence at the trial (while other judges contribute likewise by preparing reports).

In common law systems, the trial judge presides over proceedings grounded in the adversarial system of dispute resolution , where both the prosecution and the defence prepare arguments to be presented before the court. Some civil law systems have adopted adversarial procedures.

Proponents of either system tend to consider that their system defends best the rights of the innocent. There is a tendency in common law countries to believe that civil law / inquisitorial systems do not have the so-called " presumption of innocence ", and do not provide the defence with adequate rights. Conversely, there is a tendency in countries with an inquisitorial system to believe that accusatorial proceedings unduly favour rich defendants who can afford large legal teams, and therefore disfavour poorer defendants.

See also [ edit ] Offence (law) Trial (law) Civil procedure Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 of India Court Appointed Special Advocates Criminal Procedure Act Criminal procedure in the United States Formal procedure law in Switzerland Italian Criminal Procedure Code of Criminal Procedure (Japan) Criminal Procedure Code (Malaysia) Criminal Procedure Code (Ukraine) References [ edit ] ^ Antonino, Galati; Tranchina, Giovanni; Zappalà, Vincenzo (2023).

Diritto processuale penale (in Italian). Giuffrè.

ISBN 978-88-288-5157-8 .

^ a b c d Richard Powell (1993).

Law today . Harlow: Longman. p. 34.

ISBN 9780582056350 .

OCLC 30075861 .

Further reading [ edit ] Israel, Jerold H.; Kamisar, Yale; LaFave, Wayne R. (2003).

Criminal Procedure and the Constitution: Leading Supreme Court Cases and Introductory Text . St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.

ISBN 0-314-14669-5 .

v t e Criminal procedure (investigation) Criminal investigation Arguido Arrest Arrest warrant Consent search Detention Exigent circumstance Knock-and-announce Miranda warning Pretextual stop Probable cause Reasonable suspicion Right to silence Search and seizure Search of persons Search warrant Suspect Terry stop Law portal Criminal prosecution Adversarial system Bail Bill of attainder Criminal jurisdiction Diversion program Deferred prosecution agreement Ex post facto law Extradition Grand jury Habeas corpus Indictment Inquisitorial system Nolle prosequi Precognition Preliminary hearing Statute of limitations Charges and pleas Alford plea Arraignment Indictment Information Nolo contendere Peremptory plea Plea Plea bargain Presentence investigation Suspended sentence Related areas Criminal defenses Criminal law Evidence Evidence law in the United States Legal abuse Wiktionary Wikibooks Wikiquote WikiSource Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiversity v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criminal_procedure&oldid=1300973706 " Category : Criminal procedure Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 12:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criminal procedure 36 languages Add topic

