Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relationship with international law 2 Use and viewpoints Toggle Use and viewpoints subsection 2.1 Graduation 2.2 Abuse 3 Law in selected countries Toggle Law in selected countries subsection 3.1 Albania 3.2 Argentina 3.3 Australia 3.3.1 New South Wales 3.3.2 Victoria 3.4 Brazil 3.5 Brunei 3.6 Canada 3.7 Egypt 3.8 Ethiopia 3.9 Finland 3.10 France 3.11 Germany 3.12 Hong Kong (China) 3.13 Hungary 3.14 Iceland 3.15 India 3.16 Ireland 3.17 Israel 3.18 Italy 3.19 Macau (China) 3.20 Malaysia 3.21 Maldives 3.22 New Zealand 3.23 Nigeria 3.24 Pakistan 3.25 Philippines 3.26 Portugal 3.27 Poland 3.28 Romania 3.29 Russia 3.30 Sierra Leone 3.31 Singapore 3.31.1 Special Emergency Powers (1964-2021) 3.31.2 History of Emergency 3.32 South Africa 3.33 Spain 3.34 Sri Lanka 3.35 Switzerland 3.36 Syria 3.37 Trinidad and Tobago 3.38 Turkey 3.39 United Kingdom 3.40 United States 3.41 Venezuela 4 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 4.1 Active in 2025 4.2 Active in 2024 4.3 Active in 2023 4.4 Active in 2022 4.5 Active in 2021 4.6 Active in 2020 4.7 Past states of emergency 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents State of emergency 63 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Declaration by a government allowing assumption of extraordinary power "State of siege" redirects here. For the 1972 film, see State of Siege .

"Emergency declaration" redirects here. For the 2021 film, see Emergency Declaration (film) .

For other uses, see State of emergency (disambiguation) .

Members of the Royal Malay Regiment during the Malayan Emergency in 1949, inspecting equipment captured in a raid A state of emergency is a situation in which a government is empowered to put through policies that it would normally not be permitted to do, for the safety and protection of its citizens. A government can declare such a state before, during, or after a natural disaster , civil unrest , armed conflict , medical pandemic or epidemic or other biosecurity risk, although, the declaration is not influenced by these events.

Relationship with international law [ edit ] Under international law , rights and freedoms may be suspended during a state of emergency, depending on the severity of the emergency and a government's policies.

[ 1 ] Use and viewpoints [ edit ] Democracies use states of emergency to manage a range of situations from extreme weather events to public order situations.

Dictatorial regimes often declare a state of emergency that is prolonged indefinitely for the life of the regime, or for extended periods of time so that derogations can be used to override human rights of their citizens usually protected by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).

[ 2 ] In some situations, martial law is also declared, allowing the military greater authority to act. In other situations, emergency is not declared and de facto measures taken or decree-law adopted by the government.

Nicole Questiaux (France) and Leandro Despouy (Argentina), two consecutive United Nations Special Rapporteurs , have recommended to the international community to adopt the following "principles" to be observed during a state or de facto situation of emergency: Principles of Legality, Proclamation, Notification, Time Limitation, Exceptional Threat, Proportionality, Non-Discrimination, Compatibility, Concordance and Complementarity of the Various Norms of International Law (cf. "Question of Human Rights and State of Emergency", E/CN.4/Sub.2/1997/19, at Chapter II; see also état d'exception ).

Article 4 to the ICCPR , permits states to derogate from certain rights guaranteed by the ICCPR in "time of public emergency". Any measures derogating from obligations under the Covenant, however, must be to only the extent required by the exigencies of the situation, and must be announced by the State Party to the Secretary-General of the United Nations . The European Convention on Human Rights [ 3 ] and American Convention on Human Rights [ 4 ] have similar derogatory provisions. No derogation is permitted to the International Labour Conventions .

Some, such as political theorist and Nazi Party member Carl Schmitt , have argued that the power to decide the initiation of the state of emergency defines sovereignty itself. In State of Exception (2005) , Giorgio Agamben criticized this idea, arguing that the mechanism of the state of emergency deprives certain people of their civil and political rights , producing his interpretation of homo sacer .

[ 5 ] Graduation [ edit ] In many democratic states there are a selection of legal definitions for specific states of emergency, [ 6 ] when the constitution of the State is partially in abeyance depending on the nature of the perceived threat to the general public . In order of severity these may include: Martial law : when civil rights are severely restricted by the imposition of military force within a sovereign state , for example during a period of extreme threat of invasion or actual hostilities by foreign forces State of siege: when the civil rights of specified persons or groups such as political activists are likely to be curtailed, for example to prevent an insurrection or organized acts of treason by suspected agents provocateurs Civil emergency : dealing with disaster areas and requiring the deployment of extraordinary resources to contain dangerous situations such as natural disasters or extensive malicious property damage such as may occur during rioting or by arson . As well as regular emergency services , sometimes military forces may be assigned to deliver aid under especially dangerous conditions or to prevent looting .

Abuse [ edit ] The state of emergency can be abused by being invoked. An example would be to allow a state to suppress internal opposition without having to respect human rights . An example was the August 1991 attempted coup in the Soviet Union (USSR) where the coup leaders invoked a state of emergency; the failure of the coup led to the dissolution of the Soviet Union .

Derogations by states having ratified or acceded to binding international agreements such as the ICCPR , the American and European Conventions on Human Rights and the International Labor Conventions are monitored by independent expert committees, regional Courts and other State Parties.

[ 7 ] Law in selected countries [ edit ] Albania [ edit ] The Constitution of Albania grants only the Parliament of Albania the power to declare a state of emergency, based on the advice of the government . The state of emergency can last for up to 60 days, and may be extended by the parliament for no more than 90 days.

The Albanian Armed Forces are only permitted to intervene if the civil police have been unable to restore order. During a state of emergency, articles 15 (inviolability of constitutional rights), 18 (equality before the law), 19 ( right to citizenship ), 20 (protection of minority rights), 21 (right to life), 24 (freedom of conscience and religion), 25 (right to not be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment), 29 (prohibition of ex post facto law ), 30 (innocence before being proven guilty), 32 (rights during a criminal proceeding [ 8 ] ), 32 ( self-incrimination ), 34 ( double jeopardy ), 39.1 (prohibition of expulsion of
nationals), 41 ( right to property and related rights), 42 ( due process clause), 43 ( right to appeal ), 48 (right to complain to public bodies), 54 (special protection of children, pregnant women, and new mothers), and 55 (right to healthcare from the state and equality of health services) of the constitution may not be limited.

If a natural disaster is declared, articles 37 (inviolability of the residence), 38 (right to choose residence), 41.4 (right to fair compensation for expropriation), 49 (right to freely choose your profession), 51 (right to strike ) may be limited. The state of a natural disaster is distinct from that of a national emergency.

During a state of emergency, the parliament may not be dissolved, a new president may not be elected, elections for local government bodies or referendums may not be held, and the Constitution, the electoral code, and the extraordinary measures law may not be changed. The constitution requires proportionality with regards to the level of risk and requires the government to work to re-establish the conditions for the normal functioning of the state as soon as possible.

Argentina [ edit ] The Constitution of Argentina , which has been amended several times, has always allowed for a state of emergency (literally estado de sitio , "state of siege"), to be declared if the constitution or the authorities it creates are endangered by internal unrest or foreign attack. This provision was much abused during dictatorships, with long-lasting states of siege giving the government a free hand to suppress opposition.

[ 9 ] The American Convention on Human Rights (Pacto de San José de Costa Rica), adopted in 1969 but ratified by Argentina only in 1984 immediately after the end of the National Reorganization Process , restricts abuse of the state of emergency by requiring any signatory nation declaring such a state to inform the other signatories of its circumstances and duration, and what rights are affected.

Australia [ edit ] See also: Exceptional circumstances , Biosecurity in Australia , and Biosecurity Act 2015 State-of-emergency legislation differs in each state of Australia. With regard to emergency management, regions (usually on a local government area basis) that have been affected by a natural disaster are the responsibility of the state, until that state declares a State of Emergency where access to the Federal Emergency Fund becomes available to help respond to and recover from natural disasters. A State of Emergency does not apply to the whole state, but rather districts or shires , where essential services may have been disrupted.

[ 10 ] On 18 March 2020, [ 11 ] a nationwide human biosecurity emergency was declared in Australia owing to the risks to human health posed by the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic , after the National Security Committee met the previous day. The Biosecurity Act 2015 [ 12 ] specifies that the governor-general of Australia may declare such an emergency if the Health Minister is satisfied that "a listed human disease is posing a severe and immediate threat, or is causing harm, to human health on a nationally significant scale". This gives the Minister sweeping powers, including imposing restrictions or preventing the movement of people and goods between specified places, and evacuations .

[ 13 ] The Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity Emergency) (Human Coronavirus with Pandemic Potential) Declaration 2020 was declared by the Governor-General, David Hurley , under Section 475 of the Act.

[ 11 ] New South Wales [ edit ] In New South Wales , the NSW Premier can, pursuant to the State Emergency and Rescue Management Act 1989 , declare a state of emergency due to an actual or imminent occurrence (such as fire, flood, storm, earthquake, explosion, terrorist act, accident, epidemic or warlike action) which endangers, or threatens to endanger, the safety or health of persons or animals in the State, or destroys or damages, or threatens to destroy or damage, property in the State, or causes a failure of, or a significant disruption to, an essential service or infrastructure.

[ 14 ] The Premier declared a state of emergency on 11 November 2019 in response to the 2019–2020 New South Wales bushfires . It was the fifth time that a state of emergency had been declared in that state since 2006 and it lasted for seven days. Subsequent declarations were made on 19 December for a further seven days, and again on 2 January 2020. In NSW, the 2019–2020 bushfire season resulted in 26 deaths, destroyed 2,448 homes, and burnt 5.5 million hectares (14 million acres).

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Victoria [ edit ] In Victoria , the Victorian Premier can declare a state of emergency under the Public Safety Preservation Act 1958 [ 17 ] if there is a threat to employment, safety or public order.

[ 18 ] A declared state of emergency allows the Premier to immediately make any desired regulations to secure public order and safety. The declaration expires after 30 days, and a resolution of either the upper or lower House of Parliament may revoke it earlier. However, these regulations expire if Parliament does not agree to continue them within seven days.

The Premier (or a delegate) may operate or prohibit operation of any essential service , such as transport, fuel, power, water or gas, under the Essential Services Act 1958 .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] If there is an emergency which the Premier, after considering the advice of the relevant Minister and the Emergency Management Commissioner , is satisfied constitutes or is likely to constitute a significant and widespread danger to life or property in Victoria, the Premier, pursuant to the Emergency Management Act 1986 , may declare a state of disaster to exist in the whole or in any part or parts of the State.

[ 21 ] The state of disaster addresses matters beyond public health issues and is intended to deal with emergencies such as natural disasters, explosions, terrorism or sieges, and it can also be used to deal with 'a plague or an epidemic'.

[ 22 ] The Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008 gives the Chief Health Officer extensive powers to take action 'to investigate, eliminate or reduce public health risks', including power to detain, restrict the movement of or prevent entry of any person in the emergency area, "and to give any other direction that the authorized officer considers is reasonably necessary to protect public health." [ 23 ] Brazil [ edit ] The current constitution of Brazil [ 24 ] allows the president to declare two states, in order to "preserve or establish peace and order, threatened by grave and imminent institutional instability or severe natural disasters". The first, and less severe state is the state of defense ( estado de defesa ), while a more severe form is the state of siege ( estado de sítio ).

In a state of defense, the federal government can occupy and use any public building or demand any service as it sees fit. It may suppress secrecy of correspondence and freedom of assembly as necessary, as long as it specifies a defined region and time period. If the president finds this insufficient, he or she may decree a state of siege, which further reduces civil liberties , removing freedom of movement , allowing for search without consent or warrant, and seizure of any assets the government deems necessary. The government may also intervene and direct the function of any company. If a state of siege is declared, the National Congress of Brazil is required to convene and approve the declaration in ten days or it is automatically cancelled. The state of siege is also subject to renewal by the Congress after a thirty-day period, unless it was raised as response to a war, in which case the government is free to set it to last until the end of said war.

Since the end of the military dictatorship in 1985, and the formation of the sixth Brazilian Republic , neither state has ever been raised.

Brunei [ edit ] The 1959 constitution allows the Sultan of Brunei to declare a state of emergency at the national or local level. The sultan may extend the state of emergency after a two-year period or cancel it altogether.

[ 25 ] Under emergency rule, the sultan can proclaim royal decrees, known as Orders, which have the force of law and can affect wide-ranging domains such as censorship , freedom of movement , finance, and modification of legislation. These Orders are then subject to review by the Legislative Council , which may promulgate them into law as Acts through the normal legislative process.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Some Acts are typically overridden by new Orders from the sultan.

[ 26 ] The current state of emergency in Brunei predates its history as an independent state , having been invoked by Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddien III on 12 December 1962, when Brunei was still a British protectorate , in response to the Brunei revolt which was later put down with British assistance.

[ 27 ] Because the rebellion came to be associated with derhaka (treachery against the Sultan) by the sultanate, it has not lifted the state of emergency nor has it reinstated the elected Legislative Council which was dissolved shortly after emergency rule was proclaimed.

[ 28 ] [ 26 ] The state of emergency has also restricted many civil liberties.

[ 29 ] Canada [ edit ] Main articles: War Measures Act , Emergencies Act , and States of emergency in Canada The federal government of Canada can use the Emergencies Act to invoke a state of emergency. A national state of emergency automatically expires after 90 days, unless extended by the Governor-in-Council .

[ 30 ] There are different levels of emergencies: Public Welfare Emergency, Public Order Emergency, International Emergency, and War Emergency.

[ 31 ] The Emergencies Act replaced the War Measures Act in 1988. The War Measures Act was invoked three times in Canadian history, most controversially by Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau during the 1970 October Crisis , and also by Prime Minister Robert Borden during World War I (from 1914 to 1920, against threat of Communism during the Revolutions of 1917–1923 ) and by Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King during World War II (from 1942 to 1945, against perceived threat from Japanese Canadians following Imperial Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor ).

Under the current Emergency Act a state of emergency can also be declared by provincial, territorial, and municipal governments.

[ 32 ] In addition Canada's federal government and any of its provincial governments can suspend, for five years at a time, Charter rights to fundamental freedoms in section 2, to legal rights in sections 7 through 14, and to equality rights in section 15 by legislation which invokes the notwithstanding clause, section 33 , and therefore emergency powers can effectively be created even without using the Emergency Act.

Provincial governments can also invoke states of emergency , and have done so to respond to at least 12 incidents during the 21st century.

[ citation needed ] The first usage of the Emergencies Act was invoked by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau on 14 February 2022 in response to the Freedom Convoy 2022 protests that occupied the capital of Ottawa . The Canadian House of Commons voted to approve the invocation 185–151 with support from the Liberal Party and the New Democratic Party and opposition from the Conservative Party and the Bloc Québécois .

[ 33 ] Prime Minister Trudeau previously considered invoking it at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in April 2020, but faced unanimous disapproval from all thirteen provincial and territorial premiers at the Council of the Federation .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Egypt [ edit ] Main article: Emergency law in Egypt States of emergency in Egypt are governed by Law 1958/162.

[ 36 ] The law grants greater powers to the police, suspends some constitutional rights and legalizes media censorship and state detention of individuals, who may be tried before military courts created under emergency rule.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Since the proclamation of the republican system in 1953, Egyptians have lived under four successive periods of emergency rule lasting more than a year: 1956–1964, 1967–1980, 1981–2012 and 2017–2021.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The emergency law received widespread criticism during the presidency of Hosni Mubarak , when thousands of civilians were detained under the law according to human rights groups, with estimates of political prisoners running as high as 30,000.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Ethiopia [ edit ] Further information: 2023 Ethiopian state of emergency , 2021–2022 Ethiopian state of emergency , and 2016–2018 Ethiopian state of emergency Article 93 of the Constitution of Ethiopia provides for a six-month state of emergency under certain conditions.

[ 42 ] Finland [ edit ] The Finnish Government , in cooperation with the President of Finland , may declare a state of emergency in Finland , after which it is possible to apply the provisions of the Emergency Powers and Defence Act. A state of emergency may only be declared when all other legislative means have been exhausted.

[ 43 ] According to an earlier law, passed in 1930, Finland could be declared a state of war if necessary.

[ 44 ] Under this law, Finland was declared a state of war on 30 November 1939, after the start of the Winter War , and the state of war continued until 26 September 1947.

[ 45 ] The most recent state of emergency was declared during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, when the Marin cabinet invoked a state of emergency in Finland to alleviate the epidemic .

[ 46 ] These measures included, among other things, isolating the Uusimaa region from the rest of Finland.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] France [ edit ] Police stationed in Paris during a state of emergency, November 2015 Main article: States of emergency in France Three main provisions concern various kinds of "state of emergency" in France: Article 16 of the Constitution of 1958 allows, in time of crisis, "extraordinary powers" to be used by the president. Article 36 of the same constitution regulates a "state of siege" ( état de siège ). Finally, the Act of 3 April 1955 allows the proclamation, by the Council of Ministers, of a "state of emergency" ( état d'urgence ).

[ 50 ] The distinction between article 16 and the 1955 Act concerns mainly the distribution of powers: whereas in article 16, the executive power overturns the regular procedures of the Republic, the 1955 Act permits a twelve-day state of emergency, after which a new law extending the emergency must be voted by the Parliament of France . These dispositions have been used at various times: three times during the Algerian War (in 1955, 1958 and 1961), in 1984 during violent pro-independence revolts in New Caledonia , during the 2005 riots , following the 2015 Paris terrorist attacks , and during the 2024 unrest in New Caledonia .

Germany [ edit ] The Weimar Constitution (1919–1933) [ 51 ] allowed states of emergency under Article 48 to deal with rebellions. Article 48 was often invoked during the 14-year life of the Weimar Republic , sometimes for no reason other than to allow the government to act when it was unable to obtain a parliamentary majority .

After 27 February 1933, Reichstag fire , an attack blamed on the communists , Adolf Hitler declared a state of emergency using Article 48, and then had President Paul von Hindenburg sign the Reichstag Fire Decree , which suspended some of the basic civil liberties provided by the Weimar Constitution (such as habeas corpus , freedom of expression , freedom of the speech , the freedom to assemble or the privacy of communications) for the whole duration of the Third Reich .

[ 52 ] On 23 March, the Reichstag enacted the Enabling Act of 1933 with the required two-thirds majority, which enabled Chancellor Adolf Hitler and his cabinet to enact laws without legislative participation. The Weimar Constitution was never actually repealed by Nazi Germany , but it effectively became inoperable after the passage of the Enabling Act.

[ 53 ] These two laws implemented the Gleichschaltung , the Nazis' institution of totalitarianism .

In the postwar Federal Republic of Germany the Emergency Acts state that some of the basic constitutional rights of the Basic Law may be limited in case of a State of Defence , a state of tension, or an internal state of emergency or disaster (catastrophe). These amendments to the constitution were passed on 30 May 1968, despite fierce opposition by the so-called extra-parliamentary opposition (see German student movement for details).

Hong Kong (China) [ edit ] During a state of war or turmoil which threatens national security or unity, and which the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress believes is beyond the control of the local government, the Standing Committee can invoke Article 18 of the Hong Kong Basic Law and declare a "State of Emergency" in Hong Kong; thus, the Central People's Government can selectively implement national laws not normally allowed in Hong Kong.

[ 54 ] Deployment of troops from the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison under the "Law of the People's Republic of China on Garrisoning the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region" can happen.

[ 55 ] The Chief Executive of Hong Kong along with the Executive Council can prohibit public gatherings, issue curfew orders, prohibit the movement of vessels or aircraft, delegate authority, and other listed powers, under "Cap. 245 Public Order Ordinance".

[ 56 ] Although the People's Liberation Army Hong Kong Garrison may not interfere in internal Hong Kong affairs, the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Government may invoke Article 14 of the Hong Kong Basic Law and request permission of the Central People's Government to have the garrison assist in "maintenance of public order or disaster relief".

[ 54 ] Since 1997, a State of Emergency has never been declared. However, emergency measures have been used in varying degrees over the years during British rule and after the establishment of the Special Administrative Region. A few notable mentions are as follow: Seamen's strike of 1922 – Enactment of the Emergency Regulations Ordinance , 1922 within one day on 28 February 1922 Canton-Hong Kong strike 1925 – with involvement of police and soldiers from multiple nations Anti-Japanese riot of 1931 – with involvement of Hong Kong Police and British Armed Forces Hong Kong 1956 riots – with involvement of British Armed Forces and Hong Kong Police Hong Kong 1966 riots – with involvement of British Armed Forces and Hong Kong Police Hong Kong 1967 Leftist Riots – with involvement of British Armed Forces and Hong Kong Police Hong Kong 1981 riots – with involvement of Hong Kong Police 2005 WTO Conference Protests – with involvement of Hong Kong Police and anti-globalization protesters led by Hong Kong People's Alliance on WTO from 148 countries 2014 Hong Kong protests – with involvement of Hong Kong Police 2016 Mong Kok civil unrest – with involvement of Hong Kong Police 2019–20 Hong Kong protests – with involvement of Hong Kong Police On 4 October 2019, Carrie Lam , the Chief Executive of Hong Kong S.A.R., invoked Section 2(1) of the Emergency Regulations Ordinance [ 57 ] implemented since 1922 and last amended by the Legislative Council in 1999, which allow the government to implement the new, Prohibition on Face Covering Regulation .

[ 58 ] The new regulation forbid public assembly participants from wearing masks or obscure faces during such events without reasonable excuses. The permitted excuses are: pre-existing medical or health reasons, religious reasons, and if the person uses the face covering for physical safety while performing an activity connected with their profession or employment. Any person defying the new regulation face possible criminal prosecution. The government's motive in doing so is to end months of social unrest and riots, however, did not declare a "State of Emergency". The new regulation took effect at 00:00 HKT on 5 October 2019.

[ 59 ] Offenders risked a maximum of one-year imprisonment or a fine of HK$25,000 (US$3,200).

[ 60 ] The High Court of Hong Kong denied an application for a judicial injunction of the anti-mask law, on the same night shortly before the new regulation took effect. A subsequent attempt by pro-democrats to halt the new regulation also failed, however, the court recommended a judicial review at a later date.

[ 61 ] On 18 November 2019, the High Court ruled the "Cap. 241 Emergency Regulations Ordinance" is "incompatible with the Basic Law", however, the court "leaves open the question of the constitutionality of the ERO insofar as it relates to any occasion of emergency." The court also held the ordinance meets the "prescribed by law" requirement. However, the court deemed s3(1)(b), (c), (d) and s5 of the regulation do not meet the proportionality test as they impose restrictions on fundamental rights that goes beyond what is necessary in furthering its intended goals.

[ 62 ] On 22 November 2019, the High Court made the following remark: Nevertheless, we recognize that our Judgment is only a judgment at first instance, and will soon be subject to an appeal to the Court of Appeal. In view of the great public importance of the issues raised in this case, and the highly exceptional circumstances that Hong Kong is currently facing, we consider it right that we should grant a short interim suspension order so that the respondents may have an opportunity to apply to the Court of Appeal, if so advised, for such interim relief as may be appropriate.  Accordingly, we shall grant an interim temporary suspension order to postpone the coming into operation of the declarations of invalidity for a period of 7 days up to the end of 29 November 2019, with liberty to apply.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] On 26 November 2019, the High Court announced hearing for the government appeal against the judgement is on 9 January 2020.

[ 65 ] On 27 November 2019, the Court of Appeal extended the interim suspension of the judgment until 10 December 2019.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] On 10 December 2019, the Court of Appeal refused to suspend the "unconstitutional" ruling by the Court of First Instance on the anti-mask regulation. As scheduled, a full hearing will commence on 9 January 2020.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] On 21 December 2020, the Court of Final Appeal ruled that the prohibition on the use of face coverings at public gatherings, regardless of legality, was constitutional.

[ 71 ] Hungary [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2020 ) According to the Hungarian Constitution , the National Assembly of Hungary can declare state of emergency in case of armed rebellion or natural or industrial disaster. It expires after 30 days, but can be extended. Most civil rights can be suspended, but basic human rights (such as the right to life, the ban of torture, and freedom of religion) cannot.

During state of emergency, the Parliament cannot be disbanded.

Iceland [ edit ] The Icelandic constitution provides no mechanism for the declaration of war, martial law nor state of emergency.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] Main article: States of emergency in India The State of Emergency can be proclaimed by the President of India , when they perceive grave threats to the nation, albeit through the advice of the Union Council of Ministers . Part XVIII of the Constitution of India gives the President the power to overrule many provisions, including the ones guaranteeing fundamental rights to the citizens of India In India, a state of emergency was declared twice: Between 26 October 1962 to 10 January 1968 during the Sino-Indian War —the security of India having been declared "threatened by external aggression".

[ 72 ] Between 3 December 1971 to 21 March 1977 originally proclaimed during the Indo-Pakistani War , and later extended on 25 June 1975, along with the third proclamation—the security of India having been declared "threatened by external aggression" and by "internal disturbances".

The first internal State of Emergency, popularly known as the Emergency , was declared by the then President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed on advice of then Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi . The provisions of the Constitution allows the Prime Minister to rule by decree .

Ireland [ edit ] In Ireland declaring a state of "national emergency" involves Article 28.3.3° of the 1937 Constitution of Ireland , which states that: [ 73 ] Nothing in this Constitution [...] shall be invoked to invalidate any law enacted by the Oireachtas [parliament] which is expressed to be for the purpose of securing the public safety and the preservation of the State in time of war or armed rebellion, or to nullify any act done or purporting to be done in time of war or armed rebellion in pursuance of any such law.

In addition, during a "war or armed rebellion", military tribunals may try civilians, [ 74 ] and the Defence Forces are not bound by habeas corpus .

[ 75 ] The First Amendment of the Constitution of 1939 allows an emergency to be declared during wars in which the state is a non-belligerent , subject to resolutions by the houses of the Oireachtas .

[ 76 ] By the 2nd Amendment of 1941, an emergency ends, not automatically when the war does, but only by Oireachtas resolutions.

[ 77 ] The 21st Amendment of 2002 prevents the reintroduction of capital punishment during an emergency.

[ 78 ] The first amendment was rushed through the Oireachtas after the outbreak of the Second World War , in which the state remained neutral . Immediately after, the required resolution was passed, in turn enabling the passage of the Emergency Powers Act 1939 (EPA), which granted the government and its ministers sweeping powers to issue statutory orders termed "Emergency Powers Orders" (EPOs).

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] (The period in Ireland was and is referred to as " The Emergency ".)  The EPA expired in 1946, although some EPOs were continued under the Supplies and Services (Temporary Provisions) Act 1946 until as late as 1957.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Rationing continued until 1951.

The 1939 state of emergency was not formally ended until a 1976 resolution, which also declared a new state of emergency in relation to the Troubles in Northern Ireland and in particular the recent assassination of the British ambassador to Ireland, Christopher Ewart Biggs .

[ 83 ] The Emergency Powers Act 1976 was then passed to increase the Garda Síochána powers to arrest, detain, and question those suspected of offences against the state .

[ 84 ] President Cearbhall Ó Dálaigh referred the bill under Article 26 of the Constitution to the Supreme Court , which upheld its constitutionality.

[ 85 ] The referral was condemned by minister Paddy Donegan as a "thundering disgrace", causing Ó Dálaigh to resign in protest. The 1976 EPA expired after one year, but the state of emergency persisted until 1995, when as part of the Northern Ireland peace process it was rescinded as a "confidence building measure" to satisfy physical force republicans after the Provisional IRA's 1994 ceasefire .

[ 86 ] The Offences against the State Act does not require a state of emergency under Article 28.3.3°.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Part V of the Act, which provides for a non-jury Special Criminal Court (SCC), is permitted under Article 38.3.1°.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Part V is activated by a declaration from the government that it is "necessary to secure the preservation of public peace and order", and it can be rescinded by vote of Dáil Éireann . Provision for internment is similarly activated and rescinded (originally by Part VI of the 1939 act, later by Part II of a 1940 amending act).

[ 87 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Parts V and VI were both activated during the Second World War and the IRA's late 1950s Border Campaign ; Part V has been continually active since 1972.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Several official reviews of the Constitution and the Offences Against the State Acts have recommended a time limit within which the operation of Article 28.3.3° or Article 38.3.1° must either be explicitly renewed by resolution or else lapse.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Israel [ edit ] The Israeli state of emergency , as authorized by the Defence (Emergency) Regulations , is older than the state itself, having been passed under the British Mandate for Palestine in 1945. The regulations were incorporated into domestic law following the Israeli Declaration of Independence in 1948. A repeal was briefly considered in 1967 but cancelled following the Six-Day War . The regulations allow Israel, through its military , to control movements and prosecute suspected terrorists in occupied territories , and to censor publications that are deemed prejudicial to national defense.

[ citation needed ] Italy [ edit ] In Italy, the state of emergency planned by the legal system is implemented by the Council of Ministers , without the need of a parliamentary vote, due to the Law n. 225 of 1992 on Civil Protection .

[ 98 ] Moreover, the Article 120 of the Constitution provides that the government can exercise "substitute powers" of local authorities in typically situations: to protect the legal or economic unity of the state, in case of violation of supranational laws and to face a serious danger for safety and public safety.

[ 99 ] For other emergency, such as a war , a parliamentary vote is required to give extraordinary powers to the government.

[ 100 ] The Parliament of Italy can also give extraordinary powers to the government in case of health emergency, as it occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, when the Parliament approved a state of emergency from 31 January 2020 to 31 December 2021, thanks to what the government can implement administrative acts, without the approval of the Parliament.

[ 101 ] Macau (China) [ edit ] The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress can declare a state of emergency and deploy troops from the People's Liberation Army Macau Garrison under the Article 14 of Macau's Basic Law on the defence of the Macau Special Administrative Region .

Since the handover of Macau in 1999, no emergency measure have been enacted. Prior to 1999, emergency measures were used for the 12-3 incident (1966), with martial law being invoked and the involvement of Portuguese troops .

Malaysia [ edit ] Main articles: Malayan Emergency and 2021 Malaysian state of emergency In Malaysia , if the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security, or the economic life, or public order in the Federation or any part thereof is threatened, he may issue a Proclamation of Emergency making therein a declaration to that effect.

[ 102 ] A state of emergency was declared by the then- colonial government of Britain from 1948 until 1960 to deal with an insurgency of communists led by Chin Peng .

States of emergency were also declared during the Konfrontasi in 1962, the 1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis and the 1977 Kelantan Emergency .

When a race riot broke out on 13 May 1969, a state of emergency was declared.

Amid severe haze on 11 August 2005, a state of emergency was announced for the world's 13th-largest port , Port Klang and the district of Kuala Selangor after air pollution there reached dangerous levels (defined as a value greater than 500 on the Air Pollution Index or API).

Thierry Rommel, the European Commission 's envoy to Malaysia, told Reuters by telephone on 13 November 2007 (the last day of his mission) that, "Today, this country still lives under (a state of) emergency." [ 103 ] Although not officially proclaimed as a state of emergency, the Emergency Ordinance and the Internal Security Act had allowed detention for years without trial.

On 23 June 2013, a state of emergency was declared by Prime Minister Najib Razak for Muar and Ledang, Johor as severe Southeast Asian haze that pushed the air pollution index to above 750. This was the first time in years that air quality had dipped to a hazardous level with conditions worsening as dry weather persisted and fires raged in Sumatra.

[ 104 ] On 12 January 2021, a nationwide state of emergency was declared by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong Abdullah of Pahang in response to the COVID-19 pandemic in Malaysia , at the request of Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin . The state of emergency is planned to end on 1 August 2021. The declaration included the suspension of parliament and elections , and came amid political instability .

[ 105 ] On 25 February 2021, Yang di-Pertuan Agong announced that the parliament can be convened during the state of emergency.

[ 106 ] [ needs update ] Maldives [ edit ] A state of emergency was declared on 26 December 2004, following the 2004 Indian Ocean Earthquake and Tsunami . The resulting tsunamis caused extensive damage to the country's infrastructure, cutting off communications from large swathes of the nation, decimating islands and forcing the closure of a number of resorts due to the damage.

On 5 February 2018, a state of emergency was declared by Maldives's President Abdulla Yameen for 15 days and ordered security forces into the Supreme Court of the Maldives and arrested former president Maumoon Abdul Gayoom and the Chief Justice of the Maldives .

[ 107 ] New Zealand [ edit ] The Civil Defence Emergency Management Act 2002 gives the New Zealand Government and local-body councils the power to issue a state of emergency, either over the entire country or within a specific region .

[ 108 ] This may suspend ordinary work and essential services if need be. States of emergency in New Zealand expire on the commencement of the seventh day after the date of a declaration unless extended. However, the Minister of Civil Defence or a local mayor may lift a state of emergency after an initial review of a region's status.

In 1951, the First National Government issued emergency regulations in response to that year's waterfront dispute .

[ 109 ] On 23 February 2011 at 11.28 am the Minister of Civil Defence John Carter declared the first state of national emergency (for a civil-defence emergency) in New Zealand's history in response to the 22 February 2011 Christchurch earthquake .

[ 110 ] A local state of emergency was declared by mayors of Christchurch City , Selwyn District and Waimakariri District following 4 September 2010 Canterbury earthquake .

[ 111 ] On 25 March 2020 at 12.21 pm, the Minister for Civil Defense Peeni Henare declared a state of national emergency in response to the total cases of COVID-19 reaching 205. Combined with an epidemic notice issued under the Epidemic Preparedness Act 2006, the state of emergency declaration enabled authorities to close most premises in New Zealand and enforce a nationwide lockdown . This also provided access to special powers to combat COVID-19 , including powers of requisition and closing roads and restricting movement. Director of Civil Defence Emergency Management Sarah Stuart-Black said these powers sat alongside other powers to ensure essential services could stay up and running.

[ 112 ] The state of national emergency was renewed four times, to last for a total of five weeks.

[ 113 ] On 14 February 2023 at 8:43 am, the Minister for Civil Defense Kieran McAnulty declared a state of national emergency in response to Cyclone Gabrielle reaching New Zealand and causing flooding and evacuations.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Nigeria [ edit ] In Nigeria, a state of emergency is usually declared in times of great civil unrest. In recent years, it has specifically been implemented in reaction to terrorist attacks on Nigerians by the Islamic terrorist group Boko Haram .

On 14 May 2013, Goodluck Jonathan declared a state of emergency for the entire northeastern states of Borno , Yobe and Adamawa .

[ 116 ] A more limited state of emergency had been declared on 31 December 2011 in parts of Yobe, Borno, Plateau and Niger states. This earlier declaration included the temporary shutdown of the international borders in those regions.

[ 117 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Further information: 2007 Pakistani state of emergency In Pakistan, a state of emergency was declared five times in its history: In 1958 by President Iskander Mirza In 1969 by President General Yahya Khan In 1977 by President General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq In 1998 by President Muhammad Rafiq Tarar In 2007 by President General Pervez Musharraf The first three were regarded as the imposition of direct martial law.

Philippines [ edit ] There are several situations that calls for various levels of government action in the Philippines. The constitution alludes to these: State of war: Declared by Manuel L. Quezon in 1941 after the United States' entry during World War II and lead to its occupation by Japanese forces.

State of martial law : Six declarations in history ( 1896 , 1898 , 1944–45 , 1972–1981 , 2009 and 2017–2019 ) These are not specified in the constitution, but were nevertheless declared at least once: State of rebellion : Last declared in 2003 due to the Oakwood mutiny State of emergency: Last two declarations were in 2006 and 2016–2023 .

State of public health emergency: Last declared in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines .

State of calamity : Last national declaration was in 2020–21 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines and later, the outbreak of African swine fever virus in several provinces and regions of the country, as well as Super Typhoon Odette (Rai) .

Local governments are also permitted to declare local states of calamity in their areas hit by natural and man-made disasters .

Portugal [ edit ] Letter from the Portuguese President, Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa , to the Speaker of the Assembly of the Republic, Eduardo Ferro Rodrigues , requesting Parliament for authorisation under the terms of the Constitution, for a declaration of the state of emergency in the context of the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic The current Constitution of Portugal empowers the President of the Republic [ 118 ] to declare a state of siege ( Portuguese : estado de sítio ) or a state of emergency ( Portuguese : estado de emergência ) in part or the entirety of the Portuguese territory, only in cases of actual or imminent aggression by foreign forces, serious threats to or disturbances of the democratic constitutional order, or public disasters.

[ 119 ] Such declarations allow the entities that exercise sovereignty from suspending the exercise of some of the constitutionally defined rights, freedoms and guarantees, so that the public authorities can take the appropriate and strictly necessary measures for the prompt restoration of constitutional normality; the Constitution, however, sets a temporal limit for these states of emergency (no more than fifteen days, even though renewal is possible) and forbids any suspension of the right to life , to personal integrity, to personal identity , to civil capacity and citizenship, the non-retroactivity of criminal law , the right to a fair trial , or the freedom of conscience and religion .

[ 119 ] They also may not affect the constitutionally defined competences and mode of operation of the entities that exercise sovereignty. The Assembly of the Republic may not be dissolved while a state of siege or a state of emergency is in force, [ 120 ] nor can the Constitution itself be subject to amendment.

[ 121 ] Before declaring a state of siege or a state of emergency, the President is required to consult with the Government and request authorisation to do so from the Assembly of the Republic .

[ 122 ] During the Third Portuguese Republic , the only two times such states of exceptional suppression of constitutional provisions were declared were during the failed left-wing coup d'état of 25 November 1975 (state of siege, within the confines of the Lisbon Military Region), [ 123 ] and during the COVID-19 pandemic (state of emergency, in the entirety of the Portuguese territory).

Within the remit of the basic law of civil protection services ( Portuguese : Lei de Bases da Protecção Civil ), the prime minister can, through a Resolution of the Council of Ministers and without the need of parliamentary approval or presidential promulgation, decree a situation of calamity ( Portuguese : situação de calamidade ). Lesser exceptional statuses, the situation of contingency ( Portuguese : situação de contingência ) and the situation of alert ( Portuguese : situação de alerta ) in descending order of importance, can also be set in motion by other civil protection authorities or Mayors .

[ 124 ] These three situations allow for some extraordinary measures and special restrictions, but not the suspension of constitutional rights and freedoms.

Poland [ edit ] In Poland, the institution of the state of emergency was absorbed by the institution of martial law in the years 1952–1983 in the constitutional regulations. According to the provisions of the Constitution of 1997 (Articles 228 et seq.), A state of emergency may be introduced by the president at the request of the Council of Ministers for a specified period of time, but not longer than 90 days, in part or throughout the territory of the country, if the security of the state, the security of citizens or public order has been threatened. The President may extend this state only once (for a period not longer than 60 days) with the consent of the Sejm. During the state of emergency and within 90 days from its end, the Constitution and electoral regulations may not be changed, and the Sejm may not be dissolved; there are also no national elections or referendums. In the event of the expiry of the term of office of the President, the Sejm and the Senate, or local self-government bodies, they are appropriately extended.

Romania [ edit ] This section's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Romania , there are two types of states of emergency, each designed for a different type of situation.

[ citation needed ] State of alert ( Stare de alertă in Romanian ): Non-military, can be enforced by a prefect.

Roadblocks are enforced. Any utilitarian vehicle or equipment can be temporarily used by the state, without any restriction. Evacuation is not mandatory, unless extreme circumstances apply. Only EMS , Police and firefighting personnel are required to intervene. This situation can be enforced in case of natural disasters or civil unrest .

State of emergency ( stare de urgentă in Romanian): Can only be enforced by the President of Romania with approval from Parliament . The military becomes the upper form of control in the country (under the rule of the president).

[ citation needed ] The civilian population is subject to strict regulations, imposed by the type of emergency.

[ citation needed ] All private and public non-crucial activities are suspended.

[ citation needed ] Essential services might be disrupted. This situation can be enforced in case of extreme circumstances, such as a war.

Special zone of public safety ( Zonă specială de siguranță publică in Romanian): Administrative, can be enforced by local police. This implies installation of road check-points and higher numbers in police and gendarmes/ riot police presence, patrolling the area. There is also a ban that restricts the right to travel for people in the area; any vehicle and individual transiting the zone are subject to screening.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The most well-known event in which the state of emergency has been enforced was because of 1977 Vrancea earthquake .

[ citation needed ] The last instance in which the special zone of public safety was enforced was on 8 December 2013, in Pungești, Vaslui following civil unrest in Pungești from Chevron 's plans to begin exploring shale-gas in the village.

[ 127 ] According to police officials, the special security zone will be maintained as long as there is conflict in the area that poses a threat to Chevron's operations.

[ 125 ] This special security zone has faced domestic and international criticism for alleged human-rights abuses .

Russia [ edit ] Main article: State of emergency in Russia Sierra Leone [ edit ] Sierra Leone declared, on 7 February 2019, a State of Emergency due to ongoing rape and sexual violence in the country.

[ 128 ] On 24 March 2020, a 12-month state of emergency was declared by (Rtd) Brigadier Julius Madaa Bio due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 129 ] Singapore [ edit ] Article 150(1) of the Constitution of Singapore [ 130 ] allows the President of Singapore to declare a state of emergency in the event of a security or economic threat and must notify Parliament as soon as practicable under Article 150(3). A state of emergency would last for six months under Article 150(6). With the repeal of the Emergency (Essential Powers) Act in 2021, only the powers granted by the Constitution are allowed to be exercised in an event of an emergency.

Special Emergency Powers (1964-2021) [ edit ] When Singapore was in Malaysia, the Malaysian Federation declared a State of Emergency in September 1964. It conferred upon the Federal King special powers during a State of Emergency [ 131 ] such as creating offenses and prescribing penalties among others. When Singapore gained independence in 1965, that ordinance was enacted as the Emergency (Essential Powers) Act conferring those powers on the President. These powers were repealed effective the 1st day of March 2021.

[ 132 ] History of Emergency [ edit ] In response to the Malayan Communist Party (MCP)'s murder of three British planters in Perak on 16 June 1948, Sir Edward Gent , the British High Commissioner of Malaya declared a State of Emergency to the whole of Perak and Johore. This emergency was extended to the whole of Malaya on the 18th of June, and six days later, Singapore came under a State of Emergency. The emergency officially ended on 31 July 1960, 12 years since its declaration, and when Singapore was a self-governing state rather than a colony during which the emergency was imposed in the first place.

[ 133 ] The subsequent time Singapore experienced a State of Emergency was when it was declared in 1964, when race riots broke out in July and in September. This time, Singapore was a state in the Malaysian Federation.

Malaysian Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman declared a State of Emergency under the provisions of the Malaysian Constitution.

[ 134 ] This was the period when Ordinance 30 of 1964 was enacted conferring upon the Federal King special powers. This ordinance would become known as the Emergency (Essential Powers) Act and would be adopted by Singapore when it gained independence. The Act would remain in force for close to 57 years, until 2021.

While the British and the Malaysian Federal authorities have declared a State of Emergency in Singapore, no Singaporean government, thus far, has declared a State of Emergency since the country's independence in 1965. This is due to the Singaporean government's reliance on the Internal Security Act of 1960 [ 135 ] and other targeted legislation to deal with security threats.

South Africa [ edit ] Further information: State of Emergency Act, 1997 States of emergency in South Africa are governed by section 37 of the Constitution and by the State of Emergency Act, 1997 . The president may declare a state of emergency only when "the life of the nation is threatened by war, invasion, general insurrection, disorder, natural disaster or other public emergency" and if the ordinary laws and government powers are not sufficient to restore peace and order. The declaration is made by proclamation in the Government Gazette and may only apply from the time of publication, not retroactively. It can only continue for 21 days unless the National Assembly grants an extension, which may be for at most three months at a time. The High Courts have the power, subject to confirmation by the Constitutional Court , to determine the validity of the declaration of a state of emergency.

[ 136 ] During a state of emergency the President of South Africa has the power to make emergency regulations "necessary or expedient" to restore peace and order and end the emergency. This power can be delegated to other authorities. Emergency measures can violate the Bill of Rights , but only to a limited extent. Some rights are inviolable, including amongst others the rights to life and to human dignity; the prohibition of discrimination on the grounds of race, sex or religion; the prohibition of torture or inhumane punishment; and the right of accused people to a fair trial. Any violation of a constitutional right must be strictly required by the emergency. Emergency measures may not indemnify the government or individuals for illegal actions. They may impose criminal penalties, but not exceeding three years' imprisonment. They may not require military service beyond that required by the ordinary laws governing the defence force. An emergency measure may be disapproved by the National Assembly, in which case it lapses, and no emergency measure may interfere with the elections, powers or sittings of Parliament or the provincial legislatures . The courts have the power to determine the validity of any emergency measure.

The constitution places strict limits on any detention without trial during a state of emergency. A friend or family member of the detainee must be informed, and the name and place of detention must be published in the Government Gazette . The detainee must have access to a doctor and a legal representative. The detainee must be brought before a court within at most ten days, for the court to determine whether the detention is necessary, and if not released may demand repeated review every ten days. At the court review the detainee must be allowed legal representation and must be allowed to appear in person. The provisions on detention without trial do not apply to prisoners of war in an international conflict; instead they must be treated in accordance with the Geneva Conventions and other international law.

Spain [ edit ] In Spain, there are three degrees of state of emergency ( estado de emergencia in Spanish): alarma (alarm or alert), excepción (exception[al circumstance]) and sitio (siege). They are named by the constitution , which limits which rights may be suspended, but regulated by the " Ley Orgánica 4/1981 " ( Organic Law ).

On 4 December 2010, the first state of alert was declared following the air traffic controllers strike .

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] It was the first time since the Francisco Franco's regime that a state of emergency was declared.

[ 139 ] The second state of alert was declared on 14 March 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic .

[ 140 ] The third state of alert was declared before the end of October 2020 given the difficulties to control the spread of said pandemic.

[ 141 ] Sri Lanka [ edit ] In Sri Lanka, the president is able to proclaim emergency regulations under the Public Security Ordinance in the constitution in order to preserve public security and public order; suppression of mutiny , riot or civil commotion ; or maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the community. These regulations last for one month unless confirmed otherwise by Parliament .

[ 142 ] Switzerland [ edit ] According to Art. 185 of the Swiss Federal Constitution The Federal Council (Bundesrat) can call up in their own competence military personnel of maximum 4000 militia for three weeks to safeguard inner or outer security (called Federal Intervention or Federal Execution, respectively). A larger number of soldiers or of a longer duration is subject to parliamentary decision. For deployments within Switzerland the principle of subsidiarity rules: as a first step, unrest has to be overcome with the aid of cantonal police units.

Syria [ edit ] An emergency prevailed in Syria from 1963, following the Ba'athist coup d'état , to 2011.

[ 143 ] Originally predicated on the conflict with Israel , the emergency acted to centralize authority in the presidency and the national security apparatus while silencing public dissent. The emergency was terminated in response to protests that preceded the Syrian Civil War . Under the 2012 constitution , the president may pass an emergency decree with a 2/3 concurrence of his ministers, provided that he presents it to the People's Assembly for constitutional review.

Trinidad and Tobago [ edit ] Sections 7 though 12 of the Constitution [ 144 ] set out the legal basis for declaring that a state of emergency exists. The president , under the advice of the prime minister , may make a proclamation that a "state of public emergency" exists if: "A public emergency has arisen as a result of the imminence of a state of war between Trinidad and Tobago and a foreign state, A public emergency has arisen as a result of the occurrence of any earthquake, hurricane, flood, fire, outbreak of pestilence or of infectious disease, or other calamity whether similar to the foregoing or not, Action has been taken, or is immediately threatened, by any person, of such a nature and on so extensive a scale, as to be likely to endanger the public safety or to deprive the community or any substantial portion of the community of supplies or services essential to life." (ss. 8 (2)).

Upon declaring that a state of emergency exists, the President may make regulations to deal with the situation at hand. The regulations can even infringe upon the rights enshrined within sections 4 and 5 of the Constitution (e.g. freedom of speech, freedom of movement, etc.) but only to such extent as such constitutional encroachments are "reasonably justifiable for the purpose of dealing with the situation that exists during that period." (ss. 7 (3)). Once the President has declared that a state of emergency exists, the initial duration of that proclamation is 15 days, unless revoked sooner. The state of emergency can then be extended for up to three months by a simple majority vote of the House of Representatives and can be extended by a further three months by a three-fifths majority vote of the House of Representatives and must also be passed in the Senate .

A state of emergency was declared in 1970 during the Black Power Revolution by then Prime Minister Eric Williams . During the attempted state coup by the Jamaat al Muslimeen against the NAR government of the then Prime Minister A. N. R. Robinson in 1990, [ 145 ] [ 146 ] a state of emergency was declared during the coup attempt and for a period after the coup.

On 4 August 1995, a state of emergency was declared to remove the Speaker of the House Occah Seapaul by Prime Minister Patrick Manning during a constitutional crisis.

[ 147 ] The government had attempted to remove the speaker via a no-confidence motion, which failed. The state of emergency was used to remove the speaker using the emergency powers granted.

[ 148 ] On 22 August 2011 at 8:00 pm, Prime Minister Kamla Persad-Bissessar announced a state of emergency in an attempt to crack down on the trafficking of illegal drugs and firearms, in addition to gangs.

[ 149 ] The decision of the President, George Maxwell Richards , to issue the proclamation for the state of emergency was debated in the country's Parliament as required by the Constitution on 2 September 2011 and passed by the required simple majority of the House of Representatives. On 4 September, the Parliament extended the state of emergency for a further three months. It ended in December 2011.

On 15 May 2021 at 2:50 pm, Prime Minister Keith Rowley declared a state of emergency following a mass surge in the number of deaths and COVID-19 infections, no hospital beds being available and a lack of COVID-19 vaccines in dealing with a rapid and deadly spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Trinidad and Tobago , [ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] noted as being one of the worst in the world.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] On 24 August, the Parliament extended the state of emergency for a further three months.

[ 155 ] On 30 December 2024, a state of emergency was declared after a spike in gang violence, which killed 6 people in the previous 2 days.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Martial law and state of emergency in Turkey Since the foundation of the Republic of Turkey in 1923 the military conducted three coups d'état and announced martial law . Martial law between 1978 and 1983 was replaced by a state of emergency that lasted until November 2002.
The latest state of emergency was declared by President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on 20 July 2016 following a failed coup attempt on 15 July 2016 by a faction of the country's armed forces. It was lifted on 18 July 2018.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Civil Contingencies Act 2004 In the United Kingdom, only the British Sovereign , [ 159 ] on the advice of the Privy Council , or a Minister of the Crown in exceptional circumstances, has the power to introduce emergency regulations under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 , in case of an emergency, broadly defined as war or attack by a foreign power, terrorism which poses a threat of serious damage to the security of the UK, or events which threaten serious damage to human welfare or the environment of a place in the UK. The duration of these regulations is limited to thirty days, but may be extended by Parliament .
A state of emergency was last invoked in 1974 by Prime Minister Edward Heath in response to increasing industrial action .

The act grants wide-ranging powers to central and local government in the event of an emergency. It allows the modification of primary legislation by emergency regulation, with the exception of the Human Rights Act 1998 and Part 2 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 .

United States [ edit ] Further information: Senate Report 93-549 , Insurrection Act , National Emergencies Act , and List of national emergencies in the United States The United States Constitution implicitly provides some emergency powers in the article about the executive power: Congress may authorize the government to call forth the militia to execute the laws, suppress an insurrection or repel an invasion.

Congress may authorize the government to suspend consideration of writs of habeas corpus "when in cases of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it." Felony charges may be brought without presentment or grand jury indictment in cases arising "in the militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger." A state government may engage in war without Congress's approval if "actually invaded, or in such imminent Danger as will not admit of delay." Aside from these, many provisions of law exist in various jurisdictions, which take effect only upon an executive declaration of emergency; some 500 federal laws take effect upon a presidential declaration of emergency. The National Emergencies Act regulates this process at the federal level. It requires the President to specifically identify the provisions activated and to renew the declaration annually so as to prevent an arbitrarily broad or open-ended emergency.
Presidents have occasionally taken action justified as necessary or prudent because of a state of emergency, only to have the action struck down in court as unconstitutional.

[ 160 ] A state governor or local mayor may declare a state of emergency within their jurisdiction . This is common at the state level in response to natural disasters. The Federal Emergency Management Agency maintains a system of assets, personnel and training to respond to such incidents. For example, on 10 December 2015, Washington state Governor Jay Inslee declared a state of emergency due to flooding and landslides caused by heavy rains.

[ 161 ] The 1977 International Emergency Economic Powers Act allows the government to freeze assets, limit trade and confiscate property in response to an "unusual and extraordinary threat" to the United States that originates substantially outside of it. As of 2015 more than twenty emergencies under the IEEPA remain active regarding various subjects, the oldest of which was declared in 1979 with regard to the government of Iran . Another ongoing national emergency, declared after the September 11 attacks , authorizes the president to retain or reactivate military personnel beyond their normal term of service.

[ 162 ] In 2020, it was common for states to enact a state of emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 163 ] Because the Defense Resources Act contain numerous Titles or individual national emergency laws, it provides an important framework. In American film and popular culture, American views on what to expect during national emergencies can include prominent Cold War television programs such as The Day After , which aired on ABC in November 1983.

Officials under President Ronald Reagan briefed Congress on the Act in 1983.

[ 164 ] The briefing explained several emergency actions Congress might approve in a grave national crisis such as the nuclear war scare depicted in The Day After . Upon approval by Congress, the Act would have authorized the president to issue orders putting forth wage and price controls, censorship and commandeering of private property. The present legal status of these matters is not clear.

Presidential Emergency Action Documents reviews issues concerning national emergencies in the United States as well as legal and constitutional concerns.

Venezuela [ edit ] Further information: States of emergency in Venezuela Examples [ edit ] Active in 2025 [ edit ] On 16 February 2025, the Governor of West Virginia in the United States, Patrick Morrisey declared a state of emergency due to severe flooding across southern West Virginia.

[ 165 ] Active in 2024 [ edit ] On 30 December 2024, President of Trinidad and Tobago Christine Kangaloo issued the declaration of a state of emergency on the advice of Prime Minister Keith Rowley over surging violence as weapons from the United States fuel a crime wave around the Caribbean.

[ 166 ] On 26 July 2024, then-Governor of West Virginia in the United States, Jim Justice declared a state of emergency due to a severe drought that was ongoing.

[ 167 ] The declaration was originally supposed to last for 30 days; but was later extended on 23 August 2024 for an additional 30 days.

[ 168 ] On 26 March 2024, the Governor of Maryland in the United States , Wes Moore declared a state of emergency due to the collapse of the Francis Scott Key Bridge .

[ 169 ] On 14 January 2024, the Governor of Kentucky in the United States , Andy Beshear declared a state of emergency due to the severe winter storms.

On 11 January 2024, Papua New Guinea's Prime Minister James Marape declared a state of emergency due to the 2024 Papua New Guinean unrest .

On 9 January 2024, Ecuador's President Daniel Noboa declared a state of emergency following the escape of José Adolfo Macías Villamar , leader of the Los Choneros drug cartel, from prison.

Active in 2023 [ edit ] On 10 November 2023, Icelandic authorities declared a state of emergency after a series of powerful earthquakes rocked the country's southwestern Reykjanes peninsula, signalling the increased likelihood of a volcanic eruption in the region. The village of Grindavík was ordered to evacuate due to the imminent volcanic eruption of the Fagradalsfjall volcano.

On 4 August 2023, Ethiopia's Council of ministers declared a state of emergency in the Amhara region after clashes between regional armed forces and the military.

On 7 February 2023, Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan declared a three-month long state of emergency in 10 cities due to the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake .

On 8 September 2023, United States President Joe Biden extended the state of emergency declared by George W. Bush after the September 11 attacks .

[ 170 ] Active in 2022 [ edit ] On 5 January 2022, Kazakhstan 's President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev declared a state of emergency due to the 2022 Kazakh protests .

On 6 February 2022, Ottawa 's Mayor Jim Watson declared a state of emergency due to the Freedom Convoy protests.

On 11 February 2022, Ontario Premier Doug Ford declared a state of emergency due to the Freedom Convoy protests.

On 23 February 2022, Ukraine announced in response to the Russian invasion of its territory that it would declare a nationwide state of emergency, excluding the occupied territories in Donbas . On the same day, Russia began to evacuate its embassy in Kyiv and also lowered the Russian flag from the top of the building.

On 24 February 2022, Moldova announced that it will declare a nationwide state of emergency in response to the invasion, as thousands of Ukrainians flee into Moldovan territory.

On 24 February 2022, Lithuania declared the state of emergency due to possible disturbances and provocations as large military forces massed in Russia and Belarus .

On 26 March 2022, El Salvador declared a state of emergency after 62 people were murdered, making it the most violent day since the end of the civil war in 1992.

On 2 April 2022, Sri Lanka 's President Gotabaya Rajapaksa declared a state of emergency due to the 2022 Sri Lankan protests .

On 14 April 2022, Georgia 's Governor Brian Kemp declared a state of emergency due to supply chain disruptions and the COVID-19 pandemic .

On 16 May 2022, Poland Minister of Health Adam Niedzielski declared a state of epidemic threat for COVID-19 .

On 24 May 2022, Hungary declared a state of emergency due to economic impact of the Russian invasion on Ukraine.

On 18 June 2022, Ecuador declared a state of emergency due to the 2022 Ecuadorian protests .

On 2 July 2022, Uzbekistan declared a state of emergency due to the 2022 Karakalpak protests .

On 4 July 2022, Italy declared a state of emergency on five northern regions, due to a severe drought, one of the worst of the decade.

On 11 July 2022, Portugal declared a state of emergency due to forest fires.

On 15 July 2022, the UK declared a national emergency following extreme Red Weather Heatwave warnings that indicated a danger to life.

On 28 July 2022, Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear declared a state of emergency due to historic flooding in Eastern Kentucky .

On 25 August 2022, Pakistan declared a state of emergency because of the flooding .

Active in 2021 [ edit ] On 1 February 2021, following a military coup in Myanmar, Min Aung Hlaing , Commander-in-Chief of Armed Forces of Myanmar and its new State Leader, declared a state of emergency lasting one year.

On 15 May 2021, following a mass surge in the number of deaths and COVID-19 infections, no hospital beds being available and a lack of COVID-19 vaccines , Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago Keith Rowley , declared a state of emergency due to the rapid and deadly spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in Trinidad and Tobago , [ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] noted as being one of the worst in the world.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] On 2 September 2021, Poland declared a state of emergency in the terrain surrounding Belarus–Poland border . The request was motivated by – according to government – possible threats to security and public order in part of the territory of Poland.

[ 171 ] It covered 183 localities near the Belarusian border: 115 in Podlaskie Voivodeship and 68 in Lublin Voivodeship [ 172 ] On 15 September 2021, Alberta declared a state of public health emergency to protect their health care system that became in crisis because of COVID-19 .

[ 173 ] On 2 November 2021, Ethiopia declared a state of emergency aimed to protect civilians from atrocities being committed by the Tigray People's Liberation Front in several parts of the country.

[ 174 ] On 10 November 2021, Lithuania declared a state of emergency in the border region of Belarus-Lithuania border due to the 2021 Belarus–European Union border crisis .

[ 175 ] On 11 December 2021, Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear declared a state of emergency for parts of western Kentucky due to the Tornado outbreak of December 10–11, 2021 .

Active in 2020 [ edit ] On 9 October 2020, Kyrgyzstan 's President Sooronbay Jeenbekov declared a state of emergency due to the 2020 Kyrgyzstan protests .

On 25 August 2020, Wisconsin 's Governor Tony Evers declared a state of emergency due to Kenosha unrest .

[ 176 ] On 18 August 2020, California 's Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency because of the multiple wildfires being battled across the state.

[ 177 ] On 5 August 2020, Lebanon 's Prime Minister Hassan Diab declared a state of emergency after the 2020 Beirut explosion .

On 6 July 2020, Georgia Governor Brian Kemp declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

[ 178 ] On 31 May 2020, Missouri Governor Mike Parson declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 31 May 2020, Georgia Governor Brian Kemp declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 31 May 2020, Texas Governor Greg Abbott declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 31 May 2020, Virginia Governor Ralph Northam declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 31 May 2020, Arizona Governor Doug Ducey declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 28 May 2020, Minnesota Governor Tim Walz declared a state of emergency for the George Floyd protests .

On 9 April 2020, Botswana President Mokgweetsi Masisi declared a state of emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

On 7 April 2020, Japan Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared a national emergency for the COVID-19 pandemic .

On 25 March 2020, New Zealand Minister for Civil Defence Peeni Henare declared a National State Of Emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 179 ] On 25 March 2020, Prime Minister of Thailand Prayut Chan-o-cha declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 180 ] On 22 March 2020, Nova Scotia Premier Stephen McNeil declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 181 ] On 21 March 2020, Kyrgyzstan Prime Minister Mukhammedkalyi Abylgaziev declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 182 ] On 20 March 2020, Poland Minister of Health Łukasz Szumowski declared a state of the epidemic for COVID-19 .

On 18 March 2020, Luxembourg Prime Minister Xavier Bettel declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 18 March 2020, Portugal President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 183 ] It was renewed twice (2 and 17 April) in the constitutionally mandated 15-day periods, lasting until 1 minute before midnight on 2 May 2020.

[ 184 ] Beginning midnight, 3 May 2020, the country is now in a "situation of calamity" ( Portuguese : situação de calamidade ), a different status enshrined in the Basic Law of Civil Protection , which allows for restrictions on circulation or conditioning in the operation of certain establishments, but not the suspension of constitutional rights and freedoms as with the state of emergency.

[ 185 ] On 18 March 2020, North Macedonia President Stevo Pendarovski declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 17 March 2020, Alberta Premier Jason Kenney declares public health emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 186 ] On 17 March 2020, Ontario Premier Doug Ford declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 187 ] On 17 March 2020, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte declared all of the Philippines to be in a state of calamity following a dramatic rise in cases of COVID-19 , the declaration was eventually lifted in September 2022.

[ 188 ] On 16 March 2020, Government of Armenia declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 189 ] On 15 March 2020, President of Serbia Aleksandar Vučić declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 190 ] On 15 March 2020, President of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 191 ] On 14 March 2020, Quebec Premier Francois Legault declares public health emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 192 ] On 14 March 2020, Poland Minister of Health Łukasz Szumowski declared a state of epidemic threat for COVID-19 .

On 13 March 2020, Prime Minister of Spain Pedro Sánchez announced the declaration of the state of emergency in the nation for a period of 15 days, to become effective next day after the approval of the Council of Ministers for the COVID-19 pandemic in Spain .

[ 193 ] On 13 March 2020, President Donald Trump declared a national emergency for the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic [ 194 ] On 15 March 2020, Maine Governor Janet Mills declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 195 ] On 13 March 2020, Minnesota Governor Tim Walz declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 196 ] On 13 March 2020, Louisiana Governor John Bel Edwards declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 197 ] On 13 March 2020, Alabama Governor Kay Ivey declared a state of public health emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 198 ] On 12 March 2020, Kansas Governor Laura Kelly declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 199 ] On 12 March 2020, Virginia Governor Ralph Northam declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 200 ] On 12 March 2020, Wisconsin Governor Tony Evers declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 201 ] On 11 March 2020, Arizona Governor Doug Ducey declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 11 March 2020, New Mexico Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 202 ] On 10 March 2020, Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 203 ] On 10 March 2020, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 204 ] On 10 March 2020, North Carolina Governor Roy Cooper declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 205 ] On 10 March 2020, Colorado Governor Jared Polis declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 206 ] On 9 March 2020, New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 9 March 2020, Ohio Governor Mike Dewine declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 207 ] On 8 March 2020, Oregon Governor Kate Brown declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 208 ] On 7 March 2020, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 209 ] On 6 March 2020, Tennessee Governor Bill Lee declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 6 March 2020, Kentucky Governor Andy Beshear declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 5 March 2020, Maryland Governor Larry Hogan declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

On 4 March 2020.

California Governor Gavin Newsom declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 210 ] On 29 February 2020, Washington Governor Jay Inslee declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 211 ] On 29 February 2020, Florida Governor Ron DeSantis declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 211 ] On 11 March 2020, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 .

[ 212 ] On 3 March 2020, Tennessee Governor Bill Lee declared a state of emergency following the tornado outbreak of 2–3 March 2020 .

[ 213 ] Past states of emergency [ edit ] On 14 February 2023, New Zealand's Minister of Emergency Management Kieran McAnulty declared a national state of emergency following severe and widespread impacts from Ex- Tropical Cyclone Gabrielle . The state of emergency was lifted on 14 March.

On 12 January 2021, a national state of emergency was declared by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia Al-Sultan Abdullah to curb the spread of COVID-19 . The state of emergency was lifted on 1 August.

[ 214 ] On 7 January 2021, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga declared the second state of emergency for the COVID-19 in several prefectures . It was lifted on 22 March.

[ 215 ] On 14 January 2021, New Mexico 's Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham declared a state of emergency in preparation of Inauguration of Joe Biden .

[ 216 ] On 15 January 2021, Maryland 's Governor Larry Hogan declared a state of emergency in preparation of Inauguration of Joe Biden .

[ 217 ] On 6 January 2021, Virginia 's Governor Ralph Northam declared a state of emergency due to the attack at the United States Capitol .

[ 218 ] On 11 January 2021, outgoing President Donald Trump declared a state of emergency for two weeks in Washington, DC , in preparation of the inauguration of Joe Biden .

[ 219 ] On 15 October 2020, Thailand 's Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha declared a state of extreme emergency in Bangkok due to 2020 Thai protests .

[ 220 ] and was lifted on 22 October.

On 7 April 2020, Japan Prime Minister Shinzō Abe declared a national emergency for the COVID-19 .

On 21 March 2020, Georgian President Salome Zurabishvili declared a state of emergency for COVID-19 . State of emergency was prolonged for one month on 22 April 2020 and expired on 23 May 2020.

On 19 March 2020, the Moroccan government declared a "state of health emergency" for COVID-19 , to take effect the following day (20 March).

[ 221 ] In November 2019, New South Wales , Australia, declared a seven-day state of emergency granting "emergency powers" to fire-fighting agencies due to major bushfires occurring in the state.

[ 222 ] In October 2019, Ecuador declared a 60-day state of emergency after violent protests following the ending of fuel subsidies.

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] On 18 October 2019, a state of emergency was declared in the capital of Chile , Santiago , after violent protests broke out in response to the rising cost of living.

[ 225 ] This state of emergency was later extended to other cities in the country.

[ 226 ] The state of emergency was lifted on 27 October 2019.

[ 227 ] At midnight on 23 April 2019, a state of emergency was declared across Sri Lanka following multiple bomb attacks on churches, luxury hotels and other locations across the country in which 253 people were killed and more than 500 injured.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] After being extended three times, the state of emergency was lifted on 25 August 2019.

[ 231 ] On 15 February 2019, President Donald Trump declared a national emergency on the U.S. border with Mexico to allocate funds towards a border wall .

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] In March 2018 a state of emergency was imposed in Sri Lanka in Kandy for 10 days following clashes between Sinhalese and Muslims .

[ 234 ] In February 2018, Ethiopia declared a six-month long state of emergency following the resignation of Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn .

[ 235 ] Following the 2017 Palm Sunday church bombings in Egypt , President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi declared a nationwide three-month-long state of emergency.

[ 236 ] On 12 August 2017, a state of emergency was declared in the U.S. state of Virginia due to escalating tensions amid protesters and counter-protesters in Charlottesville.

[ 237 ] On 21 September 2016, a state of emergency was declared in the U.S. state of North Carolina for riots in Charlotte after a police shooting of a black male.

[ citation needed ] On 4 September 2016, a state of emergency was declared in the Philippines by President Rodrigo Duterte via Proclamation No. 55 following the 2 September bombings in Davao City that killed 14 people and seriously wounded at least 60 others.

[ 238 ] The declaration was lifted by his successor, Bongbong Marcos , through Proclamation No. 298, issued on 25 July 2023.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] On 28 June 2016, Namibia declared a state of emergency due to an ongoing drought .

[ 241 ] On 12 June 2016, following the Orlando nightclub shooting in which at least 50 people were killed (including the shooter), the Governor of Florida declared a state of emergency in the immediate Orlando area.

[ 242 ] In May 2016, Venezuela declared a 60-day state of emergency due to mass protests against the government of President Nicolás Maduro , further fueled by the impeachment process against Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff , which Maduro believes is the result of an American conspiracy to overthrow him.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] [ 245 ] On 22 November 2015, a state of emergency was declared in Russian-occupied Crimea after pylons in Ukraine were blown up leaving 1,896,000 people without power.

[ 246 ] France declared a state of emergency in response to the November 2015 Paris attacks which after five extensions ended in November 2017.

[ 247 ] On 27 April 2015 the U.S. state of Maryland declared a state of emergency and activated the National Guard of the United States , as a direct result of the rioting and widespread physical violence during protesting in Baltimore due to the Death of Freddie Gray .

[ citation needed ] In March 2013, Myanmar declared a state of emergency in the city of Meiktila due to ongoing sectarian violence.

[ 248 ] Egypt had been under a nearly-continuous state of emergency since 1967 (interrupted for 18 months in 1980–81); the People's Assembly renewed it every two to three years.

[ 36 ] [ 41 ] [ 249 ] The state of emergency expired on 31 May 2012.

[ 250 ] Tunisia declared state of emergency January 2011, following unrest from economic issues.

[ 251 ] 28 November 2011 – Slovakia declared a state of emergency for numerous hospitals, due to resignation of many Medicare workers.

[ 252 ] 21 August 2011 – Trinidad and Tobago , in an attempt to crack down on the trafficking of illegal drugs and firearms, in addition to gangs.

[ 253 ] 15 March 2011 – Bahrain declared a state of emergency on 15 March 2011 and asked the military to reassert its control over the capital, Manama, as clashes between Shia and Sunni groups spread across the country. Bahrain has been gripped by deepening political unrest and widespread protests for over a month, with the Shia majority and some Sunni liberals calling for democracy and an end to discrimination.

[ 254 ] 30 September 2010 – A state of emergency was declared in Ecuador due to a coup by armed forces.

11 April 2009 – Thailand 's Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva declared a state of emergency in the areas of Pattaya and Chonburi , in response to anti-government protesters breaking into the conference center of a hotel complex in the seaside resort city of Pattaya, in the then-venue site of the ASEAN was being held, immediately resulting in its cancellation.

[ 255 ] Another state of emergency on 12 April 2009, was announced in Bangkok and the surrounding areas, due to a heightened escalation of tension between the government and anti-government protesters, but was later lifted.

[ 256 ] 5 February 2009 – China was in a state of emergency due to extreme droughts in the country.

January 2009 – Slovakia was in a state of emergency due to natural gas supply shortage .

[ 257 ] 11 January 2007 – Bangladesh was in a state of emergency due to electoral violence .

[ 258 ] This ended on 16 December 2008, when new parliamentary elections were organized.

26 November 2008 – In Maharashtra state, India , Maharashtra Government declared a state of Emergency following the 2008 Mumbai attacks .

2 September 2008 – A state of emergency was declared in Bangkok by Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej following civil unrest ; [ 259 ] it was lifted on 14 September 2008.

[ 260 ] 1 July 2008 – Mongolian president Nambaryn Enkhbayar declared a state of emergency in the capital Ulaanbaatar for four days after violent protests against the ex-communist Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP). The MPRP had claimed a majority of seats in the 2008 parliamentary elections , but was accused of fraud and vote rigging by the less-successful parties.

[ 261 ] March 2008 – Armenia was in a state of emergency from 2 March 2008 to 20 March 2008, declared by President Robert Kocharyan in response to protests over the 2008 Armenian presidential elections .

[ 262 ] 3 November 2007 – Pakistan was in a state of emergency from 3 November 2007 to 15 December 2007.

[ 263 ] President Pervez Musharraf declared emergency "to stop Pakistan from committing suicide". He lifted the state of emergency after he resigned from the army and took the oath of office as a civilian President of Pakistan .

24 February 2006 – the Philippines declared a state of emergency via Philippine Proclamation 1017 for one week until Philippine Proclamation 1021 on 3 March 2006, in response to a supposed coup against President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo 's government in the midst of the 20th anniversary of the 1986 People Power Revolution that toppled the rule of Ferdinand Marcos .

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] 28 August 2005 – A state of emergency was declared in Louisiana because of Hurricane Katrina . See National Weather Service bulletin for Hurricane Katrina .

August 2005 – Portugal declares state of emergency, in response to wildfires.

[ 267 ] Mid-August 2005 – Sucumbios and Orellana , two provinces of Ecuador , because of indigenous protests against oil firms 15 April 2005 – Quito , capital of Ecuador due to protests; lifted less than a day later, on 17 April 2005.

[ 268 ] December 2004 – Sri Lanka , Indonesia and Maldives because of the tsunami .

November 2003 – Georgia , following weeks of civil unrest.

[ 269 ] August 2003 – Michigan , Ohio , New York , United States, and Ontario , Canada, in response to the Northeast blackout of 2003 .

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] [ 272 ] March 2003 – Serbia after assassination of Zoran Đinđić ( vanredno stanje ).

[ 273 ] 15 July 2002 – Paraguay , in response to public unrest .

[ 274 ] November 2001 – Nepal , in response to increased guerrilla activity.

[ 275 ] 30 November 1999 – The U.S. city of Seattle , Washington, stemming from protest of the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999 and police reaction to it – known as the 1999 Seattle WTO protests .

[ 276 ] May–June 1998 – Indonesia declares state of emergency, due to May 1998 riots of Indonesia .

2 March 1997 – The 1997 unrest in Albania , also known as the Lottery Uprising or Anarchy in Albania , was an uprising sparked by Ponzi scheme failures. Albania descended into anarchy and violence in which the government was toppled and some 2,000 people were killed. On 1 March, Prime Minister Aleksandër Meksi resigned and on 2 March President Sali Berisha declared a state of emergency.

[ 277 ] 5 August 1995 – Trinidad and Tobago to remove Speaker of the House Occah Seapaul who refused to resign.

[ 278 ] Winter 1995 – The U.S. city of Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan , after a severe snowstorm buried the city in 6 feet (1.8 m) of snow.

April–May 1992 – California , United States. state of emergency was declared by Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley in response to the 1992 Los Angeles riots , which were caused by the acquittal of the Los Angeles Police Department officers who had been seen on tape beating Rodney King .

[ 279 ] [ 280 ] March 1992 – Republic of Moldova , in response to War of Transnistria .

[ 281 ] 1992 to 2011 – Algeria endures a 19-year state of emergency enacted at the beginning of the 1992 coup .  The state of emergency, which suspended citizens' rights in lieu of military power, was lifted after the Algerian Government gave in to protester demands during the 2011 Arab Spring .

[ 7 ] May 1994 – On May 4, Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh declared a 30-day state of emergency in response to the bombing of Sana'a by separatist air forces during the escalating civil war , and foreign nationals began evacuating the country.

[ 282 ] August 1991 – Soviet Union , enemies of Mikhail Gorbachev 's glasnost and perestroika reforms evoked the state of emergency because Gorbachev, according to them, was destroying both communism and the state itself. The coup was led by the acting president of the Soviet Union , Gennady Yanayev .

July–August 1990 – Trinidad and Tobago declared a state of emergency when a group stormed Parliament and a TV Station holding government officials, including the prime minister , at ransom.

[ 283 ] See Jamaat al Muslimeen coup attempt July 1985 to February 1990 – South Africa , in response to increasing civil unrest and township violence opposing apartheid rule.

[ 284 ] 1975 to 1977 – India, Indira Gandhi declared a state of emergency in 1975 in response to political opposition and her own conviction on charges of electoral fraud.

The Emergency lasted for 21 months.

1972 to 1976 – Mauritius , due to ethnic and labor-related unrest. Elections were suspended during this period, and political rights were broadly circumscribed .

1971 – Queensland , Australia in response to fears over increasing protest over the 1971 South Africa rugby union tour of Australia 1970 to 1972 – Trinidad and Tobago; a state of emergency was declared to deal with the Black Power Revolution which also included a mutiny in the Military.

1972 – the United Kingdom in response to increasingly militant industrial action .

October 1970 – Quebec in response to the October Crisis kidnappings of government officials.

July 1967 – Detroit , United States in response to the 12th Street riot started on Sunday morning during a blind pig raid .

October 1962 – United States in response to the Cuban Missile Crisis .

1963 to 2011 – Syria during the Arab–Israeli conflict .

1948 to 1960 – Malayan Emergency in Malaysia and Singapore 1958 – Malta due to riots against the colonial government following Prime Minister Dom Mintoff 's resignation.

1950 to 1978 – United States due to the Cold War , specifically the threat of "world conquest by communist imperialism." [ 285 ] 1948 to 1991 – China declared the state of emergency in response to the communist insurgency during the Chinese Civil War .

Martial law was declared in both Mainland China and Taiwan , the latter following the February 28 incident in 1947 but was lifted in 1987. Eventually, Mainland China fell to the victorious Communists led by Mao Zedong who established the People's Republic of China in 1949.

1939 to 1952 – United States due to World War II 1941 to 1942 – Moscow due to the German advance to within 19 miles (31 km) of the city during World War II .

October 1936 – Spain in response to the proclamation of the Catalan State and the ongoing Asturian miners' strike of 1934 .

[ 286 ] 18 March 1907 – Moldavia and Wallachia in Romania during the 1907 Romanian Peasants' Revolt .

See also [ edit ] Law portal Philosophy portal Arbitrary arrest and detention Article 48 (Weimar Constitution) Continuity of Government Plan Due process Force majeure International humanitarian law Search and seizure Senate Report 93-549 Snow emergency State of exception Unitary executive theory Presidential Emergency Action Documents References [ edit ] ^ "Observatory on emergency situations" . Venice Commission.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2024 . Retrieved 11 March 2024 .

^ See Judson, 2012, " Where is R2P grounded in international law Archived 22 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine ".

^ European Convention on Human Rights , Article 15 ^ American Convention on Human Rights , Article 27 ^ Agamben 2005 ^ "Emergency Declarations and Authorities Fact Sheet | State Public Health | ASTHO" .

www.astho.org .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ a b "Algeria's state of emergency to be lifted 'imminently' " .

BBC News . 22 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "Albania 1998 (rev. 2016)" . Constitute Project.

During a criminal proceeding, everyone has the right:  to be notified immediately and in detail of the charge made against him, of his rights, as well as to have the possibility created to notify his family or those close to him; to have the time and sufficient facilities to prepare his defence; to have free of charge assistance of a translator, when he does not speak or understand the Albanian language; to be defended by himself or with the assistance of a defence lawyer chosen by him; to communicate freely and privately with him, as well as to be assured of free defence when he does not have sufficient means; to ask witnesses who are present and to seek the presentation of witnesses, experts and other persons who can clarify the facts.

^ "State of emergency in Argentina and other Spanish-speaking countries (in Spanish)" . Derecho.laguia2000.com. 22 February 1999.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ State of Queensland (June 2019).

"Disaster and Emergency Incident Plan" (PDF) .

Queensland Government .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 2 November 2020 .

^ a b "Biosecurity (Human Biosecurity Emergency) (Human Coronavirus with Pandemic Potential) Declaration 2020" (PDF) .

New South Wales Bar Association . 18 March 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ "Biosecurity Act 2015" .

Federal Register of Legislation . Australian Government. 7 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ McPhee, Sarah (30 March 2020).

"Human biosecurity emergency declared in Australia" .

News.com.au .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2020 . Retrieved 30 March 2020 .

^ State Emergency and Rescue Management Act 1989 (NSW) s 4 ^ "Unprecedented season breaks all records" (PDF) .

Bush Fire Bulletin .

42 (1). Sydney: NSW Rural Fire Service: 3.

ISSN 1033-7598 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 September 2020 . Retrieved 12 August 2020 .

^ Mao, Frances (14 February 2020).

"Australia weather: How much rain did it take to put out NSW fires?" .

BBC News . UK.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2020 . Retrieved 16 February 2020 .

^ Public Safety Preservation Act 1958 (VIC) ^ "Victorian fires: state of disaster declared as evacuation ordered and 28 people missing" .

Guardian Australia .

Australian Associated Press . 3 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2020 . Retrieved 14 August 2020 .

^ Essential Services Act 1958 (VIC) ^ Essential Services Act 1958 (VIC) s 5 ^ Emergency Management Act 1986 (VIC) s 23 ^ Twomey, Anne (2 August 2020).

"Explainer: what is a 'state of disaster' and what powers does it confer?" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 14 August 2020 .

^ Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008 , s 200.

^ "Presidência da República Casa Civil Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicosur" .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2020 .

^ a b "Constitution of Brunei Darussalam" .

Refworld . 1959 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ a b c Human Rights Resource Centre (2016).

The State of Brunei Darussalam (PDF) .

University of Indonesia .

ISBN 978-602-17986-3-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2024 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ "No. E 17 of 1962: Proclamation of Emergency" (PDF) . State of Brunei. 12 December 1962. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 October 2023 . Retrieved 12 May 2025 – via Attorney General's Chambers.

^ "Brunei - 50 years under emergency rule" .

Radio Australia . 13 December 2012. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014 . Retrieved 15 August 2025 .

^ "2022 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Brunei" .

United States Department of State . 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ "Emergencies Act" . Laws.justice.gc.ca. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "Emergencies Act" . Laws.justice.gc.ca. Archived from the original on 5 January 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "State of Emergency FAQ" . Cbc.ca. 7 August 2003. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ Major, Darren (21 February 2022).

"Emergencies Act passes crucial House of Commons vote with NDP support" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2022 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Hall, Chris; Tunney, Catharine (9 April 2020).

"As supply concerns grow, Ottawa lays the groundwork for never-used Emergencies Act" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ Cochrane, David; Cullen, Catharine; Tunney, Catharine (10 April 2020).

"Need for Emergencies Act rejected by premiers on call with PM" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2022 .

^ a b Law 1958/162 (Emergency Law) Archived 19 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Arabic) at EMERglobal Lex Archived 28 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine , part of the Edinburgh Middle East Report. Retrieved 2 April 2010.

"Law 1958/162 (Emergency Law) – Edinburgh Middle East Report" . Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 2 April 2010 .

^ Shehata, Samer (26 March 2004).

"Egypt After 9/11: Perceptions of the United States" .

Contemporary Conflicts . Social Science Research Council. Archived from the original on 17 August 2011 . Retrieved 29 January 2011 .

^ a b Mohy El Deen, Sherif (10 August 2017).

"Egypt's Unexceptional State of Emergency" .

Arab Reform Initiative . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

^ Yee, Vivian (25 October 2021).

"Egypt's Leader Ends State of Emergency, Says It's No Longer Needed" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 23 December 2021 .

^ "Egypt: Extending State of Emergency Violates Rights" . Human Rights Watch. 27 May 2008 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 .

^ a b Howeidy, Amira (14 September 2005).

"Enough is still enough" .

Al-Ahram Weekly . Archived from the original on 19 September 2014 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ Constitution of Ethiopia – via Wikisource .

^ "Ajantasainen lainsäädäntö: Valmiuslaki 1552/2011" .

finlex.fi (in Finnish). Edita . Retrieved 7 July 2025 .

^ "Laki puolustustilasta (1983/1991), 45 § (tässä pykälässä mainitaan aikaisempi, sotatilasta annettu laki, jonka tämä laki kumosi)" .

finlex.fi (in Finnish) . Retrieved 7 July 2025 .

^ Factum, 7. osa (sm–vahi, art. Sotatila) (in Finnish). Weilin & Göös. 2005. p. 37.

ISBN 951-35-6681-1 .

^ Teivainen, Aleksi (1 April 2020).

"Poll: Social Democrats overtakes Finns Party as most popular party in Finland" .

Helsinki Times . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ "Checkpoints ready: Parliament approves government plans to isolate Uusimaa" .

News Now Finland . Archived from the original on 9 April 2020.

^ "Finland shuts down Uusimaa to fight coronavirus" .

Yle News . 25 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2020 . Retrieved 25 March 2020 .

^ "Movement restrictions to Uusimaa - the Government decided on further measures to prevent the spread of the coronavirus epidemic" .

Valtioneuvosto.fi . Government of Finland.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2020 . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

^ "Loi n°55-385 du 3 avril 1955 instituant un état d'urgence et en déclarant l'application en Algérie" (in French). Legifrance.gouv.fr.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ Weimar constitution technically remained in effect throughout the Nazi era (1933–1945).

^ "Decree of the Reich President for the Protection of People and State" . 28 February 1933.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2019 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 .

^ Evans, Richard J.

(2003).

The Coming of the Third Reich . Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-303469-3 .

^ a b "Basic Law Full Text – pda – chapter (2)" .

www.basiclaw.gov.hk .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "laws" .

www.npc.gov.cn .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "Hong Kong e-Legislation" .

www.elegislation.gov.hk . Archived from the original on 7 July 2022 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "CAP 241 Emergency Regulations Ordinance" .

www.hklii.hk .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "CAP 241K PROHIBITION ON FACE COVERING REGULATION" .

www.hklii.hk .

Archived from the original on 27 December 2019 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "Prohibition on Face Covering Regulation gazetted" .

www.info.gov.hk .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ "Anti-mask law gazetted" .

Hong Kong's Information Services Department (in Chinese (Hong Kong)).

Archived from the original on 20 September 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "Judge explains reason for not allowing injunction – RTHK" .

news.rthk.hk .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2019 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "KWOK WING HANG AND OTHERS v. CHIEF EXECUTIVE IN COUNCIL AND ANOTHER [2019] HKCFI 2820; HCAL 2945/2019 (18 November 2019)" .

www.hklii.hk .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ " "KWOK WING HANG AND OTHERS v. CHIEF EXECUTIVE IN COUNCIL AND ANOTHER [2019] HKCFI 2820; HCAL 2945/2019 (22 November 2019)" .

legalref.judiciary.hk .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 November 2019 .

^ "KWOK WING HANG AND OTHERS v. CHIEF EXECUTIVE IN COUNCIL AND ANOTHER [2019] HKCFI 2884; HCAL 2945/2019 (22 November 2019)" .

www.hklii.hk .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ Standard, The.

"Anti-mask ruling appeal set for January" .

The Standard .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ "Court extends anti-mask law suspension, say pan-dems – RTHK" .

news.rthk.hk .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2019 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ "Ruling that Hong Kong mask ban is invalid suspended until December 10" .

South China Morning Post . 27 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ "Hong Kong court lifts mask ban, refusing government request to suspend earlier ruling" .

South China Morning Post . 10 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Standard, The.

"Court of Appeal rejects mask ban ruling suspension" .

The Standard .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ "Court deals govt blow over mask ban ruling – RTHK" .

news.rthk.hk .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ "Hong Kong mask ban constitutional for all public meetings, court rules" .

South China Morning Post . 21 December 2020 . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ Austin, Granville (1999).

Working a Democratic Constitution: The Indian Experience . Oxford University Press. pp.

63– 66.

ISBN 0-19-564888-9 .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 14 March 2023 .

^ "Article 28.3.3°" .

Constitution of Ireland .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Article 38.4.1°" .

Constitution of Ireland .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 January 2018 .

^ "Article 40.4.5°" .

Constitution of Ireland .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 January 2018 .

^ "First Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1939., Section 1" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Second Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1941., Schedule" .

Irish Statute Book . Ref No.22.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Twenty-First Amendment of the Constitution Act, 2001, Schedule, Part ii" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

In Article 28.3.3°, to insert "other than Article 15.5.2°" after "Constitution"; ^ "Proceedings of 2 September 1939" .

Dáil Éireann debates . pp. Vol.77 cc.1–190.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Emergency Powers Act, 1939" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Supplies and Services (Temporary Provisions) Bill, 1946—Second Stage" .

Dáil Éireann Debates . 18 June 1946. pp. Vol.101 No.15 p.19 cc.2063–94.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 12 December 2016 .

^ "Supplies and Services (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1946 (Continuance) Act, 1957, Section 2" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "National Emergency: Motion" .

Dáil debates . 31 August 1976.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

; "National Emergency: Motion (Resumed)" .

Dáil debates . 1 September 1976.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Emergency Powers Act, 1976, Section 2" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ In re Article 26 and the Emergency Powers Bill 1976 Archived 17 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine Supreme Court ^ "Cessation of State of Emergency: Motion" .

Dáil debates . 7 February 1995.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ a b "Offences Against the State Act, 1939" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2017 . Retrieved 1 April 2017 .

; "Offences Against the State (Amendment) Act, 1940" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2017 . Retrieved 3 April 2017 .

^ Longaigh, Seosamh Ó (2006).

Emergency Law in Independent Ireland, 1922–1948 . Four Courts Press.

ISBN 978-1-85182-922-4 .

^ "Article 38.3.1°" .

Constitution of Ireland .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 April 2017 .

^ O'Mahony, Paul (2002).

Criminal Justice in Ireland . Institute of Public Administration. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-1-902448-71-8 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Hederman Report 2002, Chapter 5 generally, especially §§ 5.28–33 Archived 11 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Davis, Fergal Francis (2007).

The History and Development of the Special Criminal Court 1922–2005 . Dublin: Four Courts Press.

ISBN 978-1-84682-013-7 .

^ "S.I. No. 147/1972 – Offences Against The State Act, 1939 (No. 13 of 1939) Special Criminal Court Rules, 1972" .

Irish Statute Book .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2017 . Retrieved 1 April 2017 .

^ Davis, Fergal (15 February 2016).

"Special Criminal Court is necessary in flawed justice system" .

The Irish Times .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ All-Party Oireachtas Committee on the Constitution (2003).

"Article 28.3.3°: state of emergency and time-limit" (PDF) .

Eighth Progress Report: Government . Official publications. Vol. Pn 3795. Dublin: Stationery Office. pp.

16– 18.

ISBN 0-7076-3858-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Constitution Review Group (1996).

"Report" (PDF) . "The Government, § 3: whether Article 28.3 should be amended to provide for a limit on the period during which a law enacting a state of emergency continues to have effect and for preserving certain rights during that period" and "Trial of Offences, § 4: special courts". Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

^ Hederman Report 2002, Chapter 9 generally, especially § 9.44 Archived 11 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Stati di emergenza Archived 2 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Protezione Civile ^ Le situazioni di emergenza e di grave necessità pubblica, in La pubblica sicurezza , G. Motzo, Vicenza , 1967 ^ Lo stato di eccezione ed ordinamento democratico Archived 6 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Giampiero Buonomo ^ Conte Says Italy to Extend State of Emergency to October Archived 29 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Bloomberg ^ Clause 1(A), Article 150, Constitution of Malaysia ^ "Malaysia lives under state of emergency — EU envoy" . Reuters. 13 November 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ "PM declares haze emergency in Muar and Ledang" . theSundaily. 23 June 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 23 June 2013 .

^ "Malaysia declares Covid state of emergency amid political turmoil" .

the Guardian . 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2021 .

^ Palansamy, Yiswaree (15 January 2021).

"Emergency Ordinance allows Agong to take temporary possession of any private property | Malay Mail" .

Malay Mail .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .

^ "Maldives Chief Justice Abdulla Saeed Arrested As President Abdulla Yameen declares state of emergency" . NDTV news. 6 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 6 February 2018 . Retrieved 6 February 2018 .

^ "Civil Defense Emergency Management Act 2002" . Legislation.govt.nz. 1 October 2008.

Archived from the original on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "Waterfront Strike Emergency Regulations 1951" (PDF) . New Zealand Legal Information Institute.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "Death toll at 75, national emergency declared" . Television New Zealand.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2011 . Retrieved 23 February 2011 .

^ "Canterbury earthquake timeline: Government's and Parliament's response – New Zealand Parliament" .

www.parliament.nz .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .

^ Herald, N. Z.

"Covid-19: State of emergency declared in New Zealand" .

ZB .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2020 . Retrieved 25 March 2020 .

^ Henare, Peeni (21 April 2020).

"State of National Emergency extended" (Press release). Beehive.govt.nz.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 April 2020 .

^ "Cyclone Gabrielle: New Zealand declares state of emergency" .

BBC News . 14 February 2023. Archived from the original on 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ McAnulty, Kieran (14 February 2023).

"State of National Emergency Declared" .

Beehive.govt.nz .

New Zealand Government .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2023 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

^ "Nigeria declares emergency in areas hit by Islamists" . Reuters. 14 May 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ "Boko Haram attacks prompt Nigeria state of emergency" .

BBC News . 1 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Article 134 (Personal competences)" .

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic . Diário da República Eletrónico.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ a b "Article 19 (Suspension of the exercise of rights)" .

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic . Diário da República Eletrónico.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2018 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Article 172 (Dissolution)" .

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic . Diário da República Eletrónico.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Article 289 (Circumstances in which revision is restricted)" .

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic . Diário da República Eletrónico.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Article 138 (Declaration of a state of siege or of a state of emergency)" .

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic . Diário da República Eletrónico.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Papel dos militares muda entre estado de sítio e estado de emergência" .

Público (in Portuguese). 18 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 20 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 March 2020 .

^ "Lei de Bases da Protecção Civil (Lei n.º 27/2006)" .

Diário da República Eletrónico . Diário da República n.º 126/2006, Série I de 3 July 2006.

Archived from the original on 7 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ a b Silviu Molnar, Security Zone in Pungesti Heavily Criticized by European Greens Archived 24 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Natural Gas Europe , 19 December 2013, Retrieved 23 December 2013 ^ (in Romanian) Comuna Pungești, declarată "zonă specială de siguranță publică Archived 14 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Adevărul , 19 December 2013, Retrieved 23 December 2013 ^ Gabriel Petrescu, Chevron Moves Forward in Romania Following Establishment of Special Security Zone Archived 24 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Natural Gas Europe , 14 December 2013, Retrieved 23 December 2013 ^ " Statement for the Declaration of Rape and Sexual Violence as a National Emergency by His Excellency President Julius Maada Bio State House, 7th February 2019" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ "Declaration of a State of Public Emergency by His Excellency, Dr. Julius Maada Bio, President of the Republic of Sierra Leone" (PDF) .

World Health Organization .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 January 2022 . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

^ "Constitution of the Republic of Singapore - Singapore Statutes Online" .

^ "Emergency (Essential Powers) Act - Singapore Statutes Online" .

^ "Emergency (Essential Powers) Act (Repealed) - Singapore Statutes Online" .

^ "Malayan Emergency" .

^ https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/digitised/article/straitstimes19600420-1.2.72 ^ "Internal Security Act 1960 - Singapore Statutes Online" .

^ Currie, Iain; de Waal, Johan (2005). "Chapter Thirty-three: States of Emergency".

The Bill of Rights Handbook (5th ed.). Cape Town: Juta & Company Ltd. pp.

798– 806.

ISBN 978-0-7021-5923-7 .

^ Mars, A.; Romero, A.; Álvarez, P. (4 December 2010).

"El Gobierno declara el estado de alarma y moviliza a los controladores" .

El País (in Spanish). Madrid: Prisa .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 27 October 2019 .

^ "El Gobierno declara el estado de alarma" .

El Mundo (in Spanish).

Unidad Editorial Internet, S.L. 5 December 2010.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2019 . Retrieved 27 October 2019 .

^ "Striking Spain air traffic controllers return to work" .

BBC . 4 December 2010.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ Hernández, Marisol (13 March 2020).

"Pedro Sánchez decreta el estado de alarma en toda España para frenar la expansión del coronavirus" .

El Mundo .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2020 . Retrieved 14 March 2020 .

^ Benayas, Victoria Torres (24 October 2020).

"Así son las medidas en la Comunidad de Madrid tras agotarse el estado de alarma" .

EL PAÍS (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 25 October 2020 .

^ "Constitution of Sri Lanka" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2018 . Retrieved 7 March 2018 .

^ "Assad ends five decades of emergency rule" . France 24. 21 April 2011.

^ "Constitution.pdf" (PDF) .

Ministry of Legal Affairs .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ http://www.trinidadexpress.com/news/BREAKING-NEWS-State-of-Emergency-declared-128160123 [ dead link ] ^ http://www.trinidadexpress.com/news/STATE-OF-EMERGENCY-DAY-3-128333238 [ dead link ] ^ Bagoo, Andre (5 September 2011).

"Moonilal knocks Rowley for locking up Seepaul" .

Trinidad and Tobago's Newsday . Archived from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ "World News Briefs; Trinidad House Speaker Put Under House Arrest" .

The New York Times . 5 August 1995.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ Hutchinson-Jafar, Linda (22 August 2011).

"Trinidad declares state of emergency to fight crime" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ a b "STATE OF EMERGENCY – CURFEW 9P.M −5A.M" .

Trinidad Express Newspapers . 15 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ a b "Trinidad and Tobago implements State of Emergency to combat covid19 spread" .

Trinidad and Tobago Newsday . 15 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ a b "PM announces state of emergency" .

www.looptt.com . Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ a b "It's Not Just India: New Virus Waves Hit Developing Countries" .

BloombergQuint . 3 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ a b "Trinidad and Tobago tightens lockdown as COVID-19 cases surge" .

Reuters . 3 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ Hunte, Camille (25 August 2021).

"SoE for 3 more months" .

T&T Express .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ "Trinidad and Tobago declares state of emergency as murders soar" .

www.bbc.com . 30 December 2024 . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ Mohammed, Kenneth (30 December 2024).

"Trinidad and Tobago declares state of emergency after weekend of violence" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ "State of emergency declared in Trinidad and Tobago as government launches anti-gang crackdown" .

NBC News . 30 December 2024 . Retrieved 30 December 2024 .

^ The sovereign of the UK always follows the advice of the Prime Minister on any action with constitutional significance ^ Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer (1953) ^ "Washington gov. declares weather emergency" .

USA Today . 10 December 2015.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2015 .

^ US Presidential Proclamation 7463 ^ Dress, Brad (12 September 2022).

"These 10 states still have COVID emergency orders in place" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 March 2023 .

^ Stabilization, United States Congress House Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs Subcommittee on Economic (1983).

Briefing on the Defense Production Act of 1950: Briefing Before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, Ninety-eighth Congress, First Session, March 2, 1983 . U.S. Government Printing Office.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Feinstein, Lesya (16 February 2025).

"West Virginia Governor declares State of Emergency amid flooding" .

WSAZ .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2025 . Retrieved 16 February 2025 .

^ Daniels, Joe (30 December 2024).

"Trinidad and Tobago declares state of emergency over surging violence" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ "Gov. Justice announces State of Emergency due to dangerous drought conditions" . 26 July 2024.

^ "W.Va. Gov. Justice extends drought State of Emergency" . 23 August 2024.

^ "Key Bridge collapses into Patapsco River in Baltimore after vessel hits support column; state of emergency declared" .

Baltimore Sun . 26 March 2024.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 March 2024 .

^ Stout, Nolan (8 September 2023).

"Biden extends 9/11 state of emergency by a year" .

Courthouse News Service .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 October 2023 .

^ "Projekt uchwały Rady Ministrów o skierowaniu do Prezydenta Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej wniosku o wprowadzenie stanu wyjątkowego na obszarze części województwa podlaskiego oraz części województwa lubelskiego – Kancelaria Prezesa Rady Ministrów – Portal Gov.pl" .

Kancelaria Prezesa Rady Ministrów .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 November 2021 .

^ "Stan wyjątkowy. "Prezydent bezobjawowy", "Podłość polskich władz". Fala komentarzy" .

gazetapl . 2 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 6 November 2021 .

^ Alberta declares state of public health emergency, implements vaccine passport .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2021 . Retrieved 9 October 2021 – via YouTube .

^ "Ethiopia declares nationwide state of emergency" .

www.aljazeera.com .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 .

^ "Lithuania declares state of emergency on border with Belarus" .

www.lrt.lt . 9 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 November 2021 .

^ "Wisconsin's Governor Declares State of Emergency Amid Protests" .

The Wall Street Journal . 26 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ "Governor Newsom Declares Statewide Emergency Due to Fires, Extreme Weather Conditions" .

California Governor . 18 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 9 September 2020 . Retrieved 10 September 2020 .

^ "Georgia governor declares state of emergency" .

The Mercury News . 6 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 July 2020 .

^ "Government officials declare state of national emergency in New Zealand amid COVID-19 pandemic" .

Newshub . Archived from the original on 27 March 2020 . Retrieved 27 March 2020 .

^ "Govt to invoke emergency rule" .

Bangkok Post . 25 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2020 . Retrieved 25 March 2020 .

^ Currie, Brooklyn (22 March 2020).

"N.S. declares state of emergency in response to COVID-19" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 25 July 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ "В Киргизии вводится режим чрезвычайной ситуации" .

Tacc .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2020 . Retrieved 21 March 2020 .

^ "Mensagem do Presidente da República ao País sobre a declaração do estado de emergência (Palácio de Belém, 18 de março de 2020)" [Message of the President of the Republic to the Country on the declaration of a state of emergency].

Presidency of the Portuguese Republic (in Portuguese). 18 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 18 March 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Marcelo abre caminho a Costa para regresso tímido à normalidade" [Marcelo clears the way for Costa to lead a timid return to normal].

Público (in Portuguese). 28 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 May 2020 .

^ "Portugal despede-se do confinamento sem voltar à normalidade" [Portugal says farewell to confinement without returning to normal].

Jornal Económico (in Portuguese). 3 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ " 'This is a serious moment in our history': Alberta Premier Jason Kenney declares public health emergency" .

www.cbc.ca .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

^ " 'We must act decisively': Ontario Premier Doug Ford declares state of emergency amid COVID-19 outbreak" .

www.cbc.ca .

Archived from the original on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

^ Luna, Franco (17 March 2020).

"Duterte declares nationwide state of calamity" .

The Philippine Star .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

^ "В Армении ввели режим чрезвычайного положения" .

ТАСС .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2020 . Retrieved 21 March 2020 .

^ "State of emergency declared throughout Serbia" .

www.srbija.gov.rs . 15 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 30 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 .

^ "Указ Президента Республики Казахстан от 15 марта 2020 года № 285 "О введении чрезвычайного положения в Республике Казахстан" " .

Информационная система ПАРАГРАФ .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2020 . Retrieved 21 March 2020 .

^ "COVID-19: Legault declares a public health emergency" .

montreal.ctvnews.ca .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 17 March 2020 .

^ Cué, Carlos E.; Pérez, Claudi; Blas, Elsa García de (13 March 2020).

"Sánche decreta el estado de alarma durante 15 días" .

EL PAÍS (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ Hansen, Claire (13 March 2020).

"Trump Reportedly Planning to Declare National Emergency Over Coronavirus Pandemic" .

www.usnews.com .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 14 March 2020 .

^ Shepherd, Michael (15 March 2020).

"Janet Mills declares state of emergency after Maine announces new coronavirus cases" .

Bangor Daily News .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 March 2023 .

^ "Minnesota Executive Order 20-01 Declaring a Peacetime Emergency" (PDF) . State of Minnesota Executive Department.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ "Louisiana Declares Public Health Emergency for Coronavirus" .

U.S. News & World Report . 11 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ "Proclamation by the Governor" (PDF) . State of Alabama Executive Department.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2020 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ Brown, Zoe.

"Kansas sees first coronavirus death, governor declares state of emergency" .

KCTV Kansas City . Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 16 March 2020 .

^ "Virginia Governor Ralph Northam – March" .

www.governor.virginia.gov .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ "Gov. Evers declares public health emergency over coronavirus, risk to residents remains 'low' " .

Associated Press . 12 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ "Executive Order 2020-004" (PDF) .

Governor of New Mexico .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

^ "First cases of coronavirus confirmed in Michigan; Whitmer declares state of emergency" .

WXYZ . 11 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ "Baker Declares State Of Emergency; 92 Total Coronavirus Cases In Massachusetts" .

News . 10 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ "Governor Cooper Declares State Of Emergency To Respond To Coronavirus COVID-19" .

www.ncdhhs.gov .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2020 . Retrieved 13 March 2020 .

^ "State of emergency in Colorado as coronavirus cases rise to 17" . 10 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ Bischoff, Laura A.

"Gov. DeWine declares state of emergency after 3 residents contract coronavirus" .

dayton-daily-news .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2020 . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ "State of Oregon Newsroom : NewsDetail: State of Oregon" .

www.oregon.gov .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2020 . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

^ McKinley, Jesse; Sandoval, Edgar (7 March 2020).

"Coronavirus in N.Y.: Cuomo Declares State of Emergency" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2020 . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ "Newsletter: State of emergency declared over coronavirus" . 5 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ a b Leins, Casey (2 March 2020).

"Washington, Florida Governors Declare State of Emergency for Coronavirus" .

US News and World Report .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ "Veszélyhelyzetet hirdet az ország teljes területére a kormány" .

koronavirus.gov.hu (in Hungarian). Cabinet Office of the Prime Minister. 11 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 19 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 March 2020 .

^ "State of emergency declared for Tennessee after deadly tornadoes" . 3 March 2020. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

^ "Malaysia's king declares state of emergency to curb spread of Covid-19" .

CNN . 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ Kageyama, Yuri (7 January 2021).

"Japan declares emergency for Tokyo area as cases spike" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ "New Mexico Declares Security Emergency Ahead of Inauguration" .

US News and World Report . Associated Press. 14 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ Axelrod, Tal (15 January 2021).

"Maryland governor declares state of emergency ahead of Biden's inauguration" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ Rosario, Nicole Del (6 January 2021).

"Gov. Ralph Northam issues new curfew, State of Emergency in Virginia" .

WSLS .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2021 .

^ Woodward, Alex (12 January 2021).

"Trump approves emergency declaration for Biden inauguration" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ "Thailand Declares State Of Emergency Amid Anti-Government Protests" .

NPR . 16 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ "Coronavirus: le Maroc déclare l'état d'urgence sanitaire – Jeune Afrique" .

JeuneAfrique.com (in French).

Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 .

^ "NSW Premier declares state of emergency for catastrophic fire conditions" .

ABC News Australia . Sydney. 10 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 10 November 2019 .

^ "Ecuador protests: State of emergency declared as fuel subsidies end" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ "Ecuador protests: Hundreds held as president decries 'criminals' " .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2019 .

^ "Chile protests: state of emergency declared in Santiago as violence escalates" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 19 October 2019 .

^ "Chile extends curfew again as violent unrest paralyzes one of Latin America's biggest cities" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 26 October 2019 .

^ "Chile: nearly a month of protests" . France 24.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 16 November 2019 .

^ "Sri Lanka government says local Islamist group behind blasts, to declare emergency from midnight" .

The Straits Times . Archived from the original on 22 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2019 .

^ "Death toll rises to 359 in Sri Lanka bombings, more arrested" .

Associated Press . 24 April 2019. Archived from the original on 24 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 April 2019 .

^ "Death toll from Easter Sunday attacks climbs to 321" . AdaDerana. 23 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2019 . Retrieved 23 April 2019 .

^ "Sri Lanka: State of emergency lifted as security established – Minister" . Archived from the original on 27 August 2019 . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ "Presidential Proclamation on Declaring a National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2019 – via National Archives .

^ "As Congress Passes Spending Bill, Trump Plans National Emergency to Build Border Wall" .

The New York Times . 14 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2019 . Retrieved 17 February 2019 .

^ Iqbal Amas; Manveena Suri; Steve George (7 March 2018).

"Sri Lanka declares state of emergency in wake of communal violence" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2018 . Retrieved 10 March 2018 .

^ "Why has Ethiopia imposed a state of emergency?" .

BBC News . 21 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ Joe Sterling; Sarah Sirgany; Ian Lee (10 April 2017).

"Egypt Cabinet OKs state of emergency after Palm Sunday church bombings" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 26 May 2017 .

^ Astor, Maggie; Caron, Christina; Victor, Daniel (13 August 2017).

"A Guide to the Charlottesville Aftermath" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2017 . Retrieved 14 August 2017 .

^ "Proclamation No. 55, s. 2016" .

Official Gazette . 4 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ Manahan, Job (27 July 2023).

"Marcos lifts state of national emergency due to lawless violence in Mindanao" .

ABS-CBN News .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2023 .

^ Bordey, Hana (27 July 2023).

"Marcos lifts state of nat'l emergency due to lawless violence in Mindanao" .

GMA News Online .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2023 .

^ 0, Declaration of State of Emergency: National Disaster (Drought): Namibian Constitution.

Government Gazette, Republic of Namibia, No 6056, 28 June 2016.

Archived 7 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ "State of Florida: Executive order number 16-142" (PDF) .

Flgov.com . 12 June 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 July 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ Buitrago, Deisy; Ulmer, Alexandra (13 May 2016).

"Venezuela president declares emergency, cites U.S., domestic 'threats' " . Reuters.

Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2016 .

^ "Venezuela president declares 60-day state of emergency, blaming US for instability" .

The Guardian . 14 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 14 May 2016 .

^ "Venezuela president declares emergency, citing U.S. domestic 'threats' " .

The Telegraph . 14 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2016 .

^ Bush, Jason (22 November 2015).

"A state of emergency has been declared in Crimea after electricity pylons were 'blown up' " .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 13 May 2020 .

^ "France's Macron seeks to extend state of emergency to November" . 24 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 8 February 2018 .

^ "Burma: State of emergency imposed in Meiktila" .

BBC News . 22 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ "Egypt renews tough emergency laws" .

BBC News . 12 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 25 January 2011 .

^ "Egypt state of emergency lifted after 31 years" .

BBC News . 31 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 16 August 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Tunisia: Ex-President Ben Ali flees to Saudi Arabia" .

BBC News . 15 January 2011.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2011 . Retrieved 15 January 2011 .

^ "Vláda schválila núdzový stav" . Petit Press a.s. 28 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2011 . Retrieved 28 November 2011 .

^ "100 held in Trinidad and Tobago's state of emergency" .

the Guardian . 25 August 2011.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 .

^ "Bahrain Declares State of Emergency" .

Financial Times . 15 March 2011.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2011 .

^ "Thai protests force Asia summit cancellation" . Reuters. 11 April 2009. Archived from the original on 14 April 2009 . Retrieved 11 April 2009 .

^ Thai govt declares state of emergency in Bangkok Archived 15 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Reuters. 12 April 2009 ^ "UPDATE 1-Slovakia to call state of emergency over gas" .

Reuters . 6 January 2009.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "Bangladesh Leader Declares State of Emergency" .

The New York Times . 12 January 2007.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "Thailand: State of emergency declared in Bangkok" .

The Guardian . 2 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "Thai emergency lifted, search for new PM goes on" .

Reuters . 14 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "Mongolia under state of emergency" .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ n:Armenian President Kocharyan declares state of emergency ^ "Musharraf Declares State of Emergency" .

The New York Times . 3 November 2007.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 September 2021 .

^ "Arroyo declares state of emergency amid coup rumors" .

The New York Times . 24 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Proclamation No. 1017, s. 2006" .

Official Gazette . 24 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "State of emergency declared in Philippines" .

The Guardian . 24 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Portugal fires threaten thousands" .

BBC News . 23 August 2005.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Protests Escalate in Ecuador's Capital" .

The Washington Post . 18 April 2005.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "State of emergency in Georgia" .

CNN . 22 November 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "New Yorkers face new emergency" .

CNN . 14 August 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Governor Declares State of Emergency in Southeast Michigan" .

Government of Michigan . 15 August 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Ontario declares state of emergency" .

CBC News . 14 August 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Acting Serbian President declares state of emergency" .

ReliefWeb . 12 March 2003.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "State of Emergency in Paraguay; 1 Dies in Unrest Over Economy" .

The New York Times . 15 July 2002.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Nepal considers state of emergency" .

CNN . 26 November 2001.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "State of emergency in Seattle" .

The Guardian . 1 December 1999.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Albania Declares State of Emergency" .

Los Angeles Times . 3 March 1997.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "Trinidad House Speaker Put Under House Arrest" .

The New York Times . Trinidad And Tobago. 5 August 1995.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "LA riots: How 1992 changed the police" .

BBC News . 29 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "The L.A. Riots: 25 years later" .

Los Angeles Times . 26 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "STATE OF EMERGENCY IMPOSED IN MOLDOVA" .

The Washington Post . 29 March 1992.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ The Middle East and North Africa, 2004 , p. 1221 ^ "Trinidad marks 1990 coup attempt" .

BBC News . 27 July 2010.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ "State of Emergency – 1985" .

South African History Online .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2021 .

^ Espinoza-Castro v. I.N.S.

, 242 F.3d 1181, 30 (2001).

^ McRoberts, Kenneth.

Catalonia: Nation Building Without a State.

Oxford University Press. New York. 2001. pp.36 Bibliography [ edit ] Agamben, Giorgio (2005).

State of Exception . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-00925-4 .

Excerpt online: "A Brief History of the State of Exception" .

Barzilai, Gad (1996).

Wars, Internal Conflicts, and Political Order . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-7914-2943-1 .

Walter Benjamin, Zur Kritik der Gewalt ("Critique of Violence").

Fabbri, Lorenzo.

"Chronotopologies of the Exception. Agamben and Derrida before the Camps" , Diacritics , Volume 39, Number 3 (2009): 77–95.

Hederman, Anthony J.; Committee to Review the Offences against the State Acts 1939 to 1998 (August 2002).

"Report" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 April 2017 .

Carl Schmitt, On Dictatorship and Political Theology .

Wolf, Conradin (2005).

Ausnahmezustand und Menschenrecht .

Hussein, Nassar (2003).

The Jurisprudence of Emergency . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Rooney, Bryan. 2019. " Emergency powers in democratic states: Introducing the Democratic Emergency Powers dataset.

" Research & Politics .

External links [ edit ] United Nations Human Rights Committee , General Comment 29, States of Emergency (article 4), U.N. Doc. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.11 (2001) The protection of human rights in emergency situations , PACE report (2009) Opinion on the protection of human rights in emergency situations , Venice Commission (2006) Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐x8qbx
Cached time: 20250815121619
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.760 seconds
Real time usage: 3.072 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16957/1000000
Revision size: 230736/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 563971/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10629/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 963679/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.865/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20206351/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2641.942      1 -total
 69.84% 1845.243      1 Template:Reflist
 33.33%  880.674    151 Template:Cite_web
 17.37%  458.854     84 Template:Cite_news
  5.20%  137.318      1 Template:Harvnb
  4.00%  105.715     18 Template:Cite_book
  3.91%  103.241      1 Template:Authority_control
  3.88%  102.420      2 Template:Lang
  3.73%   98.516      1 Template:Short_description
  3.61%   95.433     10 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:298608:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815121619 and revision id 1306016665. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_of_emergency&oldid=1306016665 " Categories : Constitutional law Emergency laws Emergency management Government Inclement weather management Law enforcement Dictatorship Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Chinese (Hong Kong)-language sources (zh-hk) CS1: long volume value CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2012 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles containing Portuguese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2021 Accuracy disputes from June 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State of emergency 63 languages Add topic

