Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview of the first complete tone system 2 The Pythagoreans 3 The system of Aristoxenus Toggle The system of Aristoxenus subsection 3.1 Aristoxenian tonoi 4 The octave species in all genera 5 The oldest harmoniai in three genera 6 Ptolemy and the Alexandrians 7 Harmoniai 8 Ethos 9 Melos 10 Unicode 11 Footnotes 12 See also 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Musical system of ancient Greece 6 languages العربية Català Deutsch Polski Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of ancient Greek music theory This article is about the music theory and musical intervals used in ancient Greece. For a discussion of the cultural aspects and history of ancient Greek music, see Music of ancient Greece .

The musical system of ancient Greece evolved over a period of more than 500 years from simple scales of tetrachords , or divisions of the perfect fourth , into several complex systems encompassing tetrachords and octaves, as well as octave scales divided into seven to thirteen intervals.

[ 1 ] Any discussion of the music of ancient Greece , theoretical, philosophical or aesthetic, is fraught with two problems: there are few examples of written music, and there are many, sometimes fragmentary, theoretical and philosophical accounts. The empirical research of scholars like Richard Crocker, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] C. André Barbera, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and John Chalmers [ 7 ] has made it possible to look at the ancient Greek systems as a whole without regard to the tastes of any one ancient theorist. The primary genera they examine are those of Pythagoras and the Pythagorean school , Archytas , Aristoxenos , and Ptolemy (including his versions of the genera of Didymos and Eratosthenes ).

[ 8 ] Overview of the first complete tone system [ edit ] As an initial introduction to the principal names and divisions of the Ancient Greek tone system this article will give a depiction of the "perfect system" or systema teleion , which was elaborated in its entirety by about the turn of the 5th to 4th century BCE .

The diagram at the right reproduces information from Chalmers (1993) . It shows the common ancient harmoniai , the tonoi in all genera , and the system as a whole in one complete map. (Half-sharp and double-sharp notes not used with the depicted notes are omitted.) Depiction of the ancient Greek tonal system The central three columns of the diagram show, first the modern note-names, then the two systems of symbols used in ancient Greece: the vocal symbols (favoured by singers) and instrumental symbols (favoured by instrument players). The modern note-names are given in the Helmholtz pitch notation , and the Greek note symbols are as given in the work of Egert Pöhlmann [ de ] .

[ 9 ] The pitches of the notes in modern notation are conventional, going back to the time of a publication by Johann Friedrich Bellermann [ de ] in 1840; [ 10 ] in practice the pitches would have been somewhat lower.

[ 11 ] The section spanned by a blue brace is the range of the central octave . The range is approximately what is now depicted on a modern music staff and is given in the graphic below, left . 
Note that Greek theorists described scales as descending from higher pitch to lower, which is the opposite of modern practice and caused considerable confusion among Renaissance interpreters of ancient musicological texts.

The central octave of the ancient Greek system The earliest Greek scales were organized in tetrachords , which were series of four descending tones, with the top and bottom tones being separated by an interval of a fourth , in modern terms. The sub-intervals of the tetrachord were unequal, with the largest intervals always at the top, and the smallest at the bottom. The 'characteristic interval' of a tetrachord is its largest one.

The Greater Perfect System ( systema teleion meizon ) was composed of four stacked tetrachords called (from lowest to highest) the Hypaton , Meson , Diezeugmenon and Hyperbolaion tetrachords. These are shown on the right hand side of the diagram. Octaves were composed from two stacked tetrachords connected by one common tone, the synaphe .

At the position of the paramese , the continuity of the system encounters a boundary (at b-flat, b). To retain the logic of the internal divisions of the tetrachords and avoid the Meson being forced into three whole tone steps (b–a–g–f), an interstitial note, the diazeuxis ('dividing'), was introduced between the paramese and mese . This procedure gives its name to the tetrachord diezeugmenon , which means the 'divided'.

To bridge the inconsistency of the diazeuxis , the system allowed moving the nete one step up, permitting the construction of the Synemmenon ('conjunct') tetrachord, shown at the far left of the diagram.

The use of the Synemmenon tetrachord effected a modulation of the system, hence the name systema metabolon , the modulating system, also called the Lesser Perfect System . This was considered apart, built of three stacked tetrachords—the Hypaton , Meson and Synemmenon . The first two of these are the same as the first two tetrachords of the Greater Perfect System, with a third tetrachord placed above the Meson . When all these are considered together, with the Synemmenon tetrachord placed between the Meson and Diezeugmenon tetrachords, they make up the Immutable (or Unmodulating) System (systema ametabolon). The lowest tone does not belong to the system of tetrachords, as is reflected in its name, the Proslambanomenos , the adjoined.

In sum, it is clear that the Ancient Greeks conceived of a unified system with the tetrachord as the basic structure, but the octave as the principle of unification.

Below is an elaboration of the mathematics that led to the logic of the system of tetrachords just described.

The Pythagoreans [ edit ] Main article: Pythagorean interval After the discovery of the fundamental intervals (octave, fourth and fifth), the first known systematic divisions of the octave were those of Pythagoras to whom was often attributed the discovery that the frequency of a vibrating string is inversely proportional to its length.

Pythagoras construed the intervals arithmetically, allowing for 1:1 = Unison, 2:1 = Octave, 3:2 = Fifth, 4:3 = Fourth. Pythagoras's scale consists of a stack of perfect fifths, the ratio 3:2 (see also Pythagorean Interval and Pythagorean Tuning ).

The earliest such description of a scale is found in Philolaus fr. B6.

Philolaus recognizes that, if the interval of a fourth goes up from any given note, and then up the interval of a fifth, the final note is an octave above the first note. Thus, the octave is made up of a fourth and a fifth. ... Philolaus's scale thus consisted of the following intervals: 9:8, 9:8, 256:243 [these three intervals take us up a fourth], 9:8, 9:8, 9:8, 256:243 [these four intervals make up a fifth and complete the octave from our starting note]. This scale is known as the Pythagorean diatonic and is the scale that Plato adopted in the construction of the world soul in the Timaeus (36a-b).

[ 12 ] The next notable Pythagorean theorist known today is Archytas , contemporary and friend of Plato, who explained the use of arithmetic, geometric and harmonic means in tuning musical instruments.

Euclid further developed Archytas's theory in his The Division of the Canon ( Katatomē kanonos , the Latin Sectio Canonis ). He elaborated the acoustics with reference to the frequency of vibrations (or movements).

[ 13 ] Archytas provided a rigorous proof that the basic musical intervals cannot be divided in half, or in other words, that there is no mean proportional between numbers in super-particular ratio (octave 2:1, fourth 4:3, fifth 3:2, 9:8).

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] Archytas was also the first ancient Greek theorist to provide ratios for all 3 genera .

[ 1 ] The three genera of tetrachords recognized by Archytas have the following ratios: The enharmonic – 5:4, 36:35, and 28:27 The chromatic – 32:27, 243:224, and 28:27; The diatonic – 9:8, 8:7, and 28:27.

[ 12 ] These three tunings appear to have corresponded to the actual musical practice of his day.

[ 14 ] The genera arose after the framing interval of the tetrachord was fixed, because the two internal notes (called lichanoi and parhypate ) still had variable tunings. Tetrachords were classified into genera depending on the position of the lichanos (thus the name lichanos , which means "the indicator"). For instance a lichanos that is a minor third from the bottom and a major second from the top, defines the genus diatonic . The other two genera, chromatic and enharmonic , were defined in similar fashion.

[ 15 ] More generally, three genera of seven octave species can be recognized, depending on the positioning of the interposed tones in the component tetrachords : The diatonic genus is composed of tones and semitones, the chromatic genus is composed of semitones and a minor third, the enharmonic genus consists of a major third and two quarter-tones or diesis.

[ 16 ] Within these basic forms, the intervals of the chromatic and diatonic genera were varied further by three and two "shades" ( chroai ), respectively .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The elaboration of tetrachords was also accompanied by penta- and hexachords. The joining of a tetrachord and a pentachord yields an octachord, i.e. the complete seven-tone scale plus a higher octave of the base note. However, this was also produced by joining two tetrachords, which were linked by means of an intermediary or shared note. The final evolution of the system did not end with the octave as such but with the Systema teleion , a set of five tetrachords linked by conjunction and disjunction into arrays of tones spanning two octaves, as explained above.

[ 1 ] The system of Aristoxenus [ edit ] Having elaborated the Systema teleion , the most significant individual system, that of Aristoxenos , which influenced much classification well into the Middle Ages, will be examined.

Aristoxenus was a disciple of Aristotle who flourished in the 4th century BC. He introduced a radically different model for creating scales, and the nature of his scales deviated sharply from his predecessors. His system was based on seven " octave species " named after Greek regions and ethnicities – Dorian, Lydian, etc. This association of the ethnic names with the octave species appears to have preceded Aristoxenus, [ 19 ] and the same system of names was revived in the Renaissance as names of musical modes according to the harmonic theory of that time, which was however quite different from that of the ancient Greeks. Thus the names Dorian, Lydian etc. should not be taken to imply a historical continuity between the systems.

In contrast to Archytas who distinguished his "genera" only by moving the lichanoi , Aristoxenus varied both lichanoi and parhypate in considerable ranges.

[ 20 ] Instead of using discrete ratios to place the intervals in his scales, Aristoxenus used continuously variable quantities: as a result he obtained scales of thirteen notes to an octave, and considerably  different qualities of consonance.

[ 21 ] The octave species in the Aristoxenian tradition were: [ 22 ] [ 19 ] Mixolydian : hypate hypaton–paramese (b–b′) Lydian : parhypate hypaton–trite diezeugmenon (c′–c″) Phrygian : lichanos hypaton–paranete diezeugmenon (d′–d″) Dorian : hypate meson–nete diezeugmenon (e′–e″) Hypolydian : parhypate meson–trite hyperbolaion (f′–f″) Hypophrygian : lichanos meson–paranete hyperbolaion (g′–g″) Common, Locrian , or Hypodorian : mese–nete hyperbolaion or proslambanomenos–mese (a′–a″ or a–a′) These names are derived from: an Ancient Greek subgroup ( Dorians ), a small region in central Greece ( Locris ), certain neighboring (non-Greek) peoples from Asia Minor ( Lydia , Phrygia ).

The prefixes myxo and hypo were added to these to form associated scales above and below.

Aristoxenian tonoi [ edit ] The term tonos (pl.

tonoi ) was used in four senses, for it could designate a note, an interval, a region of the voice, and a pitch.

[ 23 ] The ancient writer Cleonides attributes thirteen tonoi to Aristoxenus, which represent a transposition of the tones of the Pythagorean system into a more uniform progressive scale over the range of an octave.

[ 18 ] According to Cleonides, [ 23 ] these transpositional tonoi were named analogously to the octave species, supplemented with new terms to raise the number of degrees from seven to thirteen. In fact, Aristoxenus criticized the application of these names by the earlier theorists, whom he called the "Harmonicists".

[ 19 ] According to the interpretation of at least two modern authorities, in the Aristoxenian tonoi the Hypodorian is the lowest, and the Mixolydian is next-to-highest: the reverse of the case of the octave species.

[ 18 ] [ 24 ] The nominal base pitches are as follows (in descending order, after Mathiesen; Solomon uses the octave between A and a instead): f Hypermixolydian also called Hyperphrygian e High Mixolydian also called Hyperiastian e ♭ Low Mixolydian also called Hyperdorian d High Lydian c ♯ Low Lydian also called Aeolian c High Phrygian B Low Phrygian also called Iastian B ♭ Dorian A High Hypolydian G ♯ (and A ♭ ?) Low Hypolydian also called Hypoaeolian G High Hypophrygian F ♯ Low Hypophrygian also called Hypoiastian F Hypodorian The octave species in all genera [ edit ] Main article: Octave species Based on the above, it can be seen that the Aristoxene system of tones and octave species can be combined with the Pythagorean system of "genera" to produce a more complete system in which each octave species of thirteen tones (Dorian, Lydian, etc.) can be declined into a system of seven tones by selecting particular tones and semitones to form genera (Diatonic, Chromatic, and Enharmonic).

The order of the octave species names in the following table are the original Greek ones, followed by later alternatives (Greek and other). The species and notation are built around the template of the Dorian.

Diatonic Tonic Name Mese (A) (Hypermixolydian, Hyperphrygian, Locrian) (d) B Mixolydian, Hyperdorian e c Lydian f d Phrygian g e Dorian a f Hypolydian b g Hypophrygian, Ionian c′ a Hypodorian, Aeolian d′ Chromatic Tonic Name Mese (A) (Hypermixolydian, Hyperphrygian, Locrian) (d ♭ ) B Mixolydian, Hyperdorian e c Lydian f d ♭ Phrygian g ♭ e Dorian a f Hypolydian b g ♭ Hypophrygian, Ionian c′ a Hypodorian, Aeolian d′ ♭ Enharmonic Tonic Name Mese (A) (Hypermixolydian, Hyperphrygian, Locrian) (d ) B Mixolydian, Hyperdorian e c Lydian f d Phrygian g e Dorian a f Hypolydian b g Hypophrygian, Ionian c′ a Hypodorian, Aeolian d′ The notation " C " is standard modern notation for the pitch of note C when flattened by a quarter tone .

[ a ] The double-flats ( ) are used merely to adhere to the modern convention of that all standard pitches in an octave are assigned a distinct, sequential alphabetic letter.

The oldest harmoniai in three genera [ edit ] In the notation above and below, the standard double-flat symbol is used to accommodate as far as possible the modern musical convention that demands every note in a scale to have a distinct, sequential letter; so interpret only as meaning the immediate prior letter in the alphabet.

[ 25 ] This complication is unnecessary in Greek notation, which had distinct symbols for each pitch, in set of three: half-flat, flat, or natural notes.

The superscript symbol after a letter indicates an approximately half-flattened version of the named note; the exact degree of flattening intended depending on which of several tunings was used. Hence a three-tone falling-pitch sequence d , d , d ♭ , with the second note, d , about ⁠ 1 / 2 ⁠ flat (a quarter-tone flat: modern " ") from the first note, d , and the same d about ⁠ 1 / 2 ⁠ sharp (a quarter-tone sharp: modern " ") from the following d ♭ .

The ( d ) listed first for the Dorian is the Proslambanómenos , which was appended as it was, and falls outside of the linked-tetrachord scheme.

These tables are a depiction of Aristides Quintilianus 's enharmonic harmoniai , the diatonic of Henderson [ 26 ] and Chalmers [ 7 ] chromatic versions. Chalmers, from whom they originate, states: In the enharmonic and chromatic forms of some of the harmoniai, it has been necessary to use both a d and either a d or d because of the non-heptatonic nature of these scales.

C and F are synonyms for d and g [respectively]. The appropriate tunings for these scales are those of Archytas [ 27 ] and Pythagoras.

[ 25 ] The superficial resemblance of these octave species with the church modes is misleading: The conventional representation as a section (such as C D E F followed by D E F G ) is incorrect: The species were re-tunings of the central octave such that the sequences of intervals (the cyclical modes divided by ratios defined by genus) corresponded to the notes of the Perfect Immutable System described above.

[ 28 ] Dorian Genus Tones Enharmonic (d) e   f g a   b   c′ d′ e′ Chromatic (d) e   f   g ♭ a   b   c′   d′ ♭ e′ Diatonic (d) e   f   g   a   b   c′   d′   e′ Phrygian Genus Tones Enharmonic d   e   f g a   b   c′ d′ d′ Chromatic d   e   f   g ♭ a   b   c′   d′ ♭ d′ Diatonic d   e   f   g   a   b   c′   d′ Lydian Genus Tones Enharmonic f g a   b   c′ d′ e′   f′ Chromatic f   g   a   b   c′   d′ ♭ e′   f′ Diatonic f   g   a   b   c′   d′   e′   f′ Mixolydian Genus Tones Enharmonic B   c d d   e   f g b Chromatic B   c   d ♭ d   e   f g ♭ b Diatonic B   c   d   e   f   (g)   (a)   b Syntonolydian Genus Tones Enharmonic B   c d e   g Chromatic B   c   d ♭ e   g 1st Diatonic c   d   e   f   g 2nd Diatonic B   c   d   e   g Iastian (Ionian) Genus Tones Enharmonic B   c d e   g   a Chromatic B   c   d ♭ e   g   a 1st Diatonic c   e   f   g 2nd Diatonic B   c   d   e   g   a Ptolemy and the Alexandrians [ edit ] In marked contrast to his predecessors, Ptolemy 's scales employed a division of the pyknon in the ratio of 1:2, melodic, in place of equal divisions.

[ 29 ] Ptolemy, in his Harmonics , ii.3–11, construed the tonoi differently, presenting all seven octave species within a fixed octave, through chromatic inflection of the scale degrees (comparable to the modern conception of building all seven modal scales on a single tonic). In Ptolemy's system, therefore there are only seven tonoi .

[ 18 ] [ 30 ] Ptolemy preserved Archytas's tunings in his Harmonics as well as transmitting the tunings of Eratosthenes and Didymos and providing his own ratios and scales.

[ 1 ] Harmoniai [ edit ] In music theory the Greek word harmonia can signify the enharmonic genus of tetrachord, the seven octave species, or a style of music associated with one of the ethnic types or the tonoi named by them.

[ 31 ] Particularly in the earliest surviving writings, harmonia is regarded not as a scale, but as the epitome of the stylised singing of a particular district or people or occupation.

[ 32 ] When the late 6th-century poet Lasus of Hermione referred to the Aeolian harmonia , for example, he was more likely thinking of a melodic style characteristic of Greeks speaking the Aeolic dialect than of a scale pattern.

[ 33 ] In the Republic , Plato uses the term inclusively to encompass a particular type of scale, range and register, characteristic rhythmic pattern, textual subject, etc.

[ 18 ] The philosophical writings of Plato and Aristotle (c. 350 BCE ) include sections that describe the effect of different harmoniai on mood and character formation (see below on ethos). For example, in the Republic (iii.10–11) Plato describes the music a person is exposed to as molding the person's character, which he discusses as particularly relevant for the proper education of the guardians of his ideal State. Aristotle in the Politics (viii:1340a:40–1340b:5): But melodies themselves do contain imitations of character. This is perfectly clear, for the harmoniai have quite distinct natures from one another, so that those who hear them are differently affected and do not respond in the same way to each. To some, such as the one called Mixolydian, they respond with more grief and anxiety, to others, such as the relaxed harmoniai , with more mellowness of mind, and to one another with a special degree of moderation and firmness, Dorian being apparently the only one of the harmoniai to have this effect, while Phrygian creates ecstatic excitement. These points have been well expressed by those who have thought deeply about this kind of education; for they cull the evidence for what they say from the facts themselves.

[ 34 ] Aristotle remarks further: From what has been said it is evident what an influence music has over the disposition of the mind, and how variously it can fascinate it—and if it can do this, most certainly it is what youth ought to be instructed in.

[ 35 ] ) Ethos [ edit ] The ancient Greeks have used the word ethos (ἔθος or ἦθος), in this context best rendered by "character" (in the sense of patterns of being and behaviour, but not necessarily with "moral" implications), to describe the ways music can convey, foster, and even generate emotional or mental states. Beyond this general description, there is no unified "Greek ethos theory" but "many different views, sometimes sharply opposed." [ 33 ] Ethos is attributed to the tonoi or harmoniai or modes (for instance, Plato, in the Republic (iii: 398d–399a), attributes "virility" to the " Dorian ," and "relaxedness" to the " Lydian " mode), instruments (especially the aulos and the cithara , but also others), rhythms, and sometimes even the genus and individual tones. The most comprehensive treatment of musical ethos is provided by Aristides Quintilianus in his book On Music , with the original conception of assigning ethos to the various musical parameters according to the general categories of male and female.

Aristoxenus was the first Greek theorist to point out that ethos does not only reside in the individual parameters but also in the musical piece as a whole (cited in Pseudo-Plutarch, De Musica 32: 1142d ff; see also Aristides Quintilianus 1.12). The Greeks were interested in musical ethos particularly in the context of education (so Plato in his Republic and Aristotle in his eighth book of his Politics ), with implications for the well-being of the State. Many other ancient authors refer to what is nowadays called psychological effect of music and draw judgments for the appropriateness (or value) of particular musical features or styles, while others, in particular Philodemus (in his fragmentary work De musica ) and Sextus Empiricus (in his sixth book of his work Adversus mathematicos ), deny that music possesses any influence on the human person apart from generating pleasure. These different views anticipate in some way the modern debate in music philosophy whether music on its own or absolute music , independent of text, is able to elicit emotions on the listener or musician.

[ 36 ] Melos [ edit ] Cleonides describes "melic" composition, "the employment of the materials subject to harmonic practice with due regard to the requirements of each of the subjects under consideration" [ 37 ] — which, together with the scales, tonoi , and harmoniai resemble elements found in medieval modal theory.

[ 38 ] According to Aristides Quintilianus ( On Music , i.12), melic composition is subdivided into three classes: dithyrambic, nomic, and tragic. These parallel his three classes of rhythmic composition: systaltic, diastaltic and hesychastic. Each of these broad classes of melic composition may contain various subclasses, such as erotic, comic and panegyric, and any composition might be elevating (diastaltic), depressing (systaltic), or soothing (hesychastic).

[ 39 ] The classification of the requirements we have from Proclus Useful Knowledge as preserved by Photios : [ citation needed ] for the gods— hymn , prosodion , paean , dithyramb , nomos, adonidia, iobakchos, and hyporcheme ; for humans— encomion , epinikion , skolion , erotica , epithalamia , hymenaios , sillos, threnos, and epikedeion; for the gods and humans—partheneion, daphnephorika, tripodephorika, oschophorika, and eutika According to Mathiesen: Such pieces of music were called melos, which in its perfect form (teleion melos) comprised not only the melody and the text (including its elements of rhythm and diction) but also stylized dance movement. Melic and rhythmic composition (respectively, melopoiïa and rhuthmopoiïa) were the processes of selecting and applying the various components of melos and rhythm to create a complete work.

[ 40 ] Unicode [ edit ] Main article: Ancient Greek Musical Notation (Unicode block) Music symbols of ancient Greece were added to the Unicode Standard in March 2005 with the release of version 4.1.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ That is, C is a half-flattened C , as opposed to C ♭ is notation for a fully flattened C as found in modern musical practice, except for fine-tuning differences.

N.b.

that as well as being different notes C ♭ and B are also different pitches in every ancient, Medieval, and Renaissance tuning system . This is contrary to the expectation of people only trained in modern 12 tone ET .

See also [ edit ] Alypius of Alexandria Delphic Hymns Seikilos epitaph Mesomedes Oxyrhynchus hymn References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Chalmers 1993 , ch. 6, p. 99.

^ Crocker 1963 .

^ Crocker 1964 .

^ Crocker 1966 .

^ Barbera 1977 .

^ Barbera 1984 .

^ a b Chalmers 1993 .

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 5, pp. 48–51.

^ Pöhlmann 1970 .

^ Bellermann 1840 .

^ Pöhlmann & West 2001 , 7.

^ a b c Huffman 2011 .

^ Levin 1990 .

^ a b Barker 1984–1989 , 2:46–52.

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 5, p. 47.

^ Cleonides 1965 , 35–36.

^ Cleonides 1965 , 39–40.

^ a b c d e Mathiesen 2001a , 6(iii)(e).

^ a b c Mathiesen 2001a , 6(iii)(d).

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 5, p. 48.

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 3, pp. 17–22.

^ Barbera 1984 , 240.

^ a b Cleonides 1965 , 44.

^ Solomon 1984 , 250.

^ a b Chalmers 1993 , ch. 6, p. 109.

^ Henderson 1942 .

^ Mountford 1923 .

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 6, p. 106.

^ Chalmers 1993 , ch. 2, p. 10.

^ Mathiesen 2001c .

^ Mathiesen 2001b .

^ Winnington-Ingram 1936 , 3.

^ a b Anderson & Mathiesen 2001 .

^ Barker 1984–1989 , 1:175–176.

^ Aristotle 1912 , book 8, ch. 5.

^ Kramarz 2016 .

^ Cleonides 1965 , 35.

^ Mathiesen 2001a , 6(iii).

^ Mathiesen 2001a , 4.

^ Mathiesen 1999 , 25.

Sources [ edit ] Anderson, Warren; Mathiesen, T.J.

(2001). "Ethos". In Sadie, S.

; Tyrrell, J.

(eds.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London, UK: Macmillan.

Aristotle (1912).

A Treatise on Government . Translated by Ellis, William. London, UK / Toronto, ON / New York, NY: J.M. Dent (UK, CA) / E.P. Dutton (NY).

alt. title Politics Barbera, C. André (Autumn 1977). "Arithmetic and geometric divisions of the tetrachord".

Journal of Music Theory .

21 (2): 294– 323.

JSTOR 843492 .

Barbera, C. André (Summer 1984). "Octave species".

The Journal of Musicology .

3 (3): 229– 241.

doi : 10.2307/763813 .

JSTOR 763813 .

Barker, A , ed. (1984–1989).

Greek Musical Writings . Cambridge, UK / New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Volume 1: ISBN 0-521-23593-6 ; Volume 2: ISBN 0-521-30220-X Bellermann, J.F., ed. (1840).

Die Hymnen des Dionysius und Mesomedes: Text und Melodieen nach Handschriften und den alten Ausgaben . Berlin, DE: Albert Förstner.

Chalmers, John H. (1993). Polansky, Larry; Scholz, Carter (eds.).

Divisions of the Tetrachord: A prolegomenon to the construction of musical scales . Harrison, Lou (foreword). Hanover, NH: Frog Peak Music.

ISBN 0-945996-04-7 .

Cleonides (1965). "Harmonic Introduction". In Strunk, O.

(ed.).

Source Readings in Music History . Vol. 1 Antiquity and the Middle Ages. Translated by Strunk, O.

New York, NY: W.W. Norton. pp.

35– 46.

Crocker, Richard L. (Winter 1963). "Pythagorean mathematics and music".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

22 (2): 189– 198.

doi : 10.2307/427754 .

JSTOR 427754 .

Crocker, Richard L. (Spring 1964). "Pythagorean mathematics and music".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

22 (3): 325– 335.

doi : 10.2307/427236 .

JSTOR 427236 .

Crocker, Richard L. (April 1966). "The troping hypothesis".

The Musical Quarterly .

52 (2): 183– 203.

doi : 10.1093/mq/lii.2.183 .

Henderson, M.I. (October 1942). "The growth of the Greek ἁρμονιαι ".

The Classical Quarterly .

36 ( 3– 4): 94– 103.

Huffman, Carl A. (2011).

"Archytas" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University . Retrieved 25 August 2014 – via plato.stanford.edu.

Kramarz, Andreas (2016).

The Power and Value of Music: Its effect and ethos in classical authors and contemporary music theory . New York, NY / Bern, CH: Peter Lang.

ISBN 9781433133787 .

Levin, F.R.

(1990). "Unity in Euclid's 'Sectio Canonis' ".

Hermes .

118 (4): 430– 443.

JSTOR 4476778 .

Mathiesen, T.J.

(1999).

Apollo's Lyre: Greek music and music theory in antiquity and the middle ages . Publications of the Center for the History of Music Theory and Literature. Vol. 2. Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 9780803230798 .

Mathiesen, Thomas J. (2001a). "Greece, §I: Ancient". In Sadie, Stanley ; Tyrrell, John (eds.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London, UK: Macmillan.

Mathiesen, Thomas J. (2001b). "Harmonia (i)". In Sadie, Stanley ; Tyrrell, John (eds.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London, UK: Macmillan.

Mathiesen, Thomas J. (2001c). "Tonos". In Sadie, Stanley ; Tyrrell, John (eds.).

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians (2nd ed.). London, UK: Macmillan.

Mountford, James Frederick (1923). "The musical scales of Plato's Republic ".

The Classical Quarterly .

17 ( 3– 4): 125– 136.

doi : 10.1017/S0009838800006510 .

Pöhlmann, Egert (1970).

Denkmäler altgriechischer Musik . Erlanger Beiträge zur Sprach- und Kunstwissenschaft. Vol. 31. Nuremberg, DE: Hans Carl Verlag.

ISSN 0425-2268 .

Pöhlmann, Egert; West, M.L.

, eds. (2001).

Documents of Ancient Greek Music: The extant melodies and fragments edited and transcribed with commentary . Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-815223-X .

Solomon, Jon (Summer 1984). "Towards a history of tonoi".

The Journal of Musicology .

3 (3): 242– 251.

doi : 10.2307/763814 .

JSTOR 763814 .

Winnington-Ingram, Reginald P. (1936).

Mode in Ancient Greek Music . London, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Jan, Karl von (ed.) (1895).

Musici scriptores graeci: Aristoteles, Euclides, Nicomachus, Bacchius, Gaudentius, Alypius et melodiarum veterum quidquid exstat . Bibliotheca scriptorum graecorum et romanorum Teubneriana. Leipzig: B. G. Teubner.

Jowett, Benjamin (1937), The Dialogues of Plato (2 vols.), translated by Benjamin Jowett (3rd ed.), New York: Random House Mathiesen, Thomas J.

(2001d). "Alypius [Alupios]".

The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell . London: Macmillan Publishers.

Meibom, Marcus (ed.) (1652).

Antiquae musicae auctores septem: Graece et latine , 2 vols. Amsterdam: Apud Ludovicum Elzevirium. Facsimile reprint in Monuments of Music and Music Literature in Facsimile, Second Series: Music Literature 51. New York: Broude Bros., 1977.

ISBN 9780845022511 .

Winnington-Ingram, Reginald P. (1932). "Aristoxenus and the Intervals of Greek Music".

The Classical Quarterly .

26 ( 3– 4): 195– 208.

doi : 10.1017/s0009838800014415 .

S2CID 170375844 .

Winnington-Ingram, Reginald P. (1954). "Greek Music (Ancient)".

Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians , fifth edition, edited by Eric Blom . New York: St. Martin's Press.

External links [ edit ] Hamilton, Elsie (1953).

The Modes of ancient Greece (PDF) (Report) (reprint ed.). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-11-21 . Retrieved 22 March 2024 .

— Booklet by composer Elsie Hamilton summarizes work of deceased friend and teacher, Dr.

Kathleen Schlesinger . Gives detailed examples of the construction of Aolus (reed pipe instruments) and monochord, which might help reconstruct the intervals and modes of the Greeks.

Ioannidis, Nikolaos .

"Music of the ancient Greeks" .

homoecumenicus.com .

— Ioannidis is a musician and composer who has attempted to reconstruct ancient Greek music using a combination of the ancient texts (to be performed) and his own understanding of ancient music.

Aristoxenus (1902). Macran, Henry S. (ed.).

The Harmonics of Aristoxenus – via Internet Archive (archive.org).

— A mid-19th century edition, but free; the Barbera translation, cited above, is more up to date.

Monzo, Joe (2004).

"Analysis of Aristoxenus" .

tonalsoft.com .

— Full of interesting and insightful mathematical analysis. There are some original hypotheses outlined.

Erickson, R.

"Analysis of Archytas" .

ex-tempore.org .

— Erickson is an American composer and academic; something of a complement to the above Aristoxenus but, dealing with the earlier and arithmetically precise Archytas. An incidental note. Erickson is keen to demonstrate that Archytas' tuning system not only corresponds with Plato's harmonia , but also with the practice of musicians. Erickson mentions the ease of tuning with the kithara .

"Ancient Greek music" .

oeaw.ac.at .

Austrian Academy of Sciences .

— examples of instruments and compositions.

"Ensemble Kérylos" .

kerylos.fr (home page).

— Kérylos is a music group led by scholar Annie Bélis , dedicated to the recreation of ancient Greek and Roman music and playing scores written on inscriptions and papyri .

v t e Musical notation Staff 8 va 15 ma Abbreviation Bar Clef Da capo Dal segno Key signature Ledger line Mode Ossia Scale Rehearsal letter Repeat sign Tempo Time signature Transposition Transposing instrument Musical notes Accidental flat natural sharp Cue note Dotted note Grace note Note value beam Notehead stem Pitch Rest Tacet Tuplet Tremolo Interval Helmholtz pitch notation Letter notation Scientific pitch notation Articulation Accent Caesura Damping Dynamics Fermata Fingering Legato Marcato Ornament Appoggiatura Glissando Grace note Mordent Slide Trill Portato Slur Staccato Tenuto Tie Tonguing Sheet music History of music publishing Music engraving Music publisher Scorewriter Other systems Braille music Chord chart Chord diagram Eye music Figured bass Graphic notation Lead sheet Nashville Number System Numbered musical notation Klavarskribo Tablature Parsons Percussion notation Simplified Ancient Greek Chinese Ekphonetic Gamelan Kunkunshi Neume Swaralipi Shakuhachi Znamenny Related Mensural notation Music stand Perfect pitch Sight-reading Transcription List of musical symbols Category:Musical notation v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Modes in Western music Gregorian Authentic Dorian Phrygian Lydian Mixolydian Plagal Hypodorian Hypophrygian Hypolydian Hypomixolydian Other Ionian Hypoionian Aeolian Hypoaeolian Locrian Hypolocrian Pentatonic Reciting tone Diatonic Heptatonia prima Ionian (I) ( natural major and ascending melodic major ) Dorian (II) Phrygian (III) Lydian (IV) Mixolydian (V) Aeolian (VI) ( natural minor and descending melodic minor ) Locrian (VII) Jazz minor Heptatonia secunda Jazz minor (I) ( ascending melodic minor ) Dorian ♭2 (II) Lydian augmented (III) Acoustic (IV) Aeolian dominant (V) ( descending melodic major ) Half diminished (VI) Altered (VII) Neapolitan major Heptatonia tertia Neapolitan major (I) Leading whole tone (II) Lydian augmented dominant (III) Lydian minor (IV) Major Locrian (V) Harmonic minor Harmonic minor (I) Ukrainian Dorian (IV) Phrygian dominant (V) Lydian ♯9 (VI) Harmonic major Harmonic major (I) Dorian-Locrian (II) Neapolitan Mixolydian (V) Double harmonic scale Double harmonic (I) Hungarian minor (IV) Oriental (V) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐ckb9x
Cached time: 20250812021452
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 0.963 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9151/1000000
Revision size: 44469/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 278766/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22424/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 149049/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8433414/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  742.720      1 -total
 18.26%  135.626     56 Template:Sfn
 13.29%   98.675     13 Template:Navbox
 11.65%   86.544      4 Template:Cite_dictionary
  9.43%   70.024      1 Template:Short_description
  9.35%   69.458      1 Template:Musical_notation
  6.92%   51.383     11 Template:Cite_book
  6.88%   51.079     10 Template:Cite_journal
  5.93%   44.009      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.31%   39.460      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25111124:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021452 and revision id 1281349130. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Musical_system_of_ancient_Greece&oldid=1281349130 " Categories : Ancient Greek music Ancient Greek music theory Melody types Modes (music) Musical tuning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 19 March 2025, at 20:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Musical system of ancient Greece 6 languages Add topic

