Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 French and English spacing 2 Movement to single sentence spacing 3 The computer era 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 General 4.2 Related history 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents History of sentence spacing 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from French spacing ) Evolution of sentence spacing conventions from the introduction of movable type in Europe The history of sentence spacing is the evolution of sentence spacing conventions from the introduction of movable type in Europe by Johannes Gutenberg to the present day.

An example of early sentence spacing with an em-quad between sentences (1909) Typesetting in all European languages enjoys a long tradition of using spaces of varying widths for the express purpose of enhancing readability. American, English, French, and other European typesetters' style guides—also known as printers' rules —specified spacing rules which were all essentially identical from the 18th century onwards. Early English language guides by Jacobi in the UK [ 1 ] and MacKellar, Harpel, Bishop, and De Vinne in the US [ 2 ] specified that sentences would be separated by more space than that of a normal word space.  Spaces between sentences were to be em -spaced, and words would normally be 1/3 em-spaced, or occasionally 1/2 em-spaced (see the illustration to the right). This remained standard for quite some time.

MacKellar's The American Printer was the dominant language style guide in the US at the time and ran to at least 17 editions between 1866 and 1893, and De Vinne's The Practice of Typography was the undisputed global authority on English-language typesetting style from 1901 until well past Dowding's first formal alternative spacing suggestion in the mid-1950s.

[ citation needed ] Both the American and the UK style guides also specified that spaces should be inserted between punctuation and text. The MacKellar guide described these as hair spaces but itself used a much wider space than was then commonly regarded as a hair space.

[ 2 ] Spaces following words or punctuation were subject to line breaks, and spaces between words and closely associated punctuation were non-breaking. Additionally, spaces were (and still are today) varied proportionally in width when justifying lines, originally by hand, later by machine, now usually by software.

The spacing differences between traditional typesetting and modern conventional printing standards are easily observed by comparing two different versions of the same book, from the Mabinogion : 1894: the Badger-in-the-bag game —traditional typesetting spacing rules: a single enlarged em-space between sentences 1999: the Badger-in-the-bag game —modern mass-production commercial printing: a single word space between sentences The 1999 example demonstrates the current convention for published work. The 1894 version demonstrates thin-spaced words but em-spaced sentences. It also demonstrates spaces around punctuation according to the rules above and equivalent to French typesetting today.

French and English spacing [ edit ] French-spaced typeset text (1874) With the advent of the typewriter in the late  nineteenth century, typists adopted approximations of standard spacing practices to fit the limitations of the typewriter itself.  French typists used a single space between sentences, consistent with the typeset French spacing technique, whereas English typists used a double space.

French spacing inserted spaces around most punctuation marks, but single-spaced after sentences, colons, and semicolons.

[ 3 ] English spacing removed spaces around most punctuation marks, but double-spaced after sentences, colons, and semicolons.

[ 4 ] These approximations were taught and used as the standard typing techniques in French and English-speaking countries.

[ 5 ] For example, T. S. Eliot typed rather than wrote the manuscript for his classic The Waste Land between 1920 and 1922, and used only English spacing throughout: double-spaced sentences.

[ 6 ] There is, however, considerable variability in the use of the terms, to the extent that they are often used with the meanings reversed.  Here are some definitions of French spacing : "Additional space at the ends of sentences is called 'French Spacing.'  It is a very old practice, having been commonplace in books up through the 19th century" [ 7 ] "Adding two spaces after a period is called French spacing.  French spacing was quite common in books before the 19th century. Later it became the norm for typewritten copy." [ 8 ] "French spacing: The additional inter-word spacing between sentences can be switched off in TeX and LaTeX with the command \frenchspacing " [ 9 ] "Additional space at the ends of sentences is called French spacing, ... In typesetting, a thin space set in addition to the word space achieves French spacing.

[ 10 ] "French spacing leaves the same amount of white space after all punctuation marks, but leaves some thin space before the “tall” punctuation marks..." [ 11 ] "In ordinary spacing a full em occurs at the end of a sentence.  In French spacing the end of a sentence is spaced the same as the balance of the words in the line.

[ 12 ] "...French spacing. The insertion of  fixed space such as an en or an em between sentences instead of a variable word space." [ 13 ] This 1960 quotation is the result of some contemporary research: French spacing is tight spacing with equal word spacing throughout a line, i.e., no extra space after a period, colon, etc.  The purpose is not only to create a tighter looking, evenly colored page, but more important, to avoid rivers .  In some ad shops, French spacing is understood to mean optically equal word spacing.  As to the "French" part of the term, this style has nothing to do with France as verified by several French cultural societies and printers.  The word was evidently used because anything "French" was considered to be du haut style.

[ 14 ] Movement to single sentence spacing [ edit ] A key change in the publishing industry from the mid-19th century to the mid-20th century was the enormous growth of mass-produced books and magazines. Increasing commercial pressure to reduce the costs, complexity, and lead-time of printing deeply affected the industry, leading to a widening gap between commercial printing and fine printing.

[ 15 ] For example, T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land was originally published by a high-volume commercial printer according to its house rules and it was not until its third publication that Eliot was satisfied with its typesetting.

[ 16 ] The underlying reasons were: [ 15 ] ease and speed, since far less physical type and more importantly far less skilled effort was required cost, since less work was required and the condensed text required less paper; the bulk of the cost saving was typesetting-related rather than paper-use-related cultural, since new typesetters (and readers) had grown up with typewriters and the standard typists' spacing approximations of good typesetting Before the First World War virtually all English-language books were printed following standard typesetters' spacing rules. By the end of the Second World War most American books and an increasing proportion of English books were printed following the typewriter's English spacing approximation rules.

[ 17 ] Around this time, the practice of single spacing became more prevalent. There were various circumstances which could have contributed to the change. For example, there was an increase in high-volume low-cost mass-produced printing (e.g., newspapers, pulp novels, magazines). Also, a significant innovation in the typewriter was the breaking of the typewriter "grid" in 1941. “The grid” referred to the uniform spacing of each letter space in the monospaced font used by the typewriter. In 1941, IBM introduced the Executive , a typewriter that used proportional spacing by breaking each cell of the grid into fifths.

[ 18 ] Although proportional fonts had been used in various forms in typesetting since the invention of movable type , this innovation broke the hold that the monospaced font had over the typewriter—reducing the severity of its mechanical limitations.

During the 1950s, single sentence spacing became the standard commercial practice in mass-print-runs in the United States. However, double sentence spacing approximations were retained in some higher-cost printed works. For example, for reasons of readability, the US government's 1959 official style guide mandated double sentence spacing in all government documents—whether produced by “teletypesetter, reproduction or other method”.

[ 19 ] Single sentence spacing was introduced by professional printers in the United Kingdom as well. The 1947 version of Penguin Composition Rules stated that all Penguin publications would adhere to the following rules: “All major punctuation marks – full point, colon, and semicolon – should be followed by the same spacing as is used throughout the rest of the line.” [ 20 ] Until about the early 1990s, [ 21 ] double sentence spacing was still referred to as English spacing (or “American typewriter spacing”).

The computer era [ edit ] The introduction and widespread adoption of non-commandline desktop publishing software on personal computers in the mid-1980s eliminated previous cost-restrictions that had helped fuel the switch to single-spacing. There was no longer any material marginal cost associated with typesetting double-spaces, or even multiple-width spaces.  Despite this, resistance to double-spaced sentences started to grow among English-language professional designers and typographers as they became more directly involved with typesetting. Traditional French typists' rules continued to be the uncontested norm in French-speaking countries, [ 22 ] but English spacing became increasingly deprecated in English-speaking countries.

By the mid-1990s, the term French spacing was occasionally used in America in reference to double sentence spacing. An example of this apparent terminology reversal can be attributed to the University of Chicago Press in 1994.

[ 23 ] By the mid-2000s this usage had been widely replicated on the Internet, for unclear reasons.

Additionally, there has been a designer-led trend towards closer-fitted text in general.

[ 24 ] For example, an increasing number of computer font design guidelines now recommend the use of quarter-em spaces rather than third-em spaces. With regard to spacing, modern designers are retracing the steps of the 19th-century design-led typographer William Morris . Morris rejected the restrictions of commercial typesetting which at the time demanded traditional typesetting's spacing rules, and, declaring a "rage for beauty", advocated close-set type and dark "colour" (lack of whitespace, creating uniformity of appearance). However, the reason Donald Knuth gave for creating the TeX typesetting system was his dismay on receiving the proofs of a new edition of his book The Art of Computer Programming at the unreadability of the then new close-fitted phototypesetting technology, which he described as "awful" due to its "poor spacing".

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The leading style guides of Morris's time documented that readers of the time had the same reaction to Morris's output as Knuth did later to phototypesetting's output. De Vinne, for example, wrote in The Practice of Typography : Printed words need the relief of a surrounding blank as much as figures in a landscape need background or contrast, perspective or atmosphere. (p. 182) White space is needed to make printing comprehensible. (page 183) And in Modern Book Composition he wrote: Unleaded and thin-spaced composition is preferred by the disciples of William Morris, but it is not liked by the average reader, who does need a perceptible white blank between words or lines of print. During the fifteenth century, when thin leads and graduated spaces were almost unknown and but little used, the reading world had its surfeit of close-spaced and solid typesetting. (p. 105) Varying the spacing between sentences, and using the changing spacing to encode information, are a standard method of steganography , hiding secret information in public documents.

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] General [ edit ] Sentence spacing Sentence spacing in language and style guides Sentence spacing in digital media Sentence spacing studies Orphans and widows Style guides Typesetting Related history [ edit ] History of printing History of printing in East Asia History of Western typography Spread of European movable type printing References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Jacobi, Charles Thomas (1890) Printing London: C. Whittingham; Jacobi, Charles Thomas (1892) Some Notes on Books and Printing; a Guide for Authors, Publishers, & Others, New and enl. Ed.

London: C. Whittingham ^ a b MacKellar, Thomas (1866) The American Printer: A Manual of Typography, Containing Complete Instructions for Beginners, as Well as Practical Directions for Managing Every Department of a Printing Office Philadelphia; MacKellar Smiths & Jordan; Harpel, Oscar (1870) Harpel's Typograph, or Book of Specimens Containing Useful Information, Suggestions and a Collection of Examples of Letterpress Job Printing Arranged for the Assistance of Master Printers, Amateurs, Apprentices, and Others Cincinnati Press; Bishop, Henry Gold (1895) The Practical Printer: A Book of Instruction for Beginners; a Book of Reference for the More Advanced, 3rd. ed.

Albany; De Vinne, Theodore Low (1901) The Practice of Typography: correct composition: a treatise on spelling, abbreviations, the compounding and division of words, the proper use of figures and numerals.  With observations on punctuation and proof-reading.

New York, Century Co.

^ Lexique des règles typographiques en usage à l'Imprimerie nationale (3rd ed.). Imprimerie nationale. 1993.

^ Nelson, Julius (1949).

Stylebook for Typists . New York: Gregg Publishing Company.

^ Igot, Pierre (2006) Microsoft Word and non-breaking spaces: French typography 101 ^ Gordon, Lyndall (1999).

T.S. Eliot: An Imperfect Life (1st American ed.). W.W. Norton & Company.

^ Romano, Frank J. (1 October 1988).

Desktop typography with QuarkXPress . Windcrest. p. 92.

ISBN 978-0-8306-9323-8 .

^ Step-by-step Graphics . Dynamic Graphics, Incorporated. 1994. p. 103.

^ Helmut Kopka; Patrick W. Daly (June 1995).

A guide to Latex2[epsilon]: document preparation for beginners and advanced users . Addison-Wesley Pub. Co. p. 45.

^ Ron Goldberg (2000).

Digital Typography Pocket Primer . Windsor Professional Information. pp.

61 .

ISBN 978-1-893190-05-4 .

^ TUGboat . TEX Users Group. 1995. p. 219.

^ C. E. Nicholson; Edward J. Triebe; John H. Esak (1944).

Book production: How? Why? When?

. American Institute of Graphic Arts. p. 7.

^ Book Production Procedures for Today's Technology (Second ed.). Inkwell Publishing. 15 January 2006. p. 201.

ISBN 978-1-929163-21-2 .

^ "Inland Printer, American Lithographer".

145 . Maclean-Hunter Publishing Company. April 1960: 71.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b Keefe, H. J. (1939).

A Century in Print - The Story of Hazell's - 1839-1939 . London: Hazell Watson & Viney Ltd.

^ Rainey, Lawrence (2005) The Annotated Waste Land with Eliot's Contemporary Prose New Haven: Yale University Press ^ e.g., Standard typesetters' spacing rules: Linklater, Eric (1954) A year of space The Reprint Society, London; e.g., English spacing: Gordon, Richard (1955) Doctor in the House; Doctor at Sea The Reprint Society , London; e.g., English spacing: Leslie, Doris (1956) Peridot Flight The Book Club, London ^ Wershler-Henry, Darren (2005).

The Iron Whim A Fragmented History of Typewriting . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press . p.

254 .

ISBN 978-0-8014-4586-6 .

^ United States Government Printing Office Style Manual (1959), paragraph 2.36.1 ^ Jan Tschichold (18 October 2010).

"Jan Tschichold: Penguin composition rules (1947)" . Oliver Tomas . Retrieved 4 December 2010 .

^ Siebenmann, Laurent (1993).

"A Format Compilation Framework for European Languages" (PDF) .

TUGboat . pp.

212– 221.

ISSN 0896-3207 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-10-03.

^ FRENCH STYLE GUIDE – A Reference Document (2001) Nova Scotia Department of Education ^ Eckersley, Richard (1994).

Glossary of Typesetting Terms . University of Chicago Press. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-226-18371-8 .

^ Dowding, G. (1954) Finer Points in the Spacing and Arrangement of Type Wace & Co.: London; Felici 2003; Bringhurst 2004.

^ Knuth, Donald (1986) Remarks to celebrate the publication of Computers and Typesetting Archived 2011-03-15 at the Wayback Machine Address delivered at the Computer Museum in Boston on May 21, 1986. The full text can be found in TUGboat, 7 (1986), 95–98 ^ Seroul, Raymond; and Levy, Silvio (1991) A Beginners Book of TeX Springer-Verlag, pp 1-2 ^ Bender, W.; Gruhl, D.; Morimoto, N.; Lu, A. (1996), "Techniques for data hiding" (PDF) , IBM Systems Journal , 35 (3/4): 313– 336, doi : 10.1147/sj.353.0313 .

Sources [ edit ] Bringhurst, Robert (2004).

The Elements of Typographic Style (3.0 ed.). Washington and Vancouver: Hartley & Marks.

ISBN 978-0-88179-206-5 .

Dowding, Geoffrey (1995).

Finer Points in the Spacing & Arrangement of Type (Revised ed.). Vancouver, BC: Hartley & Marks Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-88179-119-8 .

Felici, James (2003).

The Complete Manual of Typography . Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press.

ISBN 978-0-321-12730-3 .

MacKellar, Thomas (1885).

The American Printer: A Manual of Typography, Containing Practical Directions for Managing all Departments of a Printing Office, As Well as Complete Instructions for Apprentices: With Several Useful Tables, Numerous Schemes for Imposing Forms in Every Variety, Hints to Authors, Etc (Fifteenth, Revised and Enlarged ed.). Philadelphia: MacKellar, Smiths & Jordan.

Wershler-Henry, Darren (2005).

The Iron Whim A Fragmented History of Typewriting . Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-4586-6 .

External links [ edit ] PHP SmartyPants Typographer : PHP MarkDown extension inserting key French spacing non-breaking spaces into entered text A "Silesian Vocational and Technical" (1960) training video for Linotype machines , notable for its clarity regarding the technology's strengths and limitations, and the full explanation of the consequent spacing practice v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=History_of_sentence_spacing&oldid=1283747120#French_and_English_spacing " Category : Typography Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 3 April 2025, at 12:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents History of sentence spacing 1 language Add topic

