Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 New Zealand science fiction fan award winners 1989-2001 4 Professional award winners since 2002 Toggle Professional award winners since 2002 subsection 4.1 2015 4.2 2016 4.3 2017 4.4 2018 4.5 2019 4.6 2020 4.7 2021 4.8 2022 4.9 2023 5 Fan award winners since 2002 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sir Julius Vogel Award 1 language Frysk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia NZ literary awards for sci-fi, fantasy and horror For the Australian award also known as the Vogel Award, see Australian/Vogel Literary Award .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sir Julius Vogel Award" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Sir Julius Vogel Awards are awarded each year at the New Zealand National Science Fiction Convention to recognise achievement in New Zealand science fiction , fantasy , horror , and science fiction fandom . They are commonly referred to as the Vogels .

[ citation needed ] Name [ edit ] Sir Julius Vogel, 8th Prime Minister of New Zealand.

The awards are named for Sir Julius Vogel , a prominent New Zealand journalist and politician, who was Premier of New Zealand twice during the 1870s. He also, in 1889, wrote what is widely regarded as New Zealand's first science fiction novel, Anno Domini 2000, or, Woman's Destiny .

[ 1 ] The book, written and published in Great Britain after Vogel had moved from New Zealand, pictured a New Zealand in the year 2000 where most positions of authority were held by women—at the time of writing, a radical proposition. In 2000, New Zealand's Head of State, Governor General, Prime Minister, Chief Justice and Attorney General were all women, as was the CEO of one of the country's largest companies, Telecom .

History [ edit ] National awards have been presented annually since 1989, but were initially simply known as the New Zealand Science Fiction Fan Awards , and were originally aimed primarily at fandom rather than at professional science fiction. In these early years the awards were organised on an ad-hoc basis by the organising committees of the national conventions, though with the support of the former national fan organisation, the National Association for Science Fiction which nominally ran the awards from 1993. In the early 1990s the awards were briefly known as the Edmund Bayne Awards, after a well-known Wellington fan who had been killed in a road accident, but this name was never formalised.

In 2002 the awards were revamped and reorganised, and since that time have been aimed more at the professional science fiction and fantasy community. The current name also dates to 2002. These changes accompanied a change in the organisation of the awards, which are now formally run by national organisation SFFANZ (the Science Fiction and Fantasy Association of New Zealand).

Categories change to some extent on an annual basis, but generally include professional awards for best novel, short story, dramatic presentation, and services to science fiction, as well as equivalent fan awards. Due to the size of New Zealand's science fiction, fantasy, and horror fiction communities, the awards cover all three of these frequently intertwined genres and attempt to treat each equally.

New Zealand science fiction fan award winners 1989-2001 [ edit ] 1989 Best fan writing: Alan Robson Best fanzine: Phlogiston Best fan art: Dan McCarthy Best fan editor: Alex Heatley Numerous other one-off awards were made in these debut awards 1990 Best fan writing (general): Alan Robson Best fan writing (media): Lana Brown Best fanzine: Cry Havoc Best media fanzine: Katra Best fan art: Peter Gainsford Best fan editor: Lyn McConchie 1991 Best fan writing: Alan Robson Best fanzine: Phlogiston Best fan art: Dan McCarthy Best fan editor: Alex Heatley 1992 Best fan writing: Alan Robson Best fanzine: Phlogiston Best fan art (tie): James Benson and Mike Hanson Best fan editor (tie): James Dignan and Alex Heatley 1993 Best fan writing: Jon Preddle Best general fanzine: Timestreams Best club fanzine: Time Space Visualiser Best fan art: Warwick Gray Special achievement: Lana Brown 1994 Best fan writing: Anne Marie Lloyd Best fanzine: Chunder Best fan art: Mark Roach Best other publication: Trimmings from the Triffid's Beard 1995 Best fan writing: Peter Friend and Li Cross (co-authors) Best fanzine: Time Space Visualiser Best fan art: Warwick Gray Best other publication: The Best of Time Space Visualiser 21-26 Special achievement: Continuum convention committee 1996 Best fan writing: Peter Friend Best fanzine: Phoenixine Best fan art: Nick Kim 1997-2000 (details unknown) 2001 Best fan writing: Jon Preddle Best fanzine: Phoenixine Best fan art: Richard Manx Services to fandom: Paul Scoones Professional award winners since 2002 [ edit ] 2002 [ 2 ] Best Novel: First Hunter by Dale Elvy Best Short Story: "The Good Earth" by Peter Friend Dramatic Presentation - Long Form: The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Best New Talent: Dale Elvy Services to Science Fiction and Fantasy: Peter Jackson , Fran Walsh , and Phillipa Boyens 2003 [ 3 ] Best Novel: Beast Master’s Ark by Andre Norton and Lyn McConchie Best Art Work: John Baster , Mary Maclachlan Services to Science Fiction and Fantasy: Weta Workshop , Weta Digital 2004 [ 4 ] Best Novel: Dark Shinto by Dale Elvy Best Short Story (tie): "A Plea for Help" by Kevin G Maclean and "The Alchemist" by Peter Friend Best New Talent: Glynne Maclean Special Award: Peter Jackson and the team responsible for The Lord of the Rings film trilogy 2005 [ 5 ] Best Novel: Beastmaster’s Circus by Lyn McConchie and Andre Norton Best Short Story: "When Dragons Dream” by Kevin G Maclean Services to Science Fiction and Fantasy: Ken Catran 2006 [ 6 ] Best Novel: The Duke's Ballad by Andre Norton and Lyn McConchie Best Short Story: "The Real Deal” by Peter Friend Services to Science Fiction and Fantasy: Margaret Mahy 2007 Best Novel: The Assassin of Gleam by James Norcliffe Best Short Story: "Western Front, 1914” by Peter Friend Best Dramatic Presentation - Long Form: Maddigan's Quest Best New Talent: Douglas A. Van Belle 2008 Best Novel - Adult: Path of Revenge by Russell Kirkpatrick Best Novel - Young Adult (tie): The Sea-wreck Stranger by Anna Mackenzie and Cybele's Secret by Juliet Marillier Best Short Story (tie): "Fendraaken" by Kevin G. Maclean and "Mist and Murder" by Lucy Sussex Best Novella/Novelette: Beat of Temptation by Nalini Singh Best Anthology: Doorways for the Dispossessed by Paul Haines Best Dramatic Presentation - Long Form: Black Sheep Best Dramatic Presentation - Short Form: "Buy Kiwi Made" advertising campaign Best New Talent: Tracie McBride Services to Science Fiction: Andromeda Spaceways Inflight Magazine Publishing Co-operative 2009 Best Novel - Adult: Dark Heart by Russell Kirkpatrick Best Novel - Young Adult: Thornspell by Helen Lowe Best Short Story: "Under Waves and Over" by Grant Stone Best Novella/Novelette: "Stroke of Enticement" by Nalini Singh Best Collected Work: "The Invisible Road" by Elizabeth Knox Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Newtons Sleep by Emma Weakley Best Dramatic Presentation - Short Form: " Skankenstein " (music video) Best Professional Publication: " Deputy Dan and The Mysterious Midnight Marauder " by Sally McLennan and Joel Liochon Best New Talent: Helen Lowe 2010 Best Novel: Beyond The Wall Of Time by Russell Kirkpatrick Best Young Adult Novel: Brainjack by Brian Falkner Best Novella/Novelette: "Wives" by Paul Haines Best Short Story (tie): "Corrigan's Exchange" by Ripley Patton and "The Living Dead Boy" by Grant Stone Best Collected Work: "Voyagers: Science Fiction Poetry From New Zealand" by Mark Pirie and Tim Jones (editors) Best Artwork: "The Test" by Serena Kearns Best Dramatic Presentation - Long Form: " Under the Mountain " (dir.

Jonathan King ) Best Production/Publication: " Semaphore Magazine " by Marie Hodgkinson Best New Talent: Simon Petrie Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror: Phillip Mann 2011 Best Novel (tie): The Heir Of Night by Helen Lowe and The Questing Road by Lyn McConchie Best Young Adult Novel: Summer Of Dreaming by Lyn McConchie Best Novella/Novelette:  "A Tale Of The Interferers - Hunger For Forbidden Flesh" by Paul Haines Best Short Story: High Tide At Hot Water Beach by Paul Haines Best Collected Work:  "A Foreign Country - New Zealand Speculative Fiction" by Anna Caro and Juliet Buchanan (editors) Best Artwork: Cover for Tymon's Flight by Frank Victoria Best Dramatic Presentation (tie): " This Is Not My Life " - Pilot Episode (Executive Producers: Gavin Strawhan, Rachel Lang, Steven O'Meagher , Tim White. Producer: Tim Sanders. Directors: Robert Sarkies , Peter Salmon . Associate Producer: Polly Fryer) and "Kaitangata Twitch" - Pilot Episode by Yvonne Mackay Best Production/Publication: 	"White Cloud Worlds Anthology" by Paul Tobin (editor) Best New Talent: Karen Healey Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror: Simon Litten 2012 Best Novel: Samiha's Song by Mary Victoria Best Youth Novel: Battle of the Birds by Lee Murray Best Novella/Novelette:  "Steam Girl" by Dylan Horrocks Best Short Story: Frankie and the Netball Clone by Alicia Ponder Best Collected Work:  "Tales for Canterbury" by Cassie Hart and Anna Caro (editors) Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Oracle's Fire by Frank Victoria Best Dramatic Presentation: " The Almighty Johnsons " (Producer: Simon Bennett. Writers: Rachel Lang and James Griffin) Best New Talent: K. D. Berry Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror: Ripley Patton 2013 Best Novel: Queen of Iron Years by Lyn McConchie and Sharman Horwood Best Youth Novel: The Prince of Soul and the Lighthouse by Frederik Brounéus Best Novella/Novelette: "Flight 404" by Simon Petrie Best Short Story: Hope is the thing with feathers by Lee Murray Best Collected Work: "Mansfield with Monsters" by Matt and Debbie Cowens Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Light Touch Paper, Stand Clear by Les Petersen Best Professional Production/Publication: " The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey: Chronicles " (Art and Design by Daniel Falconer ( WetaNZ ) Best Dramatic Presentation: The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey ( Peter Jackson , Philippa Boyens , Fran Walsh , Guillermo del Toro ) Best New Talent: Matt and Debbie Cowens Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy And Horror: Stephen Minchin 2014 Best Novel: Heartwood by Freya Robertson Best Youth Novel: Raven Flight by Juliet Marillier Best Novella: Cave Fever by Lee Murray Best Short Story: By Bone-Light by Juliet Marillier Best Collected Work: Baby Teeth by Lee Murray and Dan Rabarts (editors) Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Regeneration: Best New Zealand Speculative Fiction by Emma Weakley Best Professional Publication/Production: WearableArt by Craig Potton Best Dramatic Presentation: The Almighty Johnsons (Season Three) , South Pacific Films 2015 [ edit ] Best Novel: Engines of Empathy by Paul Mannering Best Youth Novel: The Caller: Shadowfell by Juliet Marillier Best Novella: Peach and Araxi by Celine Murray Best Short Story: Inside Ferndale by Lee Murray Best Collected Work: Lost in the Museum , Phoenix Writer's Group Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Lost in the Museum by Geoff Popham Best Professional Production/Publication: Weta: 20 Years of Imagination on Screen , Clare Burgess with Brian Stubley Best Dramatic Presentation: What We Do In The Shadows , dir Jemaine Clement and Taika Waititi 2016 [ edit ] Best Novel: Ardus by Jean Gilbert Best Youth Novel: Dragons Realm (You Say Which Way) by Eileen Mueller Best Novella/Novelette: The Ghost of Matter by Octavia Cade Best Short Story: The Thief's Tale by Lee Murray Best Collected Work: Work Off Line 2015: The Earth We Knew , Jean Gilbert and Chad Dick (editors) Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Shortcuts - Track 1 by Casey Bailey Best Professional Production/Publication: White Clouds World Anthology 3 , Weta Workshops , Paul Tobin (editor) Best New Talent: Jean Gilbert Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror: Marie Hodgkinson 2017 [ edit ] Best Novel: Into the Mist by Lee Murray Best Youth Novel: Light in My Dark by Jean Gilbert and William Dresden Best Novella/Novelette: The Convergence of Fairy Tales by Octavia Cade Best Short Story: Splintr by A.J. Fitzwater Best Collected Work: At the Edge , Dan Rabarts and Lee Murray (editors) Best Professional Artwork: Cover for At the Edge by Emma Weakley Best Professional Production/Publication: That Kind of Planet by Emma Weakley Best Dramatic Presentation: This Giant Papier Mache Boulder is Actually Really Heavy , dir Christian Nicholson Best New Talent: Eileen Mueller Services To Science Fiction, Fantasy And Horror: Lee Murray 2018 [ edit ] Best Novel: Hounds of the Underworld by Dan Rabarts and Lee Murray Best Youth Novel: The Traitor and the Thief by Gareth Ward Best Novella/Novelette: Matters Arising from the Identification of the Body by Simon Petrie Best Short Story: Crimson Birds of Small Miracles by Sean Monaghan Best Collected Work: Mariah's Prologues by Grace Bridges Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Teleport by Kate Strawbridge Best Professional Production/Publication: Mistlands by Layla Rose Best Dramatic Presentation: The Changeover , directed by Stuart McKenzie and Miranda Harcourt 2019 [ edit ] Best Novel: Into the Sounds by Lee Murray Best Youth Novel: Lutapolii – White Dragon of the South by Deryn Pittar Best Novella/Novelette: The Martian Job by M. Darusha Wehm Best Short Story: Girls Who do not Drown by A.C. Buchanan Best Collected Work: Te Korero Ahi Kā , edited by Grace Bridges, Lee Murray and Aaron Compton Best Professional Artwork: Cover for The Baker Thief by Laya Rose Best Professional Production/Publication: The Black Archive #15: Full Circle by John Toon Best Dramatic Presentation: Wellington Paranormal , directed by Jemaine Clement and Jackie van Beek 2020 [ edit ] Best Novel: The Dawnhounds by Sascha Stronach [ 7 ] Best Youth Novel: The Clockill and the Thief by Gareth Ward [ 7 ] Best Novella/Novelette: From A Shadow Grave by Andi C. Buchanan [ 7 ] Best Short Story: A Shriek Across The Sky by Casey Lucas [ 7 ] Best Collected Work: Year’s Best Aotearoa New Zealand Science Fiction and Fantasy, Vol 1 , edited by Marie Hodgkinson [ 7 ] Best Professional Artwork: Cover for Dragon Pearl by Vivienne To [ 7 ] Best Professional Production/Publication: Swords: The Webcomic by Matthew Wills [ 8 ] Best Dramatic Presentation: Dr Who: The Elysian Blade , David Bishop [ 8 ] 2021 [ edit ] Best Novel: The Stone Wētā by Octavia Cade [ 9 ] Best Youth Novel: These Violent Delights by Chloe Gong [ 9 ] Best Novella/Novelette: No Man’s Land by A. J. Fitzwater [ 9 ] Best Short Story: For Want of Parts by Casey Lucas [ 10 ] Best Collected Work: The Voyages of Cinrak the Dapper by A. J. Fitzwater [ 9 ] Best Professional Artwork: Laya Rose, for the cover art for No Man’s Land by A. J. Fitzwater [ 9 ] Best Professional Production/Publication: How New Zealand's Best Fantasy and Science Fiction Authors got Shafted on a Global Stage by Casey Lucas [ 10 ] 2022 [ edit ] Best Novel: Butcherbird , Cassie Hart [ 11 ] Best Youth Novel: Fire’s Caress, Lani Wendt Young [ 11 ] Best Novella/Novelette: The Impossible Resurrection of Grief , Octavia Cade [ 11 ] Best Short Story: "Data Migration", Melanie Harding-Shaw [ 11 ] Best Collected Work: Year's Best Aotearoa New Zealand Science Fiction & Fantasy Vol 3 , edited by Marie Hodgkinson [ 11 ] Best Professional Artwork: Laya Rose, for the cover art of Foxhunt [ 11 ] Best Professional Production/Publication: What You Need Right Now is a Nice Soothing Horror Story , Tabatha Wood [ 11 ] 2023 [ edit ] Best Novel: A Rake of His Own , A. J. Lancaster [ 12 ] Best Youth Novel: The Rarkyn's Familiar , Nikky Lee [ 12 ] Best Novella: How to Get a Girlfriend (When You're a Terrifying Monster) , Marie Cardno [ 12 ] Best Novelette: "How to Marry a Winged King", A. J. Lancaster [ 12 ] Best Short Story: "My Nascent Garden", Melanie Harding-Shaw [ 12 ] Best Collected Work: Year's Best Aotearoa New Zealand Science Fiction & Fantasy Volume 4, Emily Brill-Holland [ 12 ] Best Professional Artwork: Rebecca Hawkes for the cover of Year's Best Aotearoa New Zealand Science Fiction & Fantasy Volume 4 [ 12 ] Best Professional Production/Publication: The Black Archive #61 – Paradise Towers , John Toon [ 12 ] Fan award winners since 2002 [ edit ] 2002 Best Fan Writing: Alan Robson Best Fanzine: Phoenixine Best Fan Art: Nick Kim Services to Fandom: Norman Cates and the SFFANZ discussion group 2003 Best Fan Writing: Alan Robson Best Fanzine: Phoenixine Best Fan Art: Grant Preston Services to Fandom: William Geradts and Adele Geradts 2004 Best Fanzine: Phoenixine Services to Fandom: Laurie Fleming 2005 Best Fan Writing: Alan Robson Best Fanzine (tied): Phoenixine and Time Space Visualiser Services to Fandom: Martin Kealey 2006 Best Fan Writing: Alan Robson Best Fanzine: Phoenixine Best Fan Production: King (short film) Services to Fandom: Norman Cates 2007 Best Fan Writing: Alan Robson Services to Fandom: John and Lynelle Howell 2008 Best Fan Writing: Ross Temple Best Fanzine: Phoenixine Best Fan Production: Renaldo, First Sheep on the Moon?

Services to Fandom: Simon Litten 2009 Best Fan Writing: "Disappointment" (article by Alex Lindsay ) Best Fan Production: Chasing the Bard (podcast by Philippa Ballantine ) Best Fan Publication: The Girl Who Asked for Wisdom and Other Stories by Catherine and Stephanie Pegg Services to Fandom: Maree Pavletich 2010 Best Fan Writing: "SJV Watch" and "SFFANZ Reviews" (articles by Simon Litten ) Best Fan Production: Coals To Newcastle (short film by Yvonne Harrison ) Best Fan Publication (tie): Phoenixine by John and Lynelle Howell (editors) and Time Space Visualiser by Adam McGechen (editor) Services to Fandom: David Lee-Smith 2011 Best Fan Writing: "Musings From Under The Mountain" and Novazine contributions by Jacqui Smith Best Fan Production: Doctor Who (podcast by Paul Mannering ) Best Fan Publication: Novazine by Jacqui Smith (editor) Best Fan Artwork: Cover for StarshipSofa 150 by Gino Moretto Services to Fandom: Ross Temple 2012 Best Fan Writing: Various articles for Phoenixine and Novazine by Simon Litten Best Fan Publication: Phoenixine Best Fan Artwork: Various artwork in Phoenixine by Nick Kim Services to Fandom: Jacqui and Keith Smith 2013 Best Fan Writing: "Strange Matter" and occasional essays within Phoenixine by John Toon Best Fan Production: AetherCon Best Fan Publication: Phoenixine Best Fan Artwork: Contributions to Novazine by Keith Smith Services to Fandom: Annette Bergner 2014 Best Fan Writing (tie): Alan Parker "Presidential Address", Novazine ; Lynnelle Howell "Presidential Sweet/DuhVice", Phoenixine Best Fan Production/Publication: Phoenixine , John and Lynelle Howell Best New Talent: Dan Rabarts Services to Fandom: The League of Victorian Imagineers Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror: Helen Lowe 2015 Best Fan Writing: Rebecca Fisher Best Fan Production/Publication: Phoenixine , John and Lynelle Howell Best Fan Artwork: Keith Smith, Novazine Best New Talent: A.J. Fitzwater Services to Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror: Hugh Cook 2016 Best Fan Writing: John Toon, Phoenixine Best Fan Production/Publication: Phoenixine, John and Lynelle Howell Best Fan Artist: Keith Smith Services to Fandom: Glenn Young 2017 Best Fan Writing: Octavia Cade Best Fan Production/ Publication: Summer Star Trek: Mirror, Mirror , Enterprise Entertainment Best Fan Artist: Keith Smith Services to Fandom: Lynelle Howell 2022 Best Fan Writing: Andi C. Buchanan [ 11 ] Best Fan Production/ Publication: Phoenixine , John & Jo Toon [ 11 ] Best Fan Artist: Michelle Kan and Jules (joint winners) [ 11 ] Services to Fandom: Michelle Kan [ 11 ] 2023 Best Fan Writing: Rem Wigmore [ 12 ] Best Fan Production/ Publication: Phoenixine , John & Jo Toon [ 12 ] Best Fan Artist: Leadambeck [ 12 ] Services to Fandom: Matthew Pavletich [ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "Curiosities: Anno Domini 2000; or Woman's Destiny by Julius Vogel" by Lucy Sussex, Fantasy and Science Fiction, December 2008, page 162.

^ "Sir Julius Vogel Awards" .

www.sffanz.org.nz . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ "Sir Julius Vogel Awards" .

www.sffanz.org.nz . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ "Sir Julius Vogel Awards" .

www.sffanz.org.nz . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ "Sir Julius Vogel Awards" .

www.sffanz.org.nz . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ "Sir Julius Vogel Awards" .

www.sffanz.org.nz . Retrieved 30 May 2021 .

^ a b c d e f "NZ Sir Julius Vogel Awards 2020 winners announced" .

Books+Publishing . 3 August 2020 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ a b "Sir Julius Vogel Awards for best New Zealand speculative fiction presented | CoNZealand" . 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ a b c d e "NZ Sir Julius Vogel Awards 2021 winners announced" .

Books+Publishing . 10 August 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2021 .

^ a b "Sir Julius Vogel Award Winners – 2021" .

SFFANZ Inc .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 11 August 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Sir Julius Vogel Award Winners – 2022" .

New Zealand Society of Authors (PEN NZ Inc) | Te Puni Kaituhi O Aotearoa . 14 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "2023 Sir Julius Vogel Awards Winners" .

Locus Online . 5 June 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

External links [ edit ] SFFANZ Vogel Awards page New Zealand Book Council Vogel Awards page Bookawards.co.nz Vogel Awards page Biography of Vogel at the Dictionary of New Zealand Biography v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sir_Julius_Vogel_Award&oldid=1273804597 " Categories : Science fiction awards New Zealand fiction awards New Zealand science fiction New Zealand fantasy Awards established in 1989 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles needing additional references from February 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 03:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sir Julius Vogel Award 1 language Add topic

