Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prokaryotes 2 Eukaryotes 3 Non-cellular entities 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Replicon (genetics) 14 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Кыргызча 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia DNA region replicating from a single origin A replicon is a region of an organism's genome that is independently replicated from a single origin of replication [ citation needed ] . A bacterial chromosome contains a single origin, and therefore the whole bacterial chromosome is a replicon. The chromosomes of archaea and eukaryotes can have multiple origins of replication, and so their chromosomes may consist of several replicons [ citation needed ] . The concept of the replicon was formulated in 1963 by François Jacob , Sydney Brenner , and Jacques Cuzin as a part of their replicon model for replication initiation. According to the replicon model, two components control replication initiation: the replicator and the initiator. The replicator is the entire DNA sequence (including, but not limited to the origin of replication) required to direct the initiation of DNA replication. The initiator is the protein that recognizes the replicator and activates replication initiation.

[ 1 ] Sometimes in bacteriology , the term "replicon" is only used to refer to chromosomes containing a single origin of replication and therefore excludes the genomes of archaea and eukaryotes which can have several origins.

[ 2 ] Prokaryotes [ edit ] For most prokaryotic chromosomes , the replicon is the entire chromosome. One notable exception comes from archaea , where two Sulfolobus species have been shown to contain three replicons. Examples of bacterial species that have been found to possess multiple replicons include Rhodobacter sphaeroides (two), Vibrio cholerae , [ 3 ] and Burkholderia multivorans (three). These "secondary" (or tertiary) chromosomes are often described as molecules that are intermediate between a true chromosome and a plasmid and are sometimes called " chromids ". Various Azospirillum species possess seven replicons; A. lipoferum , for instance, has one bacterial chromosome, five chromids, and one plasmid.

[ 4 ] Plasmids and bacteriophages are usually replicated as single replicons, but large plasmids in Gram-negative bacteria have been shown to carry several replicons.

[ 5 ] Eukaryotes [ edit ] For eukaryotic chromosomes, there are multiple replicons per chromosome.  Known examples range in size from 10 to 330 kilobases . A cluster of replicons replicates simultaneously. But different clusters start replicating at different times during S phase , depending on their location along the chromosomes. In general, clusters nearer the centromere replicate earlier. Fine structure analysis of chromosomal origins of replication is limited to a single model eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Therefore, no general picture of a replicon as replicator and initiator in eukaryotes has been achieved.

In the case of mitochondria , the definition of replicons is somewhat confused, as they use unidirectional replication with two separate origins.

Non-cellular entities [ edit ] Non-cellular entities such as viruses , plasmids , transposons , retrotransposons , viroids , virusoids and RNA satellites are also replicons.

Patrick Forterre of the Pasteur Institute has coined the term "orphan replicon" to refer to those that are not viruses; i.e., that lack a capsid .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] DNA replication Origin of replication Secondary chromosome References [ edit ] ^ Watson JD (2014).

Molecular Biology of the Gene (7 ed.). Boston: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. pp.

288– 289.

ISBN 978-0-321-76243-6 .

OCLC 824087979 .

^ diCenzo GC, Finan TM (September 2017).

"The Divided Bacterial Genome: Structure, Function, and Evolution" .

Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews .

81 (3).

doi : 10.1128/MMBR.00019-17 .

PMC 5584315 .

PMID 28794225 .

^ Tagomori K, Iida T, Honda T (August 2002).

"Comparison of genome structures of vibrios, bacteria possessing two chromosomes" .

Journal of Bacteriology .

184 (16): 4351– 4358.

doi : 10.1128/JB.184.16.4351-4358.2002 .

PMC 135242 .

PMID 12142404 .

^ Wisniewski-Dyé F, Borziak K, Khalsa-Moyers G, Alexandre G, Sukharnikov LO, Wuichet K, et al. (December 2011). Richardson PM (ed.).

"Azospirillum genomes reveal transition of bacteria from aquatic to terrestrial environments" .

PLOS Genetics .

7 (12): e1002430.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002430 .

PMC 3245306 .

PMID 22216014 .

^ Thomas CM (2000-05-01).

Horizontal Gene Pool: Bacterial Plasmids and Gene Spread (1 ed.). CRC Press.

ISBN 9057024624 .

^ Raoult D, Forterre P (April 2008). "Redefining viruses: lessons from Mimivirus".

Nature Reviews. Microbiology .

6 (4): 315– 319.

doi : 10.1038/nrmicro1858 .

PMID 18311164 .

S2CID 24447407 .

v t e DNA replication (comparing prokaryotic to eukaryotic ) Initiation Prokaryotic ( initiation ) Pre-replication complex dnaC Helicase dnaA dnaB T7 Primase dnaG Eukaryotic ( preparation in G1 phase ) Pre-replication complex Origin recognition complex ORC1 ORC2 ORC3 ORC4 ORC5 ORC6 Cdc6 Cdt1 Minichromosome maintenance MCM2 MCM3 MCM4 MCM5 MCM6 MCM7 Licensing factor Autonomously replicating sequence Single-strand binding protein SSBP2 SSBP3 SSBP4 RNase H RNASEH1 RNASEH2A Helicase : HFM1 Primase : PRIM1 PRIM2 Both Origin of replication / Ori / Replicon Replication fork Lagging and leading strands Okazaki fragments Primer Replication Prokaryotic ( elongation ) DNA polymerase III holoenzyme dnaC dnaE dnaH dnaN dnaQ dnaT dnaX holA holB holC holD holE Replisome DNA ligase DNA clamp Topoisomerase DNA gyrase Prokaryotic DNA polymerase : DNA polymerase I Klenow fragment Eukaryotic ( synthesis in S phase ) Replication factor C RFC1 Flap endonuclease FEN1 Topoisomerase Replication protein A RPA1 Eukaryotic DNA polymerase : alpha POLA1 POLA2 PRIM1 PRIM2 delta POLD1 POLD2 POLD3 POLD4 epsilon POLE POLE2 POLE3 POLE4 DNA clamp PCNA Control of chromosome duplication Both Movement: Processivity DNA ligase Termination Telomere : Telomerase TERT TERC DKC1 v t e Self-replicating organic structures Cellular life Bacteria Archaea Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae Protista Incertae sedis Parakaryon Biological dark matter Virus dsDNA virus Giant virus ssDNA virus dsRNA virus (+)ssRNA virus (−)ssRNA virus ssRNA-RT virus dsDNA-RT virus Subviral agents Viroid Pospiviroidae Avsunviroidae Helper-virus dependent Satellite ssRNA satellite virus dsDNA satellite virus ( Virophage ) ssDNA satellite virus ssDNA satellite dsRNA satellite ssRNA satellite ( Virusoid ) Satellite-like nucleic acids RNA DNA Other Defective interfering particle RNA DNA Prion Mammalian prion Fungal prion Nucleic acid self-replication Mobile genetic elements Mobilome Horizontal gene transfer Genomic island Transposable element Class I or retrotransposon Class II or DNA transposon Plasmid Fertility Resistance Col Degradative Virulence / Ti Cryptic Cosmid Fosmid Phagemid Group I intron Group II intron Retrozyme Other aspects DNA replication RNA replication Chromosome Linear Circular Extrachromosomal DNA Secondary chromosome Genome Gene Gene duplication Non-coding DNA Origin of replication Replicon Endogenous viral element Provirus Prophage Endogenous retrovirus Transpoviron Repeated sequences in DNA Tandem repeat Interspersed repeat Endosymbiosis Mitochondrion Mitosome Hydrogenosome Plastid Chloroplast Chromoplast Gerontoplast Leucoplast Apicoplast Kappa organism Organs Bacteriome Trophosome Nitroplast Abiogenesis Last universal common ancestor Earliest known life forms ?

RNA life Ribozyme † Protocell Coacervate Proteinoid Sulphobe Research Model lipid bilayer Jeewanu See also Organism Cell Cell division Artificial cell Non-cellular life Synthetic virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus ?

Nanobacterium ?

Nanobe Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Virome This genetics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Replicon_(genetics)&oldid=1301190251 " Categories : DNA replication Genetics stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 All stub articles This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Replicon (genetics) 14 languages Add topic

