Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 The case of two battlefields 3 Application 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Blotto game 8 languages Español فارسی Français עברית Русский Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Resource distribution game A Colonel Blotto game is a type of two-person constant-sum game in which the players (officers) are tasked to simultaneously distribute limited resources over several objects (battlefields). In the classic version of the game, the player devoting the most resources to a battlefield wins that battlefield, and the gain (or payoff) is equal to the total number of battlefields won.

The game was first proposed by Émile Borel [ 1 ] in 1921. In 1938 Borel and Ville published a particular optimal strategy (the "disk" solution).

[ 2 ] The game was studied after the Second World War by scholars in Operation Research, and became a classic in game theory .

[ 3 ] Gross and Wagner's 1950 [ 4 ] research memorandum states Borel's optimal strategy, and coined the fictitious Colonel Blotto and Enemy names. For three battlefields or more, the space of pure strategies is multi-dimensional (two dimensions for three battlefields) and a mixed strategy is thus a probability distribution over a continuous set. The game is a rare example of a non trivial game of that kind where optimal strategies can be explicitly found.

In addition to military strategy applications, the Colonel Blotto game has applications to political strategy (resource allocations across political battlefields), network defense, R&D patent races, and strategic hiring decisions. Consider two sports teams with must spend budget caps (or two Economics departments with use-or-lose grants) are pursuing the same set of candidates, and must decide between many modest offers or aggressive pursuit of a subset of candidates.

Example [ edit ] As an example Blotto game, consider the game in which two players each write down three positive integers in non-decreasing order and such that they add up to a pre-specified number S. Subsequently, the two players show each other their writings, and compare corresponding numbers. The player who has two numbers higher than the corresponding ones of the opponent wins the game.

For S = 6 only three choices of numbers are possible: (2, 2, 2), (1, 2, 3) and (1, 1, 4). It is easy to see that: Any triplet against itself is a draw (1, 1, 4) against (1, 2, 3) is a draw (1, 2, 3) against (2, 2, 2) is a draw (2, 2, 2) beats (1, 1, 4) It follows that the optimum strategy is (2, 2, 2) as it does not do worse than breaking even against any other strategy while beating one other strategy. There are however several Nash equilibria. If both players choose the strategy (2, 2, 2) or (1, 2, 3), then none of them can beat the other one by changing strategies, so every such strategy pair is a Nash equilibrium .

For larger S the game becomes progressively more difficult to analyze. For S = 12, it can be shown that (2, 4, 6) represents the optimal strategy, while for S > 12, deterministic strategies fail to be optimal. For S = 13, choosing (3, 5, 5), (3, 3, 7) and (1, 5, 7) with probability 1/3 each can be shown to be the optimal probabilistic strategy.

Borel's game is similar to the above example for very large S, but the players are not limited to round integers. They thus have an infinite number of available pure strategies, indeed a continuum.

This concept is also implemented in a story of Sun Bin ( 田忌赛马 ) when watching a chariot race with three different races running concurrently. In the races each party had the option to have one chariot team in each race, and each chose to use a strategy of 1, 2, 3 (with 3 being the fastest chariot and 1 being the slowest) to deploy their chariots between the three races creating close wins in each race and few sure outcomes on the winners. When asked how to win Sun Bin advised the chariot owner to change his deployment to that of 2, 3, 1. Though he would be sure to lose the race against the fastest chariots (the 3 chariots); he would win each of the other races, with his 3 chariot easily beating the 2 chariots and his 2 chariot beating the 1 chariots.

The case of two battlefields [ edit ] In the simpler case of two battlefields, Macdonell and Mastronardi 2015 provide the first complete characterization of all Nash equilibria to the canonical simplest version of the Colonel Blotto game. This solution, which includes a graphical algorithm for characterizing all the Nash equilibrium strategies, includes previously unidentified Nash equilibrium strategies as well as helps identify what behaviors should never be expected by rational players. Nash equilibrium strategies in this version of the game are a set of bivariate probability distributions: distributions over a set of possible resource allocations for each player, often referred to as Mixed Nash Equilibria (such as can be found in Paper-Rock-Scissors or Matching Pennies as much simpler examples).

Macdonell and Mastronardi 2015 solution, proof, and graphical algorithm for identifying Nash equilibria strategies also pertains to generalized versions of the game such as when Colonel Blotto have differing valuations of the battlefields, when their resources have differing effectiveness on the two battlefields (e.g. one battlefield includes a water landing and Colonel Blotto's resources are Marines instead of Soldiers), and provides insights into versions of the game with three or more battlefields.

Consider two players (Colonel Blotto and Enemy), two battlefields both of equal value, both players know each other's total level of resources prior to allocation, and they then must make a simultaneous allocation decision. It is often assumed Colonel Blotto is the more-resourced officer (his level of resource can be defined to be 1), and Enemy has a fraction of resources less than 1. The Nash equilibrium allocation strategies and payoffs depend on that resource level relationship.

Application [ edit ] This game is commonly used as a metaphor for electoral competition, with two political parties devoting money or resources to attract the support of a fixed number of voters.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Each voter is a "battlefield" that can be won by one or the other party. The same game also finds application in auction theory where bidders must make simultaneous bids.

[ 7 ] Several variations on the original game have been solved by Jean-François Laslier , [ 8 ] Brian Roberson, [ 9 ] and Dmitriy Kvasov.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Goofspiel References [ edit ] ^ The Theory of Play and Integral Equations with Skew Symmetric Kernels (1953 translation from the French paper " La théorie du jeu et les équations intégrales à noyau symétrique gauche ") ^ Emile Borel and Jean Ville.

Application de la théorie des probabilités aux jeux de hasard . Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1938. Reprinted in:  by E.Borel and A. Chéron Théorie mathématique du bridge à la portée de tous , Editions Jacques Gabay, Paris, 1991.

^ Guillermo Owen, Game Theory, Academic Press (1968) ^ A Continuous Colonel Blotto Game ^ R. Myerson "Incentives to cultivate favored minorities under
alternative electoral systems" American Political Science Review 87(4):856—869, 1993 ^ Laslier, J.-F.; Picard, N. (2002). "Distributive politics and electoral competition".

Journal of Economic Theory .

103 : 106– 130.

doi : 10.1006/jeth.2000.2775 .

^ Szentes, B.; Rosenthal, R. (2003). "Three-object, Two-Bidder Simultaneous Auctions: Chopsticks and Tetrahedra".

Games and Economic Behavior .

44 : 114– 133.

doi : 10.1016/s0899-8256(02)00530-4 .

^ J.-F. Laslier, "Party objectives in the `divide a dollar’ electoral competition" in: Social Choice and Strategic Decisions, Essays in Honor of Jeff Banks, edited by D. Austen–Smith and J. Duggan, Springer, pp. 113–130 (2005) ^ B. Roberson, The Colonel Blotto game ^ Kvasov, D. (2007). "Contests with Limited Resources".

Journal of Economic Theory .

136 : 738– 748.

doi : 10.1016/j.jet.2006.06.007 .

External links [ edit ] Colonel Blotto's Top secret Files: Multi-Dimensional Iterative Reasoning in Action by Ayala Arad and Ariel Rubinstein Jonathan Partington 's Colonel Blotto page v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blotto_game&oldid=1240915192 " Category : Non-cooperative games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2024, at 06:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blotto game 8 languages Add topic

