Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Area 2 Energy, etc.

3 Length 4 Luminosity 5 Mass or weight 6 Temperature 7 Volume (dry or liquid) 8 Other 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 By geography 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents List of obsolete units of measurement 2 languages Čeština 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a list of obsolete units of measurement , organized by type. These units of measurement are typically no longer used, though some may be in limited use in various regions. For units of measurement that are unusual but not necessarily obsolete, see List of unusual units of measurement . For units of measurement that are humorous in nature, see List of humorous units of measurement .

Area [ edit ] An overview of farm -derived units of measurement. Several of these are obsolete: the oxgang , the virgate , and the carucate .

Antsingae – a unit of area , smaller than the bunarium.

[ 1 ] Bunarium (plural "bunaria") – a unit of area, equal to about 120 ares or 12,000 square metres [ 1 ] Carucate Cawnie Decimal Dessiatin Ground Hide Juchart Jugerum Katha Lessa or Lecha [ 2 ] Marabba Morgen Oxgang Pari – a unit of area equal to about 1 hectare Quinaria Tathe Virgate Energy, etc.

[ edit ] Poncelet –  unit of power Sthène –  unit of force Length [ edit ] Ald Alen Aṅgula Arabic mile Arş and Arşın – two Turkish units of length Bamboo – also known as the Burmese league Barleycorn – one-third of an inch .

Cana – a unit of length used in the former Crown of Aragon , at least in Catalonia. It is around the same value as the vara of Aragon, Spain, and Portugal.

[ 3 ] Cubit [ 4 ] Ell Girah Guz Hat'h Jow Lachter – a unit of length once used in the mining industry in most of Europe. It was usually used to measure depth, tunnel driving and the size of mining fields; it was also used for contract work. In mining in the German-speaking countries, it was the primary unit of length.

Ligne – a French unit of length, roughly equal to 2.25 mm (0.089 in), or 9 points Line Macedonian cubit Pace Palm Parasang Pes Pyramid inch – a unit of length, believed to be equal to 1 ⁄ 25 of the cubit Rod Sana lamjel Spat – a unit of length equal to 1,000,000,000 km (620,000,000 mi) Stadion Step Unglie Vara – an Aragonese , Spanish , and Portuguese unit [ 3 ] Yojana – a Vedic measure of distance used in ancient India . Its value was about 10 km (6.2 mi), although the exact value is disputed among scholars (between 8 and 13 km or 5 and 8 mi) Luminosity [ edit ] A Hefner lamp ( German : Hefnerkerze ) Carcel burner – an efficient lighting device used in the nineteenth century for domestic purposes and in France as the standard measure for illumination Carcel Hefner candle Violle Mass or weight [ edit ] Abucco – in Bago, Myanmar , this was a unit of mass used for gold and silver . It was approximately 196.44 grams or 6.316 troy ounces .

[ 5 ] Arroba – an Iberian unit of weight, equivalent to 11.5 kilograms [ 6 ] Buddam Candy Corgee – an obsolete unit of mass equal to 212 moodahs, or rush mat bundles of rice. The unit was used in the Canara (now Kanara ) region of Karnataka in India .

Cullingey Dharni Dirham Duella Dutch cask – a British unit of mass, used for butter and cheese . Equal to 112 lb (51 kg).

Esterling Faggot – has multiple meanings in metrology . As relevant to this article, it was a unit of mass, being 120 lb (54 kg).

Grzywna Keel – a UK unit of mass for coal , equaling 21,540.19446656 kg (47,488.0000000 lb) [ 7 ] : 48 Large sack – a unit of mass equal to 2 (new) sacks Long ton Lot Mark Munjandie Oka Pao Passeree – a unit of mass equal to about 4.6 kg (10.1412640605 lb) Pennyweight Pood Roll – a U.K. unit of mass for butter and cheese [ 7 ] : 46 equal to 24 oz (680 g) [ 7 ] : 52 Room – a U.K. unit of mass of coal equivalent to 15,680 lb (7,110 kg) [ 7 ] : 52 Sarpler Ship load Slug Talent – a unit of mass in the tens of kg Tank Tod Truss – a unit of mass used to describe tight bundle of hay or straw . It would usually be cuboid , for storage or shipping, and would either be harvested into such bundles or cut from a large rick.

Whey – a unit of mass used for butter and cheese Zentner Zolotnik Temperature [ edit ] Delisle scale Leiden scale Newton scale – a temperature scale devised by Isaac Newton in 1701.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Réaumur scale Rømer scale Wedgwood scale Volume (dry or liquid) [ edit ] Glass milk bottles from 1950s Quebec. From largest to smallest, they are a pinte (quart), a chopine (pint), and a demiard (half-pint).

[ 11 ] The latter was used for cream.

Acetabulum Adowlie Amphora Aum Belshazzar Botella − Spanish for "bottle", which has been given various standard capacities at different times and places, and for different fluids.

[ 12 ] Often-cited figures include 0.95 liters in Cuba (1796), 0.75 liters in Cuba (1862) and 0.7 liters in Colombia (1957).

[ 13 ] Bucket Butt Chungah Congius Coomb Cord-foot –  a U.S. unit of volume for stacked firewood with the symbol cd-ft equal to 16 cu ft (0.45 m 3 ) [ 7 ] : 52 Cotyla Cran Cullishigay Deal – a former U.K.

and U.S.

unit of volume for stacked firewood.

[ 7 ] A U.K. deal equaled 7 ft × 6 ft × 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 in, while a U.S. deal equaled 12 ft × 11 in × 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 in.

[ 7 ] Demiard – an old French unit of volume . When France metricated , it survived in Louisiana and Quebec . The demiard eventually became associated with the American and British half-pint rather than French units.

[ 7 ] Firlot Hekat Hogshead Homer House cord – a former U.S. unit of volume for stacked firewood [ 7 ] Kile Koku Lambda – an uncommon metric unit of volume discontinued with the introduction of the SI London quarter Lump of butter – used in the U.S. up to and possibly after of the American Revolution . It equaled "one well rounded tablespoon".

[ 14 ] Masu Metretes Octave Omer Pau Peck – the name of two different units of volume, one imperial and one U.S. Both equaled about 9 litres.

Puddee Salt spoon – used in the U.S., up to and possibly after of the American Revolution. Four salt spoons equaled one teaspoon.

[ 14 ] Seah Ser Shipping ton – a unit of volume defined as 50 cu ft (1.4 m 3 ) Stuck Wineglass – used in the U.S., up to and possibly after of the American Revolution. One wineglass equaled 1 ⁄ 4 cup.

[ 14 ] Other [ edit ] Apothecaries' system Atom (time) – a hypothetical unit of time used in the Middle Ages Bahar – a unit of length in Iran , and was a unit of mass in Oman Batman – mostly a unit of mass, but sometimes a unit of area Bounce - a measure of users who view a webpage and leave immediately Demal – unit of concentration Dimi (metric prefix) – a discontinued non- SI metric prefix for 10 −4 [ 7 ] Einstein – unit of energy, and a unit of amount of substance Fanega – a unit of dry volume, and a unit of area Fresnel – a unit of frequency Garce – a unit of dry volume in India, and a unit of mass in Sri Lanka Hobbit – a unit of volume, or, more rarely, of weight Kula – a unit of area in India, and mass in Morocco Last – a unit of mass or volume League – usually a unit of length, but sometimes a unit of area Mache Mesures usuelles Perch – most commonly a unit of area, but sometimes a unit of length or volume Pièze – a unit of pressure Quibi – a unit of time equal to 10 minutes. First used in Quibi's own Super Bowl LIII advertising campaign, this word saw small amounts of ironic adoption.

Rood – a unit of area or length Sack – originally a medieval unit of mass, equal to 26 stone (364 pounds, or about 165 kg). Since a unit of dry volume , equal to 24 imperial gallons (about 109 liters).

Schoenus – a unit of area or length Scrupulum – a unit of area, mass, or time Seam – a unit of mass or volume Seer – a unit of mass or volume Toise – a unit of area, length, or volume Tub – usually a unit of mass, but sometimes a unit of volume Uncia – an ancient Roman unit of length, mass, or volume Wey – a unit of mass or volume Winchester measure – a system of volume measurement See also [ edit ] Main article: Outline of metrology and measurement Dimensional metrology Forensic metrology Smart Metrology Time metrology Quantum metrology Hair's breadth Hindu units of time History of measurement List of humorous units of measurement List of scientific units named after people List of unusual units of measurement Medieval weights and measures Muggeseggele System of measurement By geography [ edit ] Ancient Arabic units of measurement Ancient Egyptian units of measurement Ancient Greek units of measurement Ancient Mesopotamian units of measurement Ancient Roman units of measurement Danish units of measurement Obsolete Finnish units of measurement Obsolete German units of measurement History of measurement systems in India Japanese units of measurement List of customary units of measurement in South Asia Maltese units of measurement Obsolete Polish units of measurement Obsolete Russian units of measurement Obsolete Scottish units of measurement Obsolete Tatar units of measurement Old Cornish units of measurement Old Irish units of measurement Ottoman units of measurement Persian units of measurement Portuguese customary units Roman timekeeping Spanish customary units Tamil units of measurement References [ edit ] ^ a b Herlihy, David (2009).

Medieval Households . Harvard University Press. p. 69.

ISBN 9780674038608 .

^ Lessa or Lecha Unit Converter ^ a b Gilbert, E.W.; Beckinsale, R.P. (1944).

Spain & Portugal: Spain . Its Geographical handbook series. Naval Intelligence Division.

^ Hoong, Tho Lai; Yi, Tho Mun (2008).

Interactive Science For Inquiring Minds Volume A . Panpac Education Pte Ltd. p. 33.

ISBN 978-9812716187 .

^ Kisch, Bruno (1965).

Scales and Weights . Original from the University of California: Yale University Press. p. 237.

^ William Parry, Louis Albert Fischer, State and National Laws Concerning the Weights and Measures of the United States United States National Bureau of Standards, 1912 p. 414 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Cardarelli, François (2003).

Encyclopaedia of Scientific Units, Weights and Measures. Their SI Equivalences and Origins . London: Springer. p.

17 .

ISBN 978-1-4471-1122-1 .

^ Published anonymously as "Scala graduum Caloris. Calorum Descriptiones & signa." in Philosophical Transactions . 1701. pp.

824– 829.

^ Nichols, Joannes, ed. (1782).

Isaaci Newtoni Opera quae exstant omnia . Vol. 4. pp.

403– 407.

^ Silverman, Mark P. (2002), A Universe of Atoms , Springer, p. 49, ISBN 9780387954370 ^ Trudel, Marcel, Introduction to New France , p. 222 ^ sizes.com lists figures for bottles in Bolivia from 460 ml to 1 liter.

^ McCusker, John (2005).

Essays in the Economic History of the Atlantic World . Routledge. p. 63.

ISBN 1134703406 .

^ a b c Pelton, Robert W.; Pelton, W. Pelton (2004).

Baking Recipes of Our Founding Fathers . Infinity Publishing. pp.

263– 264.

ISBN 0741419440 .

Further reading [ edit ] Encyclopaedia of Historical Metrology, Weights, and Measures ; Jan Gyllenbok; Birkhäuser; 2018; 3 Volumes.

Historical Metrology: A New Analysis of the Archaeological and the Historical Evidence Relating to Weights and Measures ; Algernon Berriman; Praeger; 1970; ISBN 978-0837124247 .

v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_obsolete_units_of_measurement&oldid=1291172696 " Categories : Obsolete units of measurement Lists of units of measurement Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 14:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of obsolete units of measurement 2 languages Add topic

