Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Thought disorder 1.2 Emotional dysregulation 1.3 Sensorimotor and autonomic functioning 1.4 Anxiety 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia 4 languages العربية Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical condition Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Specialty Psychiatry Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia is a postulated mental disorder categorized by the presence of two or more symptoms of mental illness such as anxiety , hysteria , and phobic or obsessive-compulsive neuroses . It is often acknowledged as a personality disorder .

[ 1 ] Patients generally display salient anxiety symptoms that disguise an underlying psychotic disorder.

[ citation needed ] In the 1940s, psychiatrists Paul Hoch and Philip Polatin created the term pseudoneurotic schizophrenia. This mental illness, however, is no longer acknowledged as a clinical entity.

[ 2 ] In 1972 it went on to be called borderline personality disorder , a term coined by Otto Friedmann Kernberg , which referred to an expansive range of issues.

[ 3 ] Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia is in the Russian adapted version of the ICD-10 (code F21.3).

[ 4 ] It is also in ICD-10 listed as a schizotypal disorder .

[ 5 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] The diagnosis of pseudoneurotic schizophrenia can be made with clinical observation and by various psychiatrical exams by a mental health professional and by the patient's explanation of his or her experiences. A patient must identify with at least two of these symptoms in order to be distinguished as a pseudoneurotic schizophrenic. The intensity of a symptom may vary with the individual patient's severity of the disorder. The symptoms are organized into disorders of thinking and association, disorders of emotional regulation, disorders of sensorimotor and autonomic functioning, pan-anxiety, pan-neurosis, and pansexuality. The two symptoms can fall under any of these categories.

Thought disorder [ edit ] A continuous, purposive thought cannot be carried. Thoughts that are somewhat similar appear to be the same.

[ 6 ] Ability to form and understand concepts is weak. New ideas cannot easily be merged with old concepts. Separate experiences are cultivated as separate concepts despite the fact that combining them would be more natural.

Fantasy life and real life cannot be distinguished. Real occurrences seem to have been imagined and fantasy thoughts seem to have actually happened.

[ 6 ] Cognizance and concentration is lacking.

Common instances of urged thought occur.

Thought blocking , which is the opposite of the previous symptom, has also been reported to be a symptom of pseudoneurotic schizophrenia.

Disturbances of awareness, attention, anticipation and concentration occur. Unpleasant behavior is not recognized. The idea that one can have effects on others is perplexed.

[ 6 ] Self-perception is altered.

Anachronism Emotional dysregulation [ edit ] Anxiety is provoked with acute ease. An anxiety episode can be stimulated by any change in the patient's activity or location. Anything unfamiliar, an experience or a person, can cause anxiety.

Several different emotions are expressed simultaneously or in speedy succession. Display of emotions is modulated and unpredictable.

[ 6 ] Patient is apathetic towards commencing, maintaining, and stopping an emotional response.

Anger is difficult to deal with. Feelings of fear, anger, and guilt are expressed inappropriately and responses are either very volatile or inert.

Needs are strongly craved, but are bitterly rejected when offered. Provocation is sought and avoided at the same time.

Anhedonia Patient pays either very little or excessive attention to friendly interactions from others.

In attempt to feel emotion, patient will make a farce of regular demeanor. In doing so, patient may take advantage of others socially, sexually, and intellectually.

Rejection of emotional feelings takes place because feelings are seen as proof of weakness.

Patient craves instant satisfaction of all desires and expects immediate fulfillment.

Sensorimotor and autonomic functioning [ edit ] Sensory perception is flawed, distorting the way the patient sees himself/herself.

Patient has extreme difficulty choosing and keeping up with consistent and appropriate reactions in social situations. Emotional reactions appear to be either overdramatic or played down.

Irregular amount of energy is shown. Patient lacks or has too much energy at inappropriate times.

[ 6 ] Anxiety [ edit ] Diffuse anxiety is stimulated by a minor catalyst and may persist long after the catalyst disappears.

Pan-Neurosis is the existence of multiple neurotic symptoms such as: obsessions compulsions phobias hysteria depression hypochondriasis depersonalization References [ edit ] ^ "pseudoneurotic schizophrenia" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 2015-11-09 .

^ Connor, Karen O.; Nelson, Barnaby; Walterfang, Mark; Velakoulis, Dennis; Thompson, Andrew (1 September 2009). "Pseudoneurotic Schizophrenia Revisited".

Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry .

43 (9): 873– 876.

doi : 10.1080/00048670903107658 .

PMID 19670061 .

S2CID 11662766 .

^ "Pseudo-neurotic Schizophrenia | Psycho-Babble" .

www.dr-bob.org . Retrieved 2015-11-09 .

^ "ICD-10. Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders (F20—F29)" (in Russian) . Retrieved 26 November 2016 .

^ "ICD-10 Version:2016" .

icd.who.int . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

^ a b c d e Hoch, Paul H.; Cattell, James P. (1 March 1959). "The diagnosis of pseudoneurotic schizophrenia".

Psychiatric Quarterly .

33 (1): 17– 43.

doi : 10.1007/BF01659427 .

PMID 14402173 .

S2CID 9292039 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : F21 ICD - 9-CM : 301.22 MeSH : D012569 External resources MedlinePlus : 001525 v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudoneurotic_schizophrenia&oldid=1230337440 " Categories : Schizophrenia Psychosis Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 This page was last edited on 22 June 2024, at 04:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia 4 languages Add topic

