Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Number and names 3 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 3.1 Children 3.2 Against the Sirens 4 Cult 5 Emblems 6 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 6.1 In society 6.2 In literature 6.3 In cults and modern museums 6.4 Places named after the Muses 7 Modern use in the arts 8 Gallery 9 Genealogy 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Muses 85 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts For the band, see Muse (band) .

For human muses, see Muse (person) and Category:Muses (persons) .

"Muse" redirects here. For other uses, see Muse (disambiguation) .

Muse, perhaps Clio , reading a scroll (Attic red-figure lekythos , Boeotia , c.

430 BC ) In ancient Greek religion and mythology , the Muses ( Ancient Greek : Μοῦσαι , romanized : Moûsai , Greek : Μούσες , romanized : Múses ) were the inspirational goddesses of literature , science , and the arts . They were considered the source of the knowledge embodied in the poetry , lyric songs , and myths that were related orally for centuries in ancient Greek culture.

The number and names of the Muses differed by region, but from the Classical period the number of Muses was standardized to nine, and their names were generally given as Calliope , Clio , Polyhymnia , Euterpe , Terpsichore , Erato , Melpomene , Thalia , and Urania .

[ 1 ] In modern figurative usage, a muse is a person who serves as someone's source of artistic inspiration .

Etymology [ edit ] Print of Clio, made in the 16th–17th century. Preserved in the Ghent University Library .

[ 2 ] The word Muses ( Ancient Greek : Μοῦσαι , romanized : Moûsai ) perhaps came from the o-grade of the Proto-Indo-European root * men- (the basic meaning of which is 'put in mind' in verb formations with transitive function and 'have in mind' in those with intransitive function), [ 3 ] or from root * men- ('to tower, mountain') since all the most important cult-centres of the Muses were on mountains or hills.

[ 4 ] R. S. P. Beekes rejects the latter etymology and suggests that a Pre-Greek origin is also possible.

[ 5 ] Number and names [ edit ] Gustave Moreau : Hesiod and the Muse (1891)— Musée d'Orsay , Paris Apollo and the Muses on Mount Parnassus , c. 1650, by Johann Christoph Storer. Held at National Gallery of Art The earliest known records of the Muses come from Boeotia (Boeotian muses). Some ancient authorities regarded the Muses as of Thracian origin.

[ 6 ] In Thrace, a tradition of three original Muses persisted.

[ 7 ] In the first century BC, Diodorus Siculus cited Homer and Hesiod to the contrary, observing: Writers similarly disagree also concerning the number of the Muses; for some say that there are three, and others that there are nine, but the number nine has prevailed since it rests upon the authority of the most distinguished men, such as Homer and Hesiod and others like them.

[ 8 ] Diodorus states (Book I.18) that Osiris first recruited the nine Muses, along with the satyrs , while passing through Aethiopia , before embarking on a tour of all Asia and Europe, teaching the arts of cultivation wherever he went.

According to Hesiod's account ( c.

700 BC ), generally followed by the writers of antiquity, the Nine Muses were the nine daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne (i.e., "Memory" personified), figuring as personifications of knowledge and the arts, especially poetry, literature, dance and music.

The Roman scholar Varro (116–27 BC) relates that there are only three Muses: one born from the movement of water, another who makes sound by striking the air, and a third who is embodied only in the human voice. They were called Melete or "Practice", Mneme or "Memory" and Aoide or "Song".

[ citation needed ] The Quaestiones Convivales of Plutarch (46–120 AD) also report three ancient Muses (9.I4.2–4).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] However, the classical understanding of the Muses tripled their triad and established a set of nine goddesses, who embody the arts and inspire creation with their graces through remembered and improvised song and mime, writing, traditional music, and dance. It was not until Hellenistic times that the following systematic set of functions became associated with them, and even then some variation persisted both in their names and in their attributes: Mosaic with symbols of each Muse and Mnemosyne, 1st century BC, Archaeological Museum of Ancient Elis .

Calliope ( epic poetry ) Clio (history) Polyhymnia ( hymn and mime) Euterpe (flute) Terpsichore (chorus and dance) Erato (lyric choral poetry) Melpomene (tragedy) Thalia (light verse and comedy) Urania (astronomy, astrology, and space) [ 11 ] The nine Muses on a Roman sarcophagus (second century AD)— Louvre , Paris According to Pausanias , who wrote in the later second century AD, there were originally three Muses, worshipped on Mount Helicon in Boeotia : Aoide ('song' or 'tune'), Melete ('practice' or 'occasion'), and Mneme ('memory').

[ 12 ] Together, these three form the complete picture of the preconditions of poetic art in cult practice .

In Delphi too three Muses were worshipped, but with other names: Nete , Mese , and Hypate , which are assigned as the names of the three chords of the ancient musical instrument, the lyre .

[ 13 ] Alternatively, later they were called Cephisso , Apollonis , and Borysthenis - names which characterize them as daughters of Apollo .

[ 14 ] A later tradition recognized a set of four Muses: Thelxinoë , Aoide , Archē , and Melete , said to be daughters of Zeus and Plusia or of Ouranos .

[ 15 ] One of the people frequently associated with the Muses was Pierus . By some he was called the father (by a Pimpleian nymph, called Antiope by Cicero ) of a total of seven Muses, called Neilṓ ( Νειλώ ), Tritṓnē ( Τριτώνη ), Asōpṓ ( Ἀσωπώ ), Heptápora ( Ἑπτάπορα ), Achelōís, Tipoplṓ ( Τιποπλώ ), and Rhodía ( Ῥοδία ).

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Mythology [ edit ] Thalia , Muse of comedy, holding a comic mask (detail from the "Muses Sarcophagus") Apollo and the Muses on Mount Helicon (1680) by Claude Lorrain According to Hesiod 's Theogony (seventh century BC), they were daughters of Zeus , king of the gods, and Mnemosyne , Titan goddess of memory. Hesiod in Theogony narrates that the Muses brought to people forgetfulness, that is, the forgetfulness of pain and the cessation of obligations.

[ 18 ] For Alcman and Mimnermus , they were even more primordial , springing from the early deities Ouranos and Gaia . Gaia is Mother Earth , an early mother goddess who was worshipped at Delphi from prehistoric times, long before the site was rededicated to Apollo, possibly indicating a transfer to association with him after that time.

Sometimes the Muses are referred to as water nymphs , associated with the springs of Helicon and with Pieris . It was said that the winged horse Pegasus touched his hooves to the ground on Helicon, causing four sacred springs to burst forth, from which the Muses, also known as pegasides , were born.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Athena later tamed the horse and presented him to the Muses (compare the Roman inspiring nymphs of springs, the Camenae , the Völva of Norse mythology and also the apsaras in the mythology of classical India ).

Classical writers set Apollo as their leader, Apollon Mousēgetēs ('Apollo Muse-leader').

[ 21 ] In one myth, the Muses judged a contest between Apollo and Marsyas . They also gathered the pieces of the dead body of Orpheus , son of Calliope , and buried them in Leivithra . In a later myth, Thamyris challenged them to a singing contest. They won and punished Thamyris by blinding him and robbing him of his singing ability.

According to a myth from Ovid 's Metamorphoses —alluding to the connection of Pieria with the Muses— Pierus , king of Macedon , had nine daughters he named after the nine Muses, believing that their skills were a great match to the Muses. He thus challenged the Muses to a match, resulting in his daughters, the Pierides , being turned into chattering magpies for their presumption.

[ 22 ] Pausanias records a tradition of two generations of Muses; the first are the daughters of Ouranos and Gaia, the second of Zeus and Mnemosyne . Another, rarer genealogy is that they are daughters of Harmonia (the daughter of Aphrodite and Ares ), which contradicts the myth in which they were dancing at the wedding of Harmonia and Cadmus .

Children [ edit ] Calliope had two sons, Ialemus and Orpheus , with Apollo . In another version of the story, the father of Orpheus was Oeagrus , but Apollo adopted him and taught him the skill of lyre while Calliope trained him in singing.

Linus was said [ 23 ] to have been the son of Apollo and one of the Muses, either Calliope or Terpsichore or Urania.

Rhesus was the son of Strymon and Calliope or Euterpe.

The sirens were the children of Achelous and Melpomene or Terpsichore. Kleopheme was the daughter of Erato and Malos.

Hyacinth was the son of Clio, according to an unpopular account.

[ 24 ] Hymenaeus was assigned as Apollo's son by one of the muses, either Calliope, or Clio, or Terpsichore, or Urania.

Corybantes were the children of Thalia and Apollo.

[ 25 ] Against the Sirens [ edit ] In the sanctuary of Hera in Coroneia was a statue created by Pythodorus of Thebes, depicting Hera holding the sirens. According to the myth, Hera persuaded the sirens to challenge the Muses to a singing contest. After the Muses won, they are said to have plucked the sirens' feathers and used them to make crowns for themselves.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] According to Stephanus of Byzantium , the sirens, overwhelmed by their loss, cast off their feathers from their shoulders, turned white and then threw themselves into the sea. As a result, the nearby city was named Aptera ("featherless") and the nearby islands were called the Leukai ("the white ones").

[ 28 ] John Tzetzes recounts that after defeating the sirens, the Muses crowned themselves with the sirens' wings, except for Terpsichore who was their mother, adding that the city of Aptera named after this event.

[ 29 ] Furthermore, in one of his letters, Julian the Emperor mentions the Muses' victory over the sirens.

[ 30 ] Cult [ edit ] The Muses had several temples and shrines in ancient Greece, their two main cult centres being Mount Helikon in Boiotia, which holds the Valley of the Muses , and Pieria in Makedonia.

Strabo wrote: "Helikon, not far distant from Parnassos, rivals it both in height and in circuit; for both are rocky and covered with snow, and their circuit comprises no large extent of territory. Here are the temple of the Mousai and Hippukrene and the cave of the Nymphai called the Leibethrides; and from this fact one might infer that those who consecrated Helikon to the Mousai were Thrakians, the same who dedicated Pieris and Leibethron and Pimpleia [in Pieria] to the same goddesses. The Thrakians used to be called Pieres, but, now that they have disappeared, the Makedonians hold these places." [ 31 ] The cult of the Muses was also commonly connected to that of Apollo.

Emblems [ edit ] Polyhymnia , the Muse of sacred poetry , sacred hymn and eloquence as well as agriculture and pantomime .

The following table lists the Classical names and attributes of the standard list of the nine Muses, [ 32 ] as well as their various associated symbols: Muse Attribute Symbols Calliope Epic poetry Writing tablet , Stylus , Lyre [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Clio History Scrolls , Books , Cornett , Laurel wreath [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Polyhymnia Mime Veil , Grapes (referring to her as an agricultural goddess) [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Euterpe Flute Aulos (an ancient Greek musical instrument like a double oboe ), panpipes , laurel wreath [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Terpsichore Light verse and dance Lyre , Plectrum [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Erato Lyric choral poetry Cithara (an ancient Greek musical instrument in the lyre family) [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Melpomene Tragedy tragic mask , sword (or any kind of blade ), club , kothornos (boots) [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Thalia Comedy Comic mask , Ivy wreath, Shepherd's crook [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Urania Astronomy ( Christian poetry in later times) [ 49 ] Globe and compass [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Some Greek writers give the names of the nine Muses as Kallichore , Helike , Eunike, Thelxinoë , Terpsichore, Euterpe, Eukelade, Dia , and Enope.

[ 52 ] [ full citation needed ] In Renaissance and Neoclassical art, the dissemination of emblem books such as Cesare Ripa 's Iconologia (1593 and many further editions) helped standardize the depiction of the Muses in sculpture and painting, so they could be distinguished by certain props. These props, or emblems , became readily identifiable by the viewer, enabling one immediately to recognize the muse and the art with which she had become associated. Here again, Calliope (epic poetry) carries a writing tablet; Clio (history) carries a scroll and books; Euterpe (song and elegiac poetry) carries a double-pipe, the aulos ; Erato (lyric poetry) is often seen with a lyre and a crown of roses; Melpomene (tragedy) is often seen with a tragic mask; Polyhymnia (sacred songs) is often seen with a pensive expression; Terpsichore (chorus dancing and choral song) is often seen dancing and carrying a lyre; Thalia (comedy) is often seen with a comic mask; and Urania (astronomy) carries a pair of compasses and the celestial globe.

Functions [ edit ] In society [ edit ] Clio , Euterpe , and Thalia , by Eustache Le Sueur , c. 1652–1655 The Greek word mousa is a common noun as well as a type of goddess: it literally means 'art' or 'poetry'. According to Pindar , to "carry a mousa " is 'to excel in the arts'. The word derives from the Indo-European root * men- , which is also the source of Greek Mnemosyne and mania , English mind , mental and monitor , Sanskrit mantra and Avestan Mazda .

[ 53 ] Melpomene , Erato , and Polyhymnia , by Eustache Le Sueur, c. 1652–1655 The Muses, therefore, were both the embodiments and sponsors of performed metrical speech: mousike (whence the English term music ) was just "one of the arts of the Muses". Others included science, geography, mathematics, philosophy, and especially art, drama, and inspiration. In the archaic period, before the widespread availability of books (scrolls), this included nearly all of learning. The first Greek book on astronomy, by Thales , took the form of dactylic hexameters , as did many works of pre-Socratic philosophy. Both Plato and the Pythagoreans explicitly included philosophy as a sub-species of mousike .

[ 54 ] The Histories of Herodotus , whose primary medium of delivery was public recitation, were divided by Alexandrian editors into nine books, named after the nine Muses.

For poet and "law-giver" Solon , [ 55 ] the Muses were "the key to the good life"; since they brought both prosperity and friendship. Solon sought to perpetuate his political reforms by establishing recitations of his poetry—complete with invocations to his practical-minded Muses—by Athenian boys at festivals each year. He believed that the Muses would help inspire people to do their best.

In literature [ edit ] Melpomene and Polyhymnia , Palacio de Bellas Artes , Mexico Ancient authors and some later authors and artists invoke Muses when writing poetry, hymns or epic history. Ancient authors invocations often occur near the beginning of their work. It asks for help or inspiration from the Muses, or simply invites the Muse to sing directly through the author.

Originally, the invocation of the Muse was an indication that the speaker was working inside the poetic tradition, according to the established formulas. For example: These things declare to me from the beginning, ye Muses who dwell in the house of Olympus, and tell me which of them first came to be.

— Hesiod (c. 700 BCE), Theogony (Hugh G. Evelyn-White translation, 2015) Sing to me of the man, Muse, the man of twists and turns driven time and again off course, once he had plundered the hallowed heights of Troy.

— Homer (c. 700 - 600 BCE), in Book I of The Odyssey ( Robert Fagles translation, 1996) O Muse! the causes and the crimes relate; What goddess was provok'd, and whence her hate; For what offence the Queen of Heav'n began To persecute so brave, so just a man; [...] — Virgil (c. 29 - 19 BCE), in Book I of the Aeneid ( John Dryden translation, 1697) Besides Homer and Virgil, other famous works that included an invocation of the Muse are the first of the carmina by Catullus , Ovid 's Metamorphoses and Amores , Dante 's Inferno (Canto II), Chaucer's Troilus and Criseyde (Book II), Shakespeare's Henry V (Act 1, Prologue), his 38th sonnet , and Milton's Paradise Lost (openings of Books 1 and 7).

In cults and modern museums [ edit ] The Car of History , a chariot clock by Carlo Franzoni, 1819, depicting Clio (housed in the National Statuary Hall Collection of the United States Capitol ) When Pythagoras arrived at Croton , his first advice to the Crotoniates was to build a shrine to the Muses at the center of the city, to promote civic harmony and learning. Local cults of the Muses often became associated with springs or with fountains. The Muses were sometimes called Aganippides, a name derived from the sacred spring Aganippe at the foot of Mount Helicon , whose waters were believed to grant inspiration.

[ 56 ] Other fountains, Hippocrene and Pirene , were also important locations associated with the Muses. Some sources occasionally referred to the Muses as "Corycides" (or "Corycian nymphs ") after a cave on Mount Parnassos , called the Corycian Cave .

Pausanias referred to the Muses by the surnames "Ardalides" or "Ardaliotides", because of a sanctuary to them at Troezen said to have been built by the mythical Ardalus .

The Muses were venerated especially in Boeotia , in the Valley of the Muses near Helicon , and in Delphi and the Parnassus , where Apollo became known as Mousēgetēs ('Muse-leader') after the sites were rededicated to his cult.

Often Muse-worship was associated with the hero-cults of poets: the tombs of Archilochus on Thasos and of Hesiod and Thamyris in Boeotia all played host to festivals in which poetic recitations accompanied sacrifices to the Muses. The Library of Alexandria and its circle of scholars formed around a mousaion (i.e., ' museum ' or shrine of the Muses) close to the tomb of Alexander the Great . Many Enlightenment figures sought to re-establish a "Cult of the Muses" in the 18th century. A famous Masonic lodge in pre-Revolutionary Paris was called Les Neuf Soeurs ('The Nine Sisters', that is, the Nine Muses); Voltaire , Benjamin Franklin , Danton , and other influential Enlightenment figures attended it. As a side-effect of this movement the word museum (originally, 'cult place of the Muses') came to refer to a place for the public display of knowledge.

Museia (Μούσεια) was a festival dedicated to Muses which was held every fifth year on the lower slopes of Mount Helicon in Boeotia . There was also another festival which was called Museia, which was celebrated in schools.

[ 57 ] Places named after the Muses [ edit ] In New Orleans , Louisiana, there are streets named for all nine. It is commonly held that the local pronunciation of the names has been colorfully anglicized in an unusual manner by the "Yat" dialect. The pronunciations are actually in line with the French, Spanish, and Creole roots of the city.

[ 58 ] Modern use in the arts [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2022 ) Further information: Muse (source of inspiration) The Muses are explicitly used in modern English to refer to an artistic inspiration, [ 59 ] as when one cites one's own artistic muse, and also implicit in words and phrases such as amuse , museum (Latinised from mouseion —a place where the Muses were worshipped), music , and musing upon .

[ 60 ] In current literature, the influential role that the Muse plays has been extended to the political sphere.

[ 61 ] Gallery [ edit ] Terpsichore Erato Clio Thalia Polyhymnia Calliope Apollo and the Muses Euterpe Parnassus Urania and Melpomene Genealogy [ edit ] The Muses's family tree, according to Hesiod's Theogony [ 62 ] Uranus Gaia Pontus Oceanus Tethys Hyperion Theia Crius Eurybia The Rivers The Oceanids Helios Selene [ 63 ] Eos Astraeus Pallas Perses Cronus Rhea Coeus Phoebe Hestia Hera Hades Zeus Leto Asteria Demeter Poseidon Iapetus Clymene (or Asia ) [ 64 ] Mnemosyne (Zeus) Themis Atlas [ 65 ] Menoetius Prometheus [ 66 ] Epimetheus The Horae CLIO THALIA TERPSICHORE POLYHYMNIA CALLIOPE EUTERPE MELPOMENE ERATO URANIA See also [ edit ] Apsara Artistic inspiration Divine inspiration Leibethra Pimpleia Saraswati Muses in popular culture Notes [ edit ] ^ Grimal, s.v. Muses.

^ "Clio" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 2020-09-28 .

^ West 2007 , p. 34.

^ * A. B. Cook (1914), Zeus: A Study in Ancient Religion , Vol. I, p. 104, Cambridge University Press.

^ R. S. P. Beekes , Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 972.

^ H. Munro Chadwick, Nora K. Chadwick (2010).

The Growth of Literature . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781108016155 .

^ At least, this was reported to Pausanias in the second century AD.

Cfr.

Karl Kerényi: The Gods of the Greeks , Thames & Hudson, London 1951, p. 104 and note 284.

^ Diodorus Siculus , 4.7.1–2 ( on-line text ) ^ See also the Italian article on this writer .

^ Susan Scheinberg, in reporting other Hellenic maiden triads in "The Bee Maidens of the Homeric Hymn to Hermes", references Diodorus, Plutarch and Pausanias - Harvard Studies in Classical Philology , 83 (1979:1–28), p. 2.

^ For this list of names and attributes, see Grimal, s.v. Muses.

^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 9.29.1–9.29.2 ^ Plutarch Symposium 9.14 ^ Eumelus fr. 35 as cited from Tzetzes on Hesiod , 23; Tzetzes on Hesiod, Works and Days 6 ^ Cicero , De Natura Deorum 3.53 , Epicharmis, Tzetzes on Hes . 23 ^ Epicharmis, Tzetzes on Hes . 23 ^ Smith, William ; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , London (1873).

"Musae" .

^ Collective work by scholars and expertise (1980).

Επιστήμη & Ζωή (Printed ed.). Greece: CHATZIAKOVOU S.A. pp. Vol.13, p.151.

^ "Elysium Gates - Historical Pegasus" . Archived from the original on 2009-06-16 . Retrieved 2010-02-26 .

^ Ovid , Heroides 15.27 : "the daughters of Pegasus" in the English translation; Propertius , Poems 3.1.19 : "Pegasid Muses" in the English translation.

^ For example, Plato, Laws 653d.

^ Ovid, Metamorphoses 5.677–78: "Now their previous eloquence also remained in the birds, as well as their strident chattering and their great zeal for speaking." See also Antoninus Liberalis 9.

^ Pseudo-Apollodorus .

Bibliotheca 1.3.2 ^ Apollodorus , 1.3.3 ^ Apollodorus , 1.3.4 ^ Pausanias, Description of Greece, 9.34.3 ^ Lemprière 768.

^ Caroline M. Galt, "A marble fragment at Mount Holyoke College from the Cretan city of Aptera", Art and Archaeology 6 (1920:150).

^ Tzetzes, Ad Lycophronem, 653 ^ Julian the Emperor, Letters, 74 ^ Strabo, Geography 9. 2. 25 (trans. Jones) ^ As given by Grimal, s.v. Muses, ^ Miate, Liana (November 2022).

"Calliope" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ The Muse Calliope by Eustache le Sueur ^ "Car of history clock" .

Architect of the Capitol . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ "Clio" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Gill, N.S.

"Who Were the 9 Greek Muses?" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Polyhymnia, the muse of sacred poetry, sacred hymn, and eloquence as well as agriculture and pantomime ^ Master of the E-series Tarocchi.

"Euterpe (music, lyric poetry) (from the Tarocchi series D: Apollo and the Muses , #18)" .

Cleveland Museum of Art .

^ van Hoogstraten, Samuel.

"Euterpe de Reedewikster" .

The British Museum . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Atsma, Aaron.

"Terpsichore" .

Theoi . Theoi Project . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Nattier, Jean-Marc.

"Terpsichore, muse of music and dance" .

Fine Art Museums of San Francisco . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Erato monte calvo ^ Wedgwood, Josiah.

"Erato" .

Royal Collection Trust . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ de Bry, Johann Theodor.

"Melpomene, muse of tragedy" .

Art Institute of Chicago . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Atsma, Aaron.

"Melpomene" .

Theoi . Theoi Project . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ "Thaia" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Nattier, Jean-Mark.

"Thalia, muse of comedy" .

Fine Art Museums of San Francisco . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Dolloff, Matthew (August 2006).

"Mediating the muse : Milton and the metamorphoses of Urania" .

The University of Texas Libraries : 14 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Goltzius, Hendrik (1592).

"Urania, the muse of astronomy" .

Art Institute of Chicago . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Atsma, Aaron.

"Urania" .

Theoi . Theoi Project . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

^ Tzetzes, J.

Scholia in Hesiodi Opera . 1,23.

^ Calvert Watkins, ed., The American Heritage Dictionary of Indo-European Roots, 3d ed., p. 56.

^ Strabo 10.3.10.

^ Solon, fragment 13.

^ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854), Helicon ^ A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1890), William Smith, LLD, William Wayte, G. E. Marindin, Ed., Museia ^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : NOLA.com (10 November 2016).

"How to pronounce New Orleans Muses Streets" – via YouTube.

^ "muse" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) Mainly 1b, 2 ^ OED derives "amuse" from French a- ("from") and muser , "to stare stupidly or distractedly".

^ Sorkin, Adam J. (1989) Politics and the Muse. Studies in the Politics of Recent American Literature.

Bowling Green State University Popular Press, Bowling Green OH.

^ Hesiod , Theogony 132–138 , 337–411 , 453–520 , 901–906, 915–920 ; Caldwell, pp. 8–11, tables 11–14.

^ Although usually the daughter of Hyperion and Theia, as in Hesiod , Theogony 371–374 , in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (4), 99–100 , Selene is instead made the daughter of Pallas the son of Megamedes.

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 507–511 , Clymene, one of the Oceanids , the daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at Hesiod , Theogony 351 , was the mother by Iapetus of Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus, while according to Apollodorus , 1.2.3 , another Oceanid, Asia was their mother by Iapetus.

^ According to Plato , Critias , 113d–114a , Atlas was the son of Poseidon and the mortal Cleito .

^ In Aeschylus , Prometheus Bound 18, 211, 873 (Sommerstein, pp.

444–445 n. 2 , 446–447 n. 24 , 538–539 n. 113 ) Prometheus is made to be the son of Themis .

References [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Muses, The" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

59– 60.

Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology , Wiley-Blackwell, 1996.

ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 .

Internet Archive .

West, Martin L.

(2007).

Indo-European Poetry and Myth .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-928075-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of The New Student's Reference Work article  " Muses ".

Look up Muse#English or Muse in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Muses .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Muses .

Muses in ancient art ; ancientrome.ru Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (ca 1,000 images of the Muses) v t e Muses Nine Muses Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Other Muses Aoede Apollonis Arche Borysthenis Cephisso Hypate Melete Mese Mneme Nete Polymatheia Thelxinoë Related Zeus (father) Mnemosyne (mother) Mouseion Pierian Spring Muse (person) Muses in popular culture v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Israel People DDB Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐26kt6
Cached time: 20250816115346
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.213 seconds
Real time usage: 1.481 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6887/1000000
Revision size: 41306/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 555265/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4430/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 152960/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.640/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17218193/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1030.078      1 -total
 27.83%  286.679     28 Template:Navbox
 25.42%  261.872      1 Template:Reflist
 16.15%  166.326     16 Template:Cite_web
 11.76%  121.113      3 Template:Langx
  8.73%   89.903      1 Template:Muses
  6.17%   63.566      1 Template:Short_description
  6.09%   62.774      4 Template:Sister_project
  5.96%   61.420      1 Template:Greek_religion
  5.92%   61.019      4 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:71180:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816115346 and revision id 1304989888. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muses&oldid=1304989888 " Categories : Music and singing goddesses Wisdom goddesses Muses (mythology) Arts goddesses Dance goddesses Knowledge goddesses Greek goddesses Musicians in Greek mythology Olympian deities Dance in Greek mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2025 Articles containing Avestan-language text Articles to be expanded from January 2022 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 11:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muses 85 languages Add topic

