Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Website attack 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents English Short Title Catalogue 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bibliographic database ESTC title count 1600–1799. The ups and downs in phases of political turmoil are clearly visible, particularly the sharp rise of the title output following the abolition of the Star chamber in 1641.

The series 1477–1799 with numbers per decade The English Short Title Catalogue ( ESTC ) is a union short-title catalogue of works published between 1473 and 1800, in Britain and its former colonies, notably those in North America, and primarily in English , drawing on the collections of the British Library and other libraries in Britain and around the world.

[ 1 ] It is co-managed by the British Library and the Center for Bibliographical Studies and Research (CBSR) at the University of California, Riverside .

[ 2 ] The database is freely searchable.

History [ edit ] The ESTC began life as the Eighteenth-Century Short Title Catalogue , with the same abbreviation, covering only 1701 to 1800. Earlier printed works had been catalogued in A. W. Pollard and G. R. Redgrave 's Short Title Catalogue (1st edn 1926; 2nd edn, 1976–91) for the period 1473 to 1640; and Donald Goddard Wing 's similarly titled bibliography (1945–51, with later supplements and addenda) for the period 1641 to 1700. These works were eventually incorporated into the database.

Website attack [ edit ] In October 2023, the database went offline, along with the broader digital infrastructure of the British Library, due to a ransomware cyberattack .

[ 3 ] A temporary version of the pre-1700 ESTC, derived from data captured in 2014, is hosted at Print Probability. As of January 2024, the Print Probability data also includes limited post-1700 ESTC entries.

In May 2025, a complete version of the English Short Title Catalogue was relaunched in beta by the Consortium of European Research Libraries (CERL), in collaboration with the original ESTC teams at the British Library and CBSR. This platform included a new search history function.

See also [ edit ] Books in the United Kingdom Books in the United States Incunabula Short Title Catalogue Universal Short Title Catalogue References [ edit ] ^ "English Short-Title Catalog (1473-1800) North America" .

University of California . Retrieved 2007-03-22 .

^ Snyder, Henry L. “The English Short Title Catalogue.” The Papers of the Bibliographical Society of America 82, no. 3 (1988): 333–36.

^ "British Library cyber-attack – some tips for workarounds" (PDF) . Cambridge University Libraries.

Bibliography [ edit ] Barker, Nicolas. "The Author as Editor." The Book Collector 41 (no 1) Spring, 1992:9-27.

Snyder, Henry L. and Michael S. Smith (eds.) The English Short-Title Catalogue: past, present, future . New York: AMS, 2003.

External links [ edit ] English Short Title Catalogue (free access via the British Library).

Archived 2022-12-19 at the Wayback Machine .

English Short Title Catalogue at CERL.

Alston, Robin.

The Eighteenth Century Short Title Catalogue: a personal history to 1989 .

Media related to English Short Title Catalogue at Wikimedia Commons English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC) Search at Print & Probability (independent, temporary interface to the ESTC made available following the British Library's 2023 cyber-attack).

v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=English_Short_Title_Catalogue&oldid=1304703979 " Categories : British Library Bibliography Short title catalogues Online databases Early modern printing databases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents English Short Title Catalogue 2 languages Add topic

