Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early and family life 2 Career in France 3 Emigration to the United States of America 4 Death and legacy 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Étienne Cabet 30 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher (1788–1856) Étienne Cabet Engraving by Antoine Maurin (1840) Born ( 1788-01-01 ) January 1, 1788 Dijon , Burgundy , Kingdom of France Died November 9, 1856 (1856-11-09) (aged 68) St. Louis , Missouri , U.S.

Occupation Philosopher Known for Founder of the Icarian movement Notable work Travel and Adventures of Lord William Carisdall in Icaria (1840) Étienne Cabet ( French: [etjɛn kabɛ] ; January 1, 1788 – November 9, 1856) was a philosopher and utopian socialist who founded the Icarian movement .

[ 1 ] Cabet became the most popular socialist advocate of his day, with a special appeal to artisans who were being undercut by factories.

Cabet published Voyage en Icarie in French in 1839 (and in English in 1840 as Travels in Icaria ), in which he proposed replacing capitalist production with workers' cooperatives. Recurrent problems with French officials (a treason conviction in 1834 resulted in five years' exile in England), led him to emigrate to the United States in 1848. Cabet founded utopian communities in Texas and Illinois , but was again undercut, this time by recurring feuds with his followers.

Early and family life [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Socialism in the United States History Utopian socialism Bishop Hill Commune Brook Farm Icarians Jonestown Looking Backward New Harmony Oneida Community Progressive Era 1877 St. Louis general strike Christian socialism in Utah 1912 Lawrence textile strike Catholic Worker Movement Green Corn Rebellion Labor unionization Haymarket affair May Day Women's suffrage Red Scare American Defense Society American Protective League Communist Party USA and African Americans Communist Party USA in the labor movement 1919–1937 1937–1957 Espionage Act of 1917 First Red Scare John Birch Society McCarthyism Seattle General Strike Smith Act Smith Act trials Anti-war and civil rights movements Black power movement COINTELPRO " I Have a Dream " March on Washington New Left Poor People's Campaign Contemporary 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2008 financial crisis Occupy movement Activists Alston Balagoon Berkman Day Dixon Du Bois Ehrenreich Ervin Flynn Goldman Grace Guthrie Hampton Hay Haywood (Bill) Haywood (Harry) Hill Hoffman Jones Keller King Labadie Lovestone Marcy Mitchell Morello Newton Ochs Parsons (Albert) Parsons (Lucy) Reed (John) Robbins Rocha Rustin Sacco and Vanzetti Seale Seeger Shakur Tankian Zinn Commentators Brooks Bruenig (Elizabeth) Bruenig (Matt) Cockburn Hedges Harrington Jameson Kochinski Magdoff Moore Parenti Piker Robinson (Nathan) Roediger Sinclair Sunkara Sweezy West Intellectuals Albert Andrews Avrich Bellamy (Edward) Bellamy (Francis) Bookchin Brisbane Butler Cabet Cannon Cantor Carmichael Chomsky Clark Cleaver Davis (Angela) Davis (Mike) Dean Dennis Dreiser Einstein Fearing Feinberg Flemm Foster Gilmore Graeber Greene Hahnel Hammett Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hillquit Kelley London Lum Most Noyes Piven Reed (Adolph) Ripley Robinson (Cedric) Rocker Sandburg Shachtman Smith Stone Wolff Wood Wright Zerzan Politicians Abern Berger Bowman Bush Casar Debs De Leon De la Cruz Dellums Ford Foster Gitlow Hall Hawkins Hillquit Hoan La Guardia London Mamdani Marcantonio McReynolds Mitchell Ocasio-Cortez Panken Randolph Ruthenberg Sanders Sawant Seidel Thomas Tlaib Turner Zeidler Organizations Active American Communist Party Antifa Black Riders Liberation Party Black Socialists in America Communist Party USA Democratic Socialists of America Freedom Party of New York Freedom Road Socialist Organization Freedom Socialist Party Green Mountain Peace and Justice Party Green Party of the United States Industrial Workers of the World Legal Marijuana Now Party New Afrikan Black Panther Party Party for Socialism and Liberation Peace and Freedom Party Progressive Dane Progressive Labor Party Revolutionary Communist Party, USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative South Carolina Workers Party Social Democrats, USA Socialist Equality Party Socialist Party USA Socialist Rifle Association Socialist Workers Party Solidarity Spark Spartacist League Working Families Party Workers World Party Working Class Party World Socialist Party of the United States Defunct American Indian Movement American Labor Party American Union of Associationists American Workers Party Black Panther Party Citizens Party Communist League of America Communist League of Struggle Communist Workers' Party Democratic Socialist Federation Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee Farmer–Labor Party Human Rights Party Independent Socialist League International Socialists International Socialist Organization International Workingmen's Association Justice Party Labor Party of the United States Labor Party Maoist Internationalist Movement Red Guards Red Guard Party New American Movement New Party Nonpartisan League Patriot Party People's Party Proletarian Party of America Raza Unida Party Redneck Revolt Revolutionary Socialist League Revolutionary Youth Movement Social Democracy of America Social Democratic Federation Social Democratic Party of America Socialist Labor Party of America Socialist Party of America SDS Weather Underground White Panther Party Workers Party of the United States Young Lords Young Patriots Organization Literature Appeal to Reason Current Affairs Daily Worker Dissent International Socialist Review Jacobin The Jungle Looking Backward Monopoly Capital Monthly Review The Other America A People's History of the United States Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat Voluntary Socialism Why Socialism?

ZNetwork Related topics American Left Anarchism in the United States individualist Labor history Labor laws Labor unions Minimum wage Progressivism in the United States Socialism portal United States portal v t e Cabet was born in Dijon , the youngest son of a cooper from Burgundy , Claude Cabet, and his wife Francoise Berthier. He was educated as a lawyer.

[ 2 ] Cabet married Delphine Lasage on March 25, 1839 at Marylebone , London, during his exile in England, who bore a child.

[ 3 ] Career in France [ edit ] Cabet secured an appointment as attorney-general in Corsica . He represented the government of Louis Philippe , despite having headed an insurrectionary committee during the July Revolution of 1830 which led to the ouster of the "Republican Monarch" King Charles X (and the ascent of Louis Philippe). However, Cabet lost this position for his attack upon the conservatism of the government in his Histoire de la révolution de 1830 .

[ 4 ] Nonetheless, in 1831, Cabet was elected to the Chamber of Deputies in France as the representative of Côte d'Or , and sat with the extreme radicals.

[ 5 ] Accused of treason in 1834 because of his bitter attacks on the government both in the history book and subsequently, Cabet was convicted and sentenced to five years' exile.

[ 6 ] He fled to England and sought political asylum. Influenced by Robert Owen , Thomas More and Charles Fourier , Cabet wrote Voyage et aventures de lord William Carisdall en Icarie ( Travel and Adventures of Lord William Carisdall in Icaria , 1840), which depicted a utopia in which a democratically elected governing body controlled all economic activity and closely supervised social life. "Icaria" is the name of his fictional country and ideal society. The nuclear family remained the only other independent unit. The book's success prompted Cabet to take steps to realize his Utopia.

[ 5 ] In 1839, Cabet returned to France to advocate a communitarian social movement , for which he invented the term communisme .

[ 7 ] Some writers ignored Cabet's Christian influences , as described in his book Le vrai christianisme suivant Jésus Christ ("The real Christianity according to Jesus Christ", in five volumes, 1846). This book described Christ's mission to be to establish social equality , and contrasted primitive Christianity with the ecclesiasticism of Cabet's time to the disparagement of the latter. In it, Cabet argued that the kingdom of God announced by Jesus was nothing other than a communist society.

[ 8 ] The book also contained a popular history of the French Revolutions from 1789 to 1830.

[ 5 ] In 1841 Cabet revived the Populaire (founded by him in 1833), which was widely read by French workingmen, and from 1843 to 1847 he printed an Icarian almanac, a number of controversial pamphlets as well as the above-mentioned book on Christianity. There were probably 400,000 adherents of the Icarian school.

[ 5 ] Emigration to the United States of America [ edit ] In 1847, after realizing the economic hardship caused by the depression of 1846, Cabet gave up on the notion of reforming French society.

[ 9 ] Instead, after conversations with Robert Owen and Owen's attempts to found a commune in Texas, Cabet gathered a group of followers from across France and traveled to the United States to organize an Icarian community.

[ 10 ] They entered into a social contract, making Cabet the director-in-chief for the first ten years, and embarked from Le Havre , February 3, 1848, for New Orleans, Louisiana . They expected to settle in the Red River valley in Texas . However, the Peters Land Company gave them deeds to only 320 acres of land in Denton County, Texas near what became Dallas, Texas rather than the million acres of land in the Red River Valley they expected (more than 200 miles away).

[ 9 ] The first group of emigrants ultimately returned to New Orleans; Cabet came later at the head of a second and smaller band. Neither Texas nor Louisiana proved the looked-for Utopia, and, ravaged by disease, about one-third of the colonists returned to France.

[ 5 ] The remainder (142 men, 74 women and 64 children, although 20 died of cholera en route), moved northward along the Mississippi River to Nauvoo, Illinois , where they purchased twelve acres recently vacated by the Mormons in 1849.

[ 11 ] [ 9 ] Cabet was unanimously elected leader, for a one-year term. The improved location enabled the experiment to develop into a successful agricultural community. Education and culture were highly valued by members. By 1855, the Nauvoo Icarian community had expanded to about 500 members with a solid agricultural base, as well as shops, three schools, flour and sawmills, a whiskey distillery, English and French newspapers, a 39 piece orchestra, choir, theater, hospital and the state's largest library (4000 volumes).

[ 11 ] Members met on Saturdays to discuss community affairs and problems, with universal male suffrage; women were allowed to speak but not vote. On Sundays members talked about ethical and moral issues, but there were no denominational religious services, only members had espoused Christianity before joining the community. Based on this success, some even considered expanding the community 200 miles west to Adair County, Iowa .

[ 12 ] However, Cabet was forced to return to France in May 1851 to settle charges of fraud brought up by his previous followers in Europe.

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] Although found not guilty by a French jury in July 1851, when Cabet returned to Nauvoo in July 1852, the community had changed. Some men were using tobacco and abusing alcohol, many women were adorning themselves with fancy dresses and jewelry, and families claimed land as private property. Cabet responded by issuing "Forty-Eight Rules of Conduct" on November 23, 1853, forbidding "tobacco, hard liquor, complaints about the food, and hunting and fishing 'for pleasure'" as well as demanding absolute silence in workshops and submission to him.

[ 13 ] Some described him as authoritarian or emotionally unstable; internal problems arose and worsened.

[ 14 ] In the spring of 1855, Cabet tried to revise the colony's constitution to make him president for life, but was instead relieved of the presidency, so his followers went out on strike, and were in turn temporarily barred from the communal dining hall.

[ 14 ] Although the colony by then had 526 members and 57 more across the Mississippi River at Montrose, Iowa , it was suffering economically—dependent upon money brought by new members and subsidies from the "Le Populaire" home office in France.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Moreover, split regarding the work division and food distribution worsened during the summer and following year.

[ 11 ] Cabet published his final book, Colonie icarienne aux États-Unis d'Amérique (1856), but that failed to solve the internal problems. In October 1856, about 180 supporters and Cabet left Nauvoo in three groups for New Bremen, Missouri near St. Louis , Missouri .

Death and legacy [ edit ] Cabet suffered a stroke on November 8, 1856, a few days after moving to Missouri with the last group of his followers, and soon died.

[ 15 ] He was buried at the Old Picker's Cemetery, but his remains were moved during construction of a high school on the site , and now rest at New Saint Marcus Cemetery and Mausoleum in Affton , St. Louis County, Missouri , with a gravestone funded by the French Embassy.

On February 15, 1858, the remaining Icarians settled in Cheltenham on the western edge of St. Louis, under the leadership of a lawyer named Mercadier, whom Cabet had designated as his successor. That colony would disband in 1864 (with several young men fighting in the American Civil War) and two families rejoined the Icarians in Corning, Iowa discussed below (the Cheltenham area became a neighborhood within St. Louis).

[ 16 ] Before his death, Cabet sued the Nauvoo Icarians in a local court, as well as petitioned the Illinois legislature to repeal the act that incorporated the community.

[ 11 ] [ 17 ] The Nauvoo colony relocated to Corning , Adams County, Iowa , about 80 miles southwest of Des Moines, Iowa between 1858 and 1860, because of Illinois crop failures as well as the end of financial support from France following the Panic of 1857 . The Corning Icarians prospered until another factional split in 1878, prompted by new emigrants from France, who left to establish a community in Cloverdale, California in 1883 (but "Icaria Speranza" lasted only four years). The colony at Corning disbanded in 1898, but by that time it had existed for 46 years, making it the longest non-religious communal living experiment in American history.

[ 16 ] The library at Western Illinois University has a Center for Icarian Studies, as well as Icarian archives and papers. The Nauvoo Historical Society also has some papers and artifacts on display, and some in the town remember the Icarians during the Labor Day Grape Festival, through a historical play. The connection with grape cultivation is more symbolic than foundational, as the growing of Concord grapes in the Nauvoo area did not begin with the Icarians. It sprang from efforts by a French Catholic priest in the 1830s, and expanded in 1846 when Swiss vintner John Tanner brought the Norton grape to the area. However, Baxter's Vineyards and Winery was founded by Icarians Emile and Annette Baxter in 1857, and continues as a 5-generation old family business. It is Illinois' oldest winery.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Johnson, Christopher H. (2022), van der Linden, Marcel (ed.), "Etienne Cabet and the Icarian Movement in France and the United States" , The Cambridge History of Socialism , vol. 1, Cambridge University Press, pp.

188– 213, ISBN 978-1-108-48134-2 ^ Soland 2017 , p. 57.

^ British parish records on ancestry.com; the child may have been Gentilly Cabet, who married Eugene Dagousset in Paris in 1891 according to another ancestry.com database ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Cabet, Étienne" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ a b c d e Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Cabet, Etienne" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

^ Soland 2017 , p. 58.

^ "CABET, Etienne (1788-1856) Fondateur du communisme en France" . Recherches sur l’anarchisme. Archived from the original on 2008-06-29 . Retrieved 2007-02-27 .

^ Paul Bénichou , Le Sacre de l'écrivain : Doctrines de l'âge romantique (Paris: Gallimard, 1977), p. 402 n.63.

^ a b c Soland 2017 , p. 59.

^ Friesen, John W.; Friesen, Virginia Lyons (2004).

The Palgrave Companion to North American Utopias . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p.

137 .

ISBN 9781403963994 .

^ a b c d e Friesen, John W.; Friesen, Virginia Lyons (2004).

The Palgrave Companion to North American Utopias . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. p.

139 .

ISBN 9781403963994 .

^ Soland 2017 , p. 63.

^ a b c Pitzer, Donald (1997).

America's Communal Utopias . Chapel Hill and London: The University of North Carolina Press. p. 283.

^ a b c Soland 2017 , p. 64.

^ Ancestry.com's Missouri Registry of Deaths for the week of November 10, 1856, p. 122 ^ a b c Soland 2017 , p. 65.

^ Some miscellaneous handwritten records of the Hancock County, Illinois court relative to "E. Cabbett" are available in ancestry.com's library edition, images 1117-1119 of 1825-1858 records Further reading [ edit ] Johnson, Christopher H (1974).

Utopian communism in France : Cabet and the Icarians, 1839-1851 . Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801408953 .

OCLC 1223569 .

Soland, Randall (2017).

Utopian communities of Illinois : heaven on the prairie . Charleston, SC: History Press.

ISBN 9781439661666 .

OCLC 1004538134 .

Sutton, Robert P. (1994).

Les Icariens : the utopian dream in Europe and America . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 9780252020674 .

OCLC 28215643 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Cabet, Étienne ".

Étienne Cabet from the Handbook of Texas Online Encyclopædia Britannica Etienne Cabet Archive of Etienne Cabet Papers at the International Institute of Social History v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium 2 Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Étienne_Cabet&oldid=1291393611 " Categories : 1788 births 1856 deaths American anti-capitalists American Christian socialists American democratic socialists American founders American political philosophers Christian communists European democratic socialists Founders of utopian communities French anti-capitalists French Christian socialists French emigrants to the United States French political philosophers Members of the 2nd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Writers from Dijon People from Hancock County, Illinois Politicians from Dijon Utopian socialists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 23:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Étienne Cabet 30 languages Add topic

