Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal history 2 Mentorship 3 Clinical contributions 4 Professional Achievements and Awards 5 Selected publications 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Edith Kaplan 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American psychologist This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Edith Kaplan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Edith F. Kaplan (February 16, 1924 – September 3, 2009) was an American psychologist , and a pioneer of neuropsychological tests who did most of her work at the Boston VA Hospital .

[ 1 ] Kaplan is known for her promotion of clinical neuropsychology as a specialty area in psychology. She examined brain-behavioral relationships in aphasia , apraxia , developmental issues in clinical neuropsychology , as well as normal and abnormal aging . Kaplan helped develop a new method of assessing brain function with neuropsychological assessment , called " The Boston Process Approach ." [ 2 ] As a graduate student, Kaplan worked with Heinz Werner , and then collaborated further with Norman Geschwind as well as Harold Goodglass .

Personal history [ edit ] Kaplan was born in Brooklyn, New York . She earned her bachelor's degree at Brooklyn College , then did her graduate work at Clark University in Worcester, with a dissertation focusing on the development of word meanings and apraxia in children.

Kaplan was a Professor in the departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, and in the Behavioral Neuroscience Ph.D. Program at Boston University School of Medicine at the time of her death. Kaplan was a Professor of Psychology at Suffolk University and Affiliate Professor of Psychology at Clark University. She was also a member of the Psychology Department at the Baycrest Hospital in Toronto , Ontario, Canada.

Mentorship [ edit ] Kaplan was a leader in developing education and training of neuropsychologists. From 1976 to 1987, Kaplan was the director of Clinical Neuropsychological Services at the Boston Veterans Administration Medical Center where she was responsible for the development of pre- and post-doctoral clinical neuropsychological internship training program. Later, at Suffolk University, Boston University School of Medicine, and Tewksbury Hospital , she continued this work. She also did philanthropic work with the National Head Injury Foundation and the World Health Organization .

Clinical contributions [ edit ] Kaplan made important contributions to clinical neuropsychological assessment . Her observations and assessment methods evolved into a philosophical school of neuropsychological assessment, called by most people the "Boston Process Approach." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Kaplan also re-purposed intelligence tests such as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale as tools to localize functional deficits in the brain (whether developmental or due to lesions ).

Prior to the introduction of the process-oriented approach, clinical neuropsychological assessment followed a fixed-battery global-achievement approach, and stressed quantitative interpretation of test results (for example, the Halstead-Reitan battery). The process-oriented approach offered advances in test interpretation, stressing the qualitative aspects of patients' performance profiles. The Boston Process Approach examines the qualitative process by which the patient solves a problem rather than simply looking at the patient's quantitative numerical scores. The Boston Process also tailors which tests to give a patient instead of administering an entire test battery to every subject, regardless of their condition. This alternative approach improved clinical understanding  of brain functions and generated discussion about diagnostic issues in clinical neuropsychology.

[ 5 ] Kaplan developed and co-authored The Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination, The Boston Naming Test , The Boston Stimulus Board, The California Verbal Learning Test (Adult and Children's Versions), Microcog: A Computerized Assessment of Cognitive Status, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale - Revised, as a Neuropsychological Instrument (WAIS-R-NI), the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children - III, as a Neuropsychological Instrument (WISC-III-NI), The Baycrest Assessment of Neuropsychological Status, and The Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS) , [ 6 ] a refined and expanded selection of tasks from the widely used Halstead-Reitan battery. She also contributed analytical methods for clock drawings as neuropsychological assessment tools, especially regarding spatial neglect and attention .

[ 7 ] Kaplan also contributed a body of research, including (with Norman Geschwind) the first paper on cerebral disconnection syndrome .

[ 8 ] She also investigated Parkinson's disease , schizophrenia , dementia , and other neuropsychological disorders.

Professional Achievements and Awards [ edit ] Distinguished Service Award, Massachusetts Speech and Hearing Association (1977) [ 9 ] Recognized by National Head Injury Foundation (1982) [ 9 ] Recognized by National Head Injury Foundation (1982) [ 9 ] Ezra Paul Psychological Service Award, Massachusetts Psychological Association (1984) [ 9 ] Distinguished Clinical Neuropsychologist Award, National Academy of Neuropsychology (1993) [ 9 ] Distinguished Contributions Award, New England Psychological Association (1996) [ 9 ] Distinguished Career Contributions Award, Massachusetts Psychological Association (1997) [ 9 ] Inducted into the Psi Chi Honor Society, St. Anselm College, Manchester, New Hampshire (1997) [ 9 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Armengol, C., Kaplan, E., & Moes, E. (Eds.). (2001).

The consumer oriented neuropsychological report.

Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.

Kaplan, E. (2002).

Serendipity in science: A personal account.

In T. Stringer, E. Cooley, & A.L. Christensen (Eds.) Pathways to prominence in neuropsychology: Reflections of twentieth century pioneers. New York: Psychology Press.

References [ edit ] ^ Nancy Hebben; William Milberg (September 28, 2009).

Essentials of Neuropsychological Assessment (Essentials of Psychological Assessment) . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-470-43747-6 .

^ Milberg WP, Hebben NA, Kaplan E (1986). "The Boston process approach to neuropsychological assessment". In Grant, Adams (eds.).

Neuropsychological Assessment of Neuropsychiatric Disorders (First ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-503545-2 .

^ Milberg WP, Hebben NA, Kaplan E (2009). "The Boston process approach to neuropsychological assessment". In Grant, Adams (eds.).

Neuropsychological Assessment of Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Third ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-537854-2 .

^ A process approach to neuropsychological assessment. Clinical neuropsychology and brain function: Research, measurement, and practice.
Kaplan, Edith
Boll, Thomas (Ed); Bryant, Brenda K. (Ed). (1988). Clinical neuropsychology and brain function: Research, measurement, and practice. The Master lecture series, Vol. 7. (pp. 127-167). Washington, DC, US: American Psychological Association. 202 pp.

^ Amir Poreh (May 26, 2006).

The Quantified Process Approach to Neuropsychological Assessment (Studies on Neuropsychology, Neurology and Cognition) . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-84169-456-6 .

^ Delis, D.C.; Kramer, J.H. & Kaplan, E. (2001).

The Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System . San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation .

^ Igor Grant; Kenneth Adams (March 10, 2009).

Neuropsychological Assessment of Neuropsychiatric and Neuromedical Disorders . Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-537854-2 .

^ Geschwind, Norman; Kaplan, Edith (1962).

"A human cerebral deconnection syndrome" .

Neurology .

12 (10): 675– 685.

doi : 10.1212/wnl.12.10.675 .

PMID 13898109 .

^ a b c d e f g h Alderson, Amy (2018).

"Kaplan, Edith (1924–2009)" .

Encyclopedia of Clinical Neuropsychology . Springer. pp.

1– 5.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-56782-2_630-2 .

ISBN 978-3-319-56782-2 .

External links [ edit ] Suffolk University biography Boston University Harold Goodglass Aphasia Research Center New York Times Obituary v t e Neuropsychology Topics Brain–computer interface Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Human brain Misconceptions Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Phrenology Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Learning Memory Motor coordination Natural language Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Arthur Lester Benton David Bohm António Damásio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Kurt Goldstein Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Oliver Sacks Roger Wolcott Sperry H. M.

K. C.

Tests Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Clinical Dementia Rating Continuous Performance Task Glasgow Coma Scale Hayling and Brixton tests Johari window Lexical decision task Mini–mental state examination Stroop effect Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wisconsin card sorting Category Commons Philosophy portal Psychology portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edith_Kaplan&oldid=1296509002 " Categories : 20th-century American psychologists American women psychologists American neuropsychologists Health professionals from Brooklyn 1924 births 2009 deaths Brooklyn College alumni 20th-century American women 20th-century American people 21st-century American women Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 11:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edith Kaplan 1 language Add topic

