Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Education 1.3 Institute of Social Research (Institut für Sozialforschung) 1.4 Later years 1.5 Legacy 2 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 2.1 Critical theory 2.2 Writing 2.2.1 Between Philosophy and Social Science 2.2.2 Eclipse of Reason 2.2.3 Dialectic of Enlightenment 3 Criticisms 4 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Articles 5 Notes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Max Horkheimer 55 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher and sociologist (1895–1973) Max Horkheimer Horkheimer in Heidelberg in 1964 Born ( 1895-02-14 ) 14 February 1895 Zuffenhausen (now Stuttgart ), Württemberg , German Empire Died 7 July 1973 (1973-07-07) (aged 78) Nuremberg , Bavaria , West Germany Education Education Munich University University of Frankfurt am Main ( PhD , 1922; Dr. phil. hab.

, 1925) Doctoral advisor Hans Cornelius Philosophical work Era 20th century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy , Frankfurt School critical theory , Western Marxism Institutions University of Frankfurt am Main Columbia University University of Chicago Main interests Social theory , Counter-Enlightenment Notable ideas Critical theory as opposed to traditional theory, culture industry , authoritarian personality , eclipse of reason , critique of instrumental reason Max Horkheimer ( / ˈ h ɔːr k h aɪ m ər / HORK -hy-mər ; German: [ˈhɔɐ̯kˌhaɪmɐ] ; 14 February 1895 – 7 July 1973) was a German philosopher and sociologist best known for his role in developing critical theory as director of the Institute for Social Research , commonly associated with the Frankfurt School .

Advancing a materialist theory of reason and society, Horkheimer analyzed the rise of instrumental reason , the erosion of the concept of truth , the decline of individual autonomy , the social-psychological roots of authoritarianism , and the reproduction of domination under modern capitalism . These concerns became fundamental to critical theory.

His most influential works include Eclipse of Reason (1947), Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947, with Theodor W. Adorno ), and a series of foundational essays written in the 1930s for the Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung , later collected in Between Philosophy and Social Science and Critical Theory: Selected Essays . He also composed aphoristic reflections between the late 1920s and the 1960s, published posthumously as Dämmerung ( Dawn and Decline ). As director of the Institute, Horkheimer planned, supported, and made possible many other significant works.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] On 14 February 1895, Horkheimer was born the only son of Moritz and Babetta Horkheimer. Horkheimer was born into a conservative, wealthy Orthodox Jewish family. His father was a successful businessman who owned several textile factories in the Zuffenhausen district of Stuttgart , where Max was born.

[ 2 ] Moritz expected his son to follow in his footsteps and own the family business.

[ 2 ] Max was taken out of school in 1910 to work in the family business, where he eventually became a junior manager. During this period he would begin two relationships that would last for the rest of his life. First, he met Friedrich Pollock , who would later become a close academic colleague, and who would remain Max's closest friend. He also met Rose Riekher, his father's personal secretary. Eight years Max's senior, a Christian, and from a lower economic class, Riekher was not considered a suitable match by Moritz Horkheimer. Despite this, Max and Maidon would marry in 1926 and remain together until her death in 1969.

[ 2 ] In 1917, his manufacturing career ended and his chances of taking over his family business were interrupted when he was drafted into World War I .

[ 3 ] However, Horkheimer avoided service, being rejected on medical grounds.

Education [ edit ] In the spring of 1919, after failing an army physical, [ 2 ] Horkheimer enrolled at Munich University . While living in Munich, he was mistaken for the revolutionary playwright Ernst Toller and arrested and imprisoned.

[ 4 ] After being released, Horkheimer moved to Frankfurt am Main , where he studied philosophy and psychology under Hans Cornelius .

[ 2 ] There, he met Theodor Adorno , several years his junior, with whom he would strike a lasting friendship and a collaborative relationship. After an abortive attempt at writing a dissertation on Gestalt psychology , Horkheimer, with Cornelius's direction, completed his doctorate in philosophy with a 78-page dissertation titled The Antinomy of Teleological Judgment ( Zur Antinomie der teleologischen Urteilskraft ).

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] In 1925, Horkheimer was habilitated with a dissertation entitled Kant 's Critique of Judgment as Mediation between Practical and Theoretical Philosophy ( Über Kants Kritik der Urteilskraft als Bindeglied zwischen theoretischer und praktischer Philosophie ). There, he met Friedrich Pollock, who would be his colleague at the University of Frankfurt Institute for Social Research . The following year, Max was appointed Privatdozent . Shortly after, in 1926, Horkheimer married Rose Riekher.

[ 5 ] Institute of Social Research (Institut für Sozialforschung) [ edit ] In 1926, Horkheimer was an "unsalaried lecturer in Frankfurt." Shortly after, in 1930, he was promoted to professor of philosophy at the University of Frankfurt am Main . In the same year, when the Institute for Social Research 's directorship became vacant, after the departure of Carl Grünberg , Horkheimer was elected to the position "by means of an endowment from a wealthy businessman".

[ 6 ] The Institute had had its beginnings in a Marxist study group started by Felix Weil , a one-time student of political science at Frankfurt who used his inheritance to fund the group as a way to support his leftist academic aims. Pollock and Horkheimer were partners with Weil in the early activities of the institute.

[ 2 ] Horkheimer worked to make the Institute a purely academic enterprise.

[ 7 ] As director, he changed the institute from an orthodox Marxist school to a heterodox school for critical social research.

[ 8 ] The following year publication of the institute's Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung began, with Horkheimer as its editor.

[ 9 ] Horkheimer intellectually reoriented the institute, proposing a programme of collective research aimed at specific social groups (specifically the working class) that would highlight the problem of the relationship between history and reason. The Institute focused on integrating the views of Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud . The Frankfurt School attempted this by systematically hitching together the different conceptual structures of historical materialism and psychoanalysis.

[ 10 ] During the time between Horkheimer's being named Professor of Social Philosophy and director of the Institute in 1930, the Nazi party became the second largest party in the Reichstag. In the midst of the violence surrounding the Nazis' rise, Horkheimer and his associates began to prepare for the possibility of moving the Institute out of Germany. Horkheimer's venia legendi was revoked by the new Nazi government because of the Marxian nature of the institute's ideas as well as its prominent Jewish association. When Hitler was named the Chancellor in 1933, [ 2 ] the institute was thus forced to close its location in Germany.

He emigrated to Geneva, Switzerland , and then to New York City the following year, where Horkheimer met with president of Columbia University Nicholas Murray Butler to discuss hosting the institute. To Horkheimer's surprise, the president agreed to host the Institute in exile as well as offer Horkheimer a building for the institute.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In July 1934, Horkheimer accepted an offer from Columbia University to relocate the institute to one of their buildings.

[ 2 ] In 1940, Horkheimer received American citizenship and moved to the Pacific Palisades district of Los Angeles , California , where his collaboration with Adorno would yield the Dialectic of Enlightenment .

In 1942, Horkheimer assumed the directorship of the Scientific Division of the American Jewish Committee . In this capacity, he helped launch and organize a series of five Studies in Prejudice, which were published in 1949 and 1950. The most important of these was the pioneering study in social psychology entitled The Authoritarian Personality , itself a methodologically advanced reworking of some of the themes treated in a collective project produced by the Institute in its first years of exile, Studies in Authority and Family.

[ 13 ] In the years that followed, Horkheimer did not publish much, although he continued to edit Studies in Philosophy and Social Science as a continuation of the Zeitschrift.

In 1949, he returned to Frankfurt, where the Institute for Social Research reopened in 1950. Between 1951 and 1953 Horkheimer was rector of the University of Frankfurt am Main . In 1953, Horkheimer stepped down from director of the Institute and took on a smaller role in the institute, while Adorno became director.

[ 14 ] Later years [ edit ] Horkheimer continued to teach at the university until his retirement in the mid-1960s. In 1953, he was awarded the Goethe Plaque of the City of Frankfurt , and was later named an honorary citizen of Frankfurt for life.

[ 15 ] He returned to the United States in 1954 and 1959 to lecture as a frequent visiting professor at the University of Chicago . In the late 1960s, Horkheimer supported Pope Paul VI 's stand against artificial contraception, specifically the pill , arguing that it would lead to the end of romantic love.

[ 16 ] Legacy [ edit ] He remained an important figure until his death in Nuremberg in 1973. Max Horkheimer with the help of Theodor Adorno, Herbert Marcuse, Walter Benjamin, Leo Löwenthal, Otto Kirchheimer, Frederick Pollock and Franz Neumann developed "Critical Theory". According to Larry Ray "Critical Theory" has "become one of the most influential social theories of the twentieth century".

[ 17 ] Thought [ edit ] Part of a series on the Frankfurt School Major works Dialectic of Enlightenment Eclipse of Reason Eros and Civilization Escape from Freedom Minima Moralia Negative Dialectics One-Dimensional Man Reason and Revolution The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere The Theory of Communicative Action " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Notable theorists Adorno Apel Benjamin Fromm Forst Grünberg Geuss Habermas Honneth Horkheimer Jaeggi Kluge Kracauer Kirchheimer Kompridis Kuhlmann Löwenthal Marcuse McCarthy Negt Neumann Offe Pollock Schmidt Sohn-Rethel Wellmer Wingert Important concepts Advanced capitalism Antipositivism Communicative rationality Critical theory Culture industry Dialectic Legitimation crisis Non-identity Popular culture Praxis Privatism Psychoanalysis Related topics Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Freudo-Marxism Marxist humanism Recognition Reification Social alienation Western Marxism Philosophy portal Society portal v t e Horkheimer's work is marked by a concern to show the relation between affect (especially suffering) and concepts (understood as action-guiding expressions of reason). In that, he responded critically to what he saw as the one-sidedness of both neo-Kantianism (with its focus on concepts) and Lebensphilosophie (with its focus on expression and world-disclosure ). He did not think that either was wrong, but he insisted that the insights of each school on its own could not adequately contribute to the repair of social problems. Horkheimer focused on the connections between social structures, networks/subcultures and individual realities and concluded that we are affected and shaped by the proliferation of products on the marketplace. It is also important to note that Horkheimer collaborated with Herbert Marcuse, Erich Fromm, Theodor Adorno, and Walter Benjamin.

[ 1 ] Critical theory [ edit ] Through critical theory , a social theory focusing on critiquing and changing society, Horkheimer "attempted to revitalize radical social, and cultural criticism" and discussed authoritarianism, militarism, economic disruption, environmental crisis and the poverty of mass culture. Horkheimer helped to create critical theory through a mix of radical and conservative lenses that stem from radical Marxism and end up in "pessimistic Jewish transcendentalism".

[ 3 ] He developed his critical theory by examining his own wealth while witnessing the juxtaposition of the bourgeois and the impoverished. This critical theory embraced the future possibilities of society and was preoccupied with forces which moved society toward rational institutions that would ensure a true, free, and just life.

[ 18 ] He was convinced of the need to "examine the entire material and spiritual culture of mankind" [ 3 ] in order to transform society as a whole. Horkheimer sought to enable the working class to reclaim their power in order to resist the lure of fascism. Horkheimer stated himself that "the rationally organized society that regulates its own existence" was necessary along with a society that could "satisfy common needs".

[ 3 ] To satisfy these needs, it reached out for a total understanding of history and knowledge. Through this, critical theory develops a "critique of bourgeois society through which 'ideology critique' attempted to locate the 'utopian content' of dominant systems of thought".

[ 19 ] Above all, critical theory sought to develop a critical perspective in the discussion of all social practices.

[ 18 ] Writing [ edit ] Between Philosophy and Social Science [ edit ] Between Philosophy and Social Science appeared between 1930 and 1938, during the time the Frankfurt school moved from Frankfurt to Geneva to Columbia University . It included: "Materialism and Morality", "The Present Situation of Moral Philosophy and the Tasks of an Institute for Social Research", "On the Problem of Truth", "Egoism and the Freedom Movement", "History and Psychology", "A New Concept of Ideology", "Remarks on Philosophical Anthropology", and "The Rationalism Debate in Contemporary Philosophy". It also included "The Present Situation of Social Philosophy and the Tasks for an Institute of Social Research", "Egoism and Freedom Movements" and "Beginnings of the Bourgeois Philosophy of History". The essays within "Between Philosophy and Social Science" were Horkheimer's attempts to "remove the individual from mass culture, a function for philosophy from the commodification of everything".

[ 20 ] Horkheimer was extremely invested in the individual. In one of his writings, he states, "When we speak of an individual as a historical entity, we mean not merely the space-time and the sense existence of a particular member of the human race, but in addition, his awareness of his own individuality as a conscious human being, including recognition of his own identity." [ 21 ] "The Present Situation of Social Philosophy and the Tasks for an Institute of Social Research" was not only included in this volume, but it was also used as Horkheimer's inaugural speech as director of the Frankfurt School. In this speech he related economic groups to the struggles and challenges of real life. Horkheimer often referenced human struggle and used this example in his speech because it was a topic he understood well.

[ 20 ] "Egoism and Freedom Movements" and "Beginnings of the Bourgeois Philosophy of History" are the longest of the essays. The first is an evaluation of Machiavelli, Hobbes and Vico; the latter discusses the bourgeois control. In Beginnings of the Bourgeois Philosophy of History, Horkheimer explained "what he learned from the bourgeois rise to power and what of the bourgeois he thought was worth preserving.

[ 20 ] The volume also looks at the individual as the "troubled center of philosophy." Horkheimer expressed that "there is no formula that defines the relationship among individuals, society and nature for all time".

[ 20 ] To understand the problem of the individual further, Horkheimer included two case studies on the individual: one on Montaigne and one on himself.

Eclipse of Reason [ edit ] Main article: Eclipse of Reason (Horkheimer) Horkheimer's book, Eclipse of Reason , started in 1941 and published in 1947, is broken into five sections: Means and Ends, Conflicting Panaceas, The Revolt of Nature, The Rise and Decline of the Individual, and On the Concept of Philosophy.

[ 1 ] The Eclipse of Reason focuses on the concept of reason within the history of Western philosophy , which can only be fostered in an environment of free, critical thinking while also linking positivist and instrumental reason with the rise of fascism.

[ 19 ] He distinguishes between objective , subjective and instrumental reason, and states that we have moved from the former through the center and into the latter (though subjective and instrumental reason are closely connected). Objective reason deals with universal truths that dictate that an action is either right or wrong. It is a concrete concept and a force in the world that requires specific modes of behavior. The focus in the objective faculty of reason is on the ends, rather than the means. Subjective reason is an abstract concept of reason, and focuses primarily on means. Specifically, the reasonable nature of the purpose of action is irrelevant – the ends only serve the purpose of the subject (generally self-advancement or preservation). To be "reasonable" in this context is to be suited to a particular purpose, to be "good for something else". This aspect of reason is universally conforming, and easily furnishes ideology . In instrumental reason, the sole criterion of reason is its operational value or purposefulness, and with this, the idea of truth becomes contingent on mere subjective preference (hence the relation with subjective reason). Because subjective/instrumental reason rules, the ideals of a society, for example democratic ideals , become dependent on the "interests" of the people instead of being dependent on objective truths. Horkheimer writes, "Social power is today more than ever mediated by power over things. The more intense an individual's concern with power over things, the more will things dominate him, the more will he lack any genuine individual traits, and the more will his mind be transformed into an automation of formalized reason." [ 22 ] Horkheimer acknowledges that objective reason has its roots in Reason (" Logos " in Greek) and concludes, "If by enlightenment and intellectual progress we mean the freeing of man from superstitious belief in evil forces, in demons and fairies, in blind fate – in short, the emancipation from fear – then denunciation of what is currently called reason is the greatest service we can render." [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Dialectic of Enlightenment [ edit ] Main article: Dialectic of Enlightenment Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno collaborated to publish Dialectic of Enlightenment , which was originally published in 1944. The inspiration for this piece came from when Horkheimer and Adorno had to flee Germany, because of Hitler, and go to New York. They went to America and "absorbed the popular culture"; thinking that it was a form of totalitarianism.

[ 25 ] Nonetheless, Dialectic of Enlightenment's main argument was to serve as a wide-ranging critique of the "self-destruction of enlightenment".

[ 19 ] The work criticized popular culture as "the product of a culture industry whose goal was to stupefy the masses with endless mass produced copies of the same thing" (Lemert). Along with that, Horkheimer and Adorno had a few arguments; one being that these mass-produced products only appear to change over time. Horkheimer and Adorno stated that these products were so standardized in order to help consumers comprehend and appreciate the products with little attention given to them. They expressed, "the result is a constant reproduction of the same thing" (Adorno and Horkheimer, 1993 [1944]). However, they also explain how pseudo-individuality is encouraged among these products in order to keep the consumers coming back for more. They argue that small differences in products within the same area are acceptable.

[ 26 ] The similar patterns found in the content of popular culture (films, popular songs and radio) have the same central message; "it's all linked to "the necessity of obedience of the masses to the social hierarchy in place in advanced capitalist societies".

[ 27 ] These products appeal to the masses and encourage conformity to the consumers. In return, capitalism remains in power while buyers continue to consume from the industry. This is dangerous because the consumers' belief that the powers of technology are liberating, starts to increase. To support their claim, Horkheimer and Adorno, "proposed an antidote: not just thinking the relations of things , but also, as an immediate second step, thinking through that thinking, self-reflexively." In other words, technology lacks self-reflexivity. Nonetheless, Horkheimer and Adorno believed that art was an exception, because it "is an open-ended system with no fixed rules"; thus, it could not be an object of the industry.

[ 28 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Perry Anderson sees Horkheimer's attempt to make the Institute purely academic as "symptomatic of a more universal process, the emergence of a ' Western Marxism ' divorced from the working-class movement and dominated by academic philosophers and the 'product of defeat ' " because of the isolation of the Russian Revolution. Rolf Wiggershaus, author of The Frankfurt School believed Horkheimer lacked the audacious theoretical construction produced by those like Marx and Lukács and that his main argument was that those living in misery had the right to material egoism. In his book, "Social Theory", Alex Callinicos claims that Dialectic of Enlightenment offers no systematic account of conception of rationality, but rather professes objective reason intransigently to an extent.

[ 7 ] Charles Lemert discusses in his book Social Theory that in writing Dialectic of Enlightenment , Horkheimer and Adorno lack sufficient sympathy for the cultural plight of the average working person, unfair to criticize the tastes of ordinary people, and that popular culture does not really buttress social conformity and stabilize capitalism as much as the Frankfurt school thinks.

[ 26 ] Ingar Solty, in a February 2020 Jacobin magazine article, notes that the work of Horkheimer, Adorno, and the Frankfurt School as a whole is marked by "the vast historical defeats suffered by the interwar socialist movement."  He notes, "Horkheimer and Adorno thus became increasingly pessimistic with regards to the working class's ability to overthrow capitalism ... Horkheimer did not conduct empirical research on capitalism and its crises ... the hierarchical nature of the international division of labor , the organization of internationalizing capitalism in a system of nation-states, the origins of imperialism and inter-imperial rivalries, or such ... For Horkheimer, the working class had been a revolutionary subject only in the abstract ... [it] was essentially an empty placeholder for the subject which would overthrow an economic and social system which they considered wrong. If it failed to live up to its expectations, then it could easily be replaced by another subject of revolution—or the conclusion that there was no way out (of capitalism)." Solty contextualizes Horkheimer's (and, by implication, the Frankfurt School's) "return from 'revolutionary optimism' to 'revolutionary pessimism ' " by noting, "[m]any postwar radical leftists and anti-capitalists, especially those not organized in real workers' parties, were disappointed revolutionaries. The German writer Alfred Andersch , who had been close to the KPD before 1933 and then withdrawn into "inner emigration," called the West German postwar left a "homeless left." The working classes' betrayals seemed to continue after 1945. After the short-lived socialist revival, the Cold War and the internationalization of the New Deal as the Keynesian welfare state seemed to have completely absorbed what was left of revolutionary working-class spirit. This led many disappointed leftists to culture and ideology as levels of analyses which could explain this failure of the working class."  Solty identifies Horkheimer's (and, implicitly, the Frankfurt School's) work as an important influence on that of Michel Foucault : [ 29 ] Ultimately, both Horkheimer and Foucault only considered the defense of remaining elements of freedom and the identification of "micro-powers" of domination a possibility, but changes in the macro-power structures were out of reach. In other words, a Left was born that was no longer oriented toward "counter-hegemony" (as per Antonio Gramsci ), as a way of building toward power, but rather "anti-hegemony" (Horkheimer, Foucault, etc.), as John Sanbonmatsu put it in his critique of postmodernism.

Selected works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Authority and the Family (1936) Traditional and Critical Theory (1937) Dialectic of Enlightenment (1947) – with Theodor Adorno ISBN 978-0-8264-0093-2 Eclipse of Reason (1947) (orig. 1941 "The End of Reason", Studies in Philosophy and Social Sciences , Vol. IX) ISBN 978-1-4437-3041-9 Egoism and the Freedom Movement The Longing for the Totally Other Critique of Instrumental Reason (1967) ISBN 978-0-8264-0088-8 Critical Theory: Selected Essays (1972) ISBN 978-0-8264-0083-3 Dawn & Decline (1978) ISBN 978-0-8164-9329-6 His collected works have been issued in German as Max Horkheimer : Gesammelte Schriften (1985–1996). 19 volumes, edited by Alfred Schmidt and Gunzelin Schmid Noerr. S. Fischer Verlag, Frankfurt am Main.

Articles [ edit ] "The social function of philosophy" [ usurped ] , in Studies in Philosophy and Social Science , vol. 8, n°3, New-York, 1939.

"The Authoritarian State". 15 (Spring 1973). New York: Telos Press.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c "Horkheimer, Max".

Dictionary of the Social Sciences . Oxford University Press. 1 January 2002.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780195123715.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-512371-5 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Berendzen, J.C. (24 June 2009). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

"Max Horkheimer" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Fall 2013 . Retrieved 14 May 2022 .

^ a b c d Reason, Nostalgia, and Eschatology in the Critical Theory of Max Horkheimer Brian J. Shaw The Journal of Politics, Vol. 47, No. 1 (Feb. 1985), pp. 160–181.

^ "Horkheimer, Max" .

Horkheimer, Max – Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press. 2010.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199532919.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-953291-9 .

^ a b Sica, Alan.

Social Thought: From the Enlightenment to The Present . Pennsylvania State University: Pearson, Inc. 2005.

[ page needed ] ^ Sica, Alan., ed. 2005. Social Thought: From the Enlightenment to the Present. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc. p. 542.

^ a b Callinicos, Alex T. 2007.

Social Theory: A Historical Introduction . 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

^ Elliot, Anthony and Larry Ray, eds. 2003. Key Contemporary Social Theorists. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 163.

^ "Glossary of People: Ho" . marxists.org . Retrieved 14 June 2015 .

^ Corradetti, Claudio.

"Frankfurt School and Critical Theory" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2 June 2025 .

^ "Biography of Horkheimer at MIT Press" . mitpress.mit.edu. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012 . Retrieved 14 June 2015 .

^ Ritzer, George. 2011. Sociological Theory. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.

^ Jay, Martin (1973). "Max Horkheimer (1895–1973)".

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

47 : 219– 220.

JSTOR 3129918 .

^ "Biography of Horkheimer at University of Haifa" . Archived from the original on 17 July 2007 . Retrieved 15 July 2007 .

^ "Max Horkheimer (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 14 June 2015 .

^ Frankfurt School: Vol. 2 . Taylor & Francis. 1994. p. 296.

ISBN 978-0-415-05856-8 .

^ Elliot, Anthony and Larry Ray (eds.). 2003.

Key Contemporary Social Theorists . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 162.

^ a b Held, David. 1980. Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

^ a b c Elliott, Anthony and Larry Ray, ed. 1996. Key Contemporary Social Theorists. Malden, MA: Blackwell.

^ a b c d W. G. Regier MLN, Vol. 110, No. 4, Comparative Literature Issue (Sep. 1995, pp. 953–957), Johns Hopkins University Press.

^ Sica, Alan. 2005. "Social Thought: From the Enlightenment to The Present" (pp. 542–546). Pennsylvania State University: Pearson, Inc.

^ Sica, Alan 2005. "Social Thought: From the Enlightenment to The Present" (pp. 542–546). Pennsylvania State University: Pearson, Inc.

^ Eclipse of Reason, Seabury Press, 1974 [1941]. p. 187.

^ Horkheimer, Max (1 January 1974).

Eclipse of Reason . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8264-0009-3 .

^ Mann, Douglas. 2008. "Slamming Society: Critical Theory and Situationism." p. 106 in Understanding Society: A Survey of Modern Social Theory . Don Mills; Oxford University Press.

^ a b Lemert, Charles. 2010.

Social Theory: The Multicultural and Classic Readings . 4th ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

^ Mann, Douglas. 2008. "Slamming Society: Critical Theory and Situationism", p. 107 in Understanding Society: A Survey of Modern Social Theory . Don Mills; Oxford University Press.

^ Parker, Noel and Stuart Sim., ed. 1997. The A-Z Guide to Modern Social and Political Theorists. Prentice Hall: London. pp. 1–2.

^ Solty, Ingar (15 February 2020).

"Max Horkheimer, a Teacher Without a Class" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 8 July 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Abromeit, John.

Max Horkheimer and the Foundations of the Frankfurt School.

Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press, 2011.

Jay, Martin.

The Dialectical Imagination: A History of the Frankfurt School and the Institute of Social Research, 1923–1950.

Second edition. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.

Schirmacher, Wolfgang .

German 20th Century Philosophy: The Frankfurt School.

New York: Continuum, 2000.

Wiggershaus, Rolf.

The Frankfurt School: Its History, Theories, and Political Significance.

Boston: MIT Press, 1995.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Max Horkheimer .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Max Horkheimer .

Max Horkheimer Internet Archive contains complete texts of Enlightenment as Mass Deception (1944), Theism and Atheism (1963) and Feudal Lord, Customer, and Specialist (1964).

Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology Online: Max Horkheimer Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Max Horkheimer Encyclopædia Britannica : Max Horkheimer biography v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Rectors and presidents of the Goethe University Frankfurt Rectors (1914–1971) Richard von Wachsmuth Ludwig Pohle Hans von Arnim Albrecht Bethe Heinrich Titze Rudolf Kautzsch Arthur Moritz Schoenflies Max Neisser Otto zur Strassen Kurt Burchard Matthias Gelzer Gustav Embden Wilhelm Gerloff Fritz Drevermann Josef Heimberger Georg Küntzel Bernhard Fischer-Wasels Erwin Madelung Wilhelm Gerloff Ernst Krieck Walter Platzhoff Georg Hohmann Walter Hallstein Franz Böhm Boris Rajewsky Max Horkheimer Oscar Gans Fritz Neumark Helmut Coing Rudolf Geißendörfer Helmut Viebrock Willy Hartner Karl Hax Fritz Neumark Walter Artelt Alfred Rammelmeyer Wolfgang Franz Walter Rüegg Erhard Denninger Presidents (since 1971) Erhard Kantzenbach Hans-Jürgen Krupp Hartwig Kelm Klaus Ring Joachim Weidmann (acting) Werner Meißner Rudolf Steinberg Werner Müller-Esterl Birgitta Wolff Enrico Schleiff v t e American Jewish Committee Presidents Mayer Sulzberger (1906–1912) Louis B. Marshall (1912–1929) Cyrus Adler (1929–1940) Sol M. Stroock (1941) Maurice Wertheim (1941–1943) Joseph M. Proskauer (1943–1949) Jacob Blaustein (1949–1954) Herbert B. Ehrmann (1959–1961) Morris B. Abram (1964–1968) Arthur J. Goldberg (1968–1969) Philip E. Hoffman (1969–1973) Elmer L. Winter (1973–1977) Maynard I. Wishner (1980–1983) Alfred H. Moses (1991–1994) Harold Tanner (2001–2004) Michael L. Tichnor (2022–) CEOs David Harris (1990–2022) Ted Deutch (2022–present) Other key people Elliot E. Cohen Felice D. Gaer Jerry Goodman Max Horkheimer Avital Leibovich Nathan Perlmutter Norman Podhoretz A. James Rudin Jacob Schiff Harry Schneiderman Kenneth S. Stern Marc H. Tanenbaum Institutions Atlanta Jewish Film Festival Muslim-Jewish Advisory Council Project Interchange Transatlantic Institute Publications American Jewish Year Book (1908–2008) The Authoritarian Personality (1950) Commentary (1945–2007) Present Tense (1973–1990) " Progressive Jewish Thought and the New Anti-Semitism " (2006) Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pgkjc
Cached time: 20250817050754
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.894 seconds
Real time usage: 1.118 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5740/1000000
Revision size: 35844/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 163901/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8853/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131522/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.592/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17749015/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  921.903      1 -total
 19.90%  183.474      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.97%  128.830      1 Template:Reflist
 11.22%  103.450      1 Template:Frankfurt_School
 11.00%  101.387      1 Template:IPA
 10.90%  100.447      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.62%   70.250      1 Template:Short_description
  6.34%   58.446      1 Template:Birth_date
  6.19%   57.094      5 Template:ISBN
  5.60%   51.602      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19456:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050754 and revision id 1294542942. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Max_Horkheimer&oldid=1294542942 " Categories : 1895 births 1973 deaths 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century German philosophers American anti-fascists American Jewish Committee American literary critics American male non-fiction writers American Marxists American sociologists Anti-consumerists Columbia University faculty Communication scholars German epistemologists Exilliteratur writers Frankfurt School philosophers German anti-fascists German literary critics German male non-fiction writers German Marxists German sociologists Goethe University Frankfurt alumni Academic staff of Goethe University Frankfurt Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish anti-fascists Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Jewish philosophers Jewish socialists Jewish sociologists Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich alumni Marxist theorists German metaphysicians Ontologists Writers from Stuttgart People from the Kingdom of Württemberg German philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics German philosophers of education German philosophers of technology German philosophers of history German philosophers of mind German political philosophers Scientists from Frankfurt University of Freiburg alumni University of Chicago faculty Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 10:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Max Horkheimer 55 languages Add topic

