Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Americas 1.2 Asia & Oceania 1.3 Europe 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Alluvial plain 40 languages العربية Aragonés 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски മലയാളം 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Region on which rivers have deposited sediment For the glacial feature, see Outwash plain .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Alluvial plain" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Floodplain (centre) within the alluvial plain of the Waimakariri River , New Zealand (part of the Canterbury Plains ).

A small, incised alluvial plain from Red Rock Canyon State Park (California) .

An alluvial plain is a plain (an essentially flat landform ) created by the deposition of sediment over a long period by one or more rivers coming from highland regions, from which alluvial soil forms. A floodplain is part of the process, being the smaller area over which the rivers flood at a particular time. In contrast, the alluvial plain is the larger area representing the region over which the floodplains have shifted over geological time.

As the highlands erode due to weathering and water flow, the sediment from the hills is transported to the lower plain. Various creeks will carry the water further to a river, lake , bay , or ocean . As the sediments are deposited during flood conditions in the floodplain of a creek, the elevation of the floodplain will be raised. As this reduces the channel floodwater capacity, the creek will, over time, seek new, lower paths, forming a meander (a curved path). The leftover higher locations, typically natural levees at the margins of the flood channel, will be eroded by lateral stream erosion, local rainfall, and possibly wind transport if the climate is arid and does not support soil-holding grasses. These processes, over geologic time, will form the plain, a region with little relief (local changes in elevation) yet with a constant but slight slope.

The Glossary of Landform and Geologic Terms , maintained by the United States National Cooperative Soil Survey (NCSS), defines an "alluvial plain" as "a large assemblage of fluvial landforms (braided streams, terraces, etc.) that form a low gradient, regional ramps along the flanks of mountains and extend great distances from their sources (e.g., High Plains of North America)".  Use of "alluvial plain" as a general, informal term for a broad flood plain or a low-gradient delta is explicitly discouraged.  The NCSS glossary instead suggests "flood plain".

[ 1 ] Alluvial plains have similar traits to a river delta ; however, the river delta will flow into a larger body of water. Alluvial plains generally don't have this.

Examples [ edit ] Americas [ edit ] Mississippi Alluvial Plain , Oxnard Plain , and Laguna de Santa Rosa in the United States [ 2 ] Santa Clara Valley in San Jose, California [ 3 ] Tempisque River plain in Costa Rica Middle Amazon , Brazil [ 4 ] Asia & Oceania [ edit ] Canterbury Plains , Southland Plains , and Waikato Plains in New Zealand Chianan Plain in Taiwan Indo-Gangetic Plain and Punjab in India , Pakistan , and Bangladesh [ 5 ] Mekong Delta in Vietnam Mesopotamia in Iraq North China Plain in China Europe [ edit ] Baetic Depression in Andalusia , Spain Lower Danubian Plain , Bulgaria and Romania Iskar (river) valleys in Bulgaria Mesaoria in Cyprus Multiple sites in Switzerland Palakaria Valley in Bulgaria Po Valley in Italy Rhine–Meuse–Scheldt in the Netherlands Haute vallée de la Sarthe in France Struma Valley in Bulgaria Tundzha valleys in Bulgaria Upper Thracian Plain in Bulgaria See also [ edit ] Alluvial fan Alluvium Coastal plain Desert pavement Floodplain River delta References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary of Landform and Geologic Terms" .

National Soil Survey Handbook—Part 629 .

National Cooperative Soil Survey . April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ Mississippi River alluvial plain Archived 2007-07-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Santa Clara Valley Groundwater Basin, East Bay Plain Subbasin Archived 2020-12-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Latrubesse, Edgardo M.; Franzinelli, Elena (2002).

"The Holocene alluvial plain of the middle Amazon River, Brazil" .

Geomorphology .

44 ( 3– 4): 241– 257.

doi : 10.1016/S0169-555X(01)00177-5 .

^ Punjab Plain , Encyclopædia Britannica Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alluvial plains .

v t e River morphology Large-scale features Alluvial plain Drainage basin Drainage system (geomorphology) Estuary Strahler number (stream order) River valley River delta River sinuosity Alluvial rivers Anabranch Avulsion (river) Bar (river morphology) Braided river Channel pattern Cut bank Floodplain Meander Meander cutoff Mouth bar Oxbow lake Point bar Riffle Rapids Riparian zone River bifurcation River channel migration River mouth Slip-off slope Stream pool Thalweg Bedrock river Canyon Knickpoint Plunge pool Bedforms Ait Antidune Dune Current ripple Regional processes Aggradation Base level Degradation (geology) Erosion and tectonics River rejuvenation Mechanics Deposition (geology) Water erosion Exner equation Hack's law Helicoidal flow Playfair's law Sediment transport List of rivers that have reversed direction Category Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alluvial_plain&oldid=1296790074 " Categories : Fluvial landforms Plains Geography terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 08:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alluvial plain 40 languages Add topic

