Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Field 2 Scope 3 Validation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Anomalistics 2 languages Čeština Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Investigation of anomalous or paranormal phenomena Charles Fort, anomalistics pioneer Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Doppelgänger Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune-telling Ghost hunting Haunted locations India UK US Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telekinesis Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific literacy Scientific skepticism Parapsychology Anomalous experiences Apparitional experiences Empath False awakening Hypnosis Ideomotor phenomenon Out-of-body experiences Parapsychology Synchronicity Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend v t e Anomalistics is the use of scientific methods to evaluate anomalies ( phenomena that fall outside current understanding), with the aim of finding a rational explanation.

[ 1 ] The term itself was coined in 1973 by Drew University anthropologist Roger W. Wescott, who defined it as being the "serious and systematic study of all phenomena that fail to fit the picture of reality provided for us by common sense or by the established sciences." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Wescott credited journalist and researcher Charles Fort as being the creator of anomalistics as a field of research, and he named biologist Ivan T. Sanderson and Sourcebook Project compiler William R. Corliss as being instrumental in expanding anomalistics to introduce a more conventional perspective into the field.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Henry Bauer , emeritus professor of science studies at Virginia Tech , writes that anomalistics is "a politically correct term for the study of bizarre claims", [ 5 ] while David J. Hess of the Department of Science and Technology Studies at the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute describes it as being "the scientific study of anomalies defined as claims of phenomena not generally accepted by the bulk of the scientific community." [ 1 ] Anomalistics covers several sub-disciplines, including ufology , cryptozoology , and parapsychology . Researchers involved in the field have included ufologist J. Allen Hynek and cryptozoologist Bernard Heuvelmans , and parapsychologist John Hayes.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Field [ edit ] According to Marcello Truzzi , Professor of Sociology at Eastern Michigan University , anomalistics works on the principles that "unexplained phenomena exist", but that most can be explained through the application of scientific scrutiny. Further, that something remains plausible until it has been conclusively proven not only implausible but actually impossible, something that science does not do. In 2000, he wrote that anomalistics has four basic functions: to aid in the evaluation of a wide variety of anomaly claims proposed by protoscientists ; to understand better the process of scientific adjudication and to make that process both more just and rational; to build a rational conceptual framework for both categorizing and accessing anomaly claims; and to act in the role of amicus curiae ("friend of the court") to the scientific community in its process of adjudication.

[ 9 ] Scope [ edit ] In the view of Truzzi, anomalistics has two core tenets governing its scope: Research must remain within the conventional boundaries; and Research must deal exclusively with "empirical claims of the extraordinary", rather than claims of a "metaphysical, theological or supernatural" nature.

According to Wescott, anomalistics is also concerned with ostensibly paranormal phenomena, such as apparitions and poltergeists , or " psi " (parapsychology, e.g., ESP , psychokinesis and telepathy ).

[ 2 ] Validation [ edit ] According to Truzzi, before an explanation can be considered valid within anomalistics, it must fulfill four criteria. It must be based on conventional knowledge and reasoning; it must be kept simple and be unburdened by speculation or overcomplexity; the burden of proof must be placed on the claimant and not the researcher; and the more extraordinary the claim, the higher the level of proof required.

Bauer states that nothing can be deemed as proof within anomalistics unless it can gain "acceptance by the established disciplines".

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena (ASSAP) References [ edit ] ^ a b Hess David J. (1997) "Science Studies: an advanced introduction" New York University Press, ISBN 0-8147-3564-9 ^ a b c Wescott, Roger W. (1975), "Anomalistics: The Outline of an Emerging Field of Investigation", in M. Maruyama & A. Harkins (ed.), Cultures Beyond the Earth , New York: Vintage Books, pp.

22– 25, ISBN 0-394-71602-7 ^ Clark, Jerome (May 1993).

Encyclopedia of strange and unexplained physical phenomena . Gale Research Inc. p.

7 .

ISBN 978-0-8103-8843-7 .

^ Clark, Jerome (1993) "Encyclopedia of Strange and Unexplained Physical Phenomena", Thomson Gale, ISBN 0-8103-8843-X ^ a b Bauer, Henry (2000) Science Or Pseudoscience: Magnetic Healing, Psychic Phenomena and Other Heterodoxies , University of Illinois Press, ISBN 0-252-02601-2 ^ Clark, Jerome (1998).

The UFO book: Encyclopedia of the Extraterrestrial . Detroit, Michigan: Visible Ink Press.

ISBN 1-57859-029-9 .

^ Science , 5 November 1999: Vol. 286. no. 5442, p. 1079.

^ Science , 14 May 2010, Vol. 328. no. 5980,  p.854.

^ Truzzi, Marcello (2002) "The Perspective of Anomalistics" (section only) - "Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience", Fitzroy Dearborn, ISBN 1-57958-207-9 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anomalistics&oldid=1286186258 " Categories : Parapsychology Scientific skepticism Fringe science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 08:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anomalistics 2 languages Add topic

