Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Axlebox 2 Center pin 3 Center plate 4 Truck side frame 5 Truck bolster 6 Side bearing 7 Brake rigging 8 Image gallery 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents List of railroad truck parts 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Parts list of railroad trucks (bogies) A Bettendorf -style truck (bogie) with the names of its parts. The journal boxes are integral parts of the side frame. Most types of modern freight trucks originate in this design.

A bogie or railroad truck holds the wheel sets of a rail vehicle.

Axlebox [ edit ] An axlebox , also known as a journal box in North America, is the mechanical subassembly on each end of the axles under a railway wagon, coach or locomotive; it contains bearings and thus transfers the wagon, coach or locomotive weight to the wheels and rails; the bearing design is typically oil-bathed plain bearings on older rolling stock, or roller bearings on newer rolling stock.

[ 1 ] Plain bearings are now illegal for interchange service in North America.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] As early as 1908 axle boxes contained a set of long cylindrical rollers allowing the axle to rotate.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It was also used on steam locomotives such as the Victorian Railways A2 class , the LMS Garratt , the LSWR 415 class , and the GCR Class 1 .

[ 5 ] [ dubious – discuss ] Center pin [ edit ] A large steel pin—or rod—which passes through the center plates on the body bolster and truck bolster.

[ 7 ] The truck turns about the pin, and stress is taken by the center plates.

[ 7 ] Center plate [ edit ] One of a pair of plates which fit one into the other and support the car body on the trucks allowing them to turn freely under the car.

[ 7 ] The one on the truck may also be called center bowl.

[ 8 ] Truck side frame [ edit ] The frame at either side of the truck.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Truck bolster [ edit ] Each truck has a bolster—a transverse floating beam—between the side frames.

[ 9 ] It is the central part of every truck on which the underframe of the railcar or railroad car is pivoted through the center pivot pin.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] Side bearing [ edit ] There is one side bearing located on each side of the centerplate on the truck bolster. In case of a shared bogie on an articulated car, there are two on each side.

Brake rigging [ edit ] The brake rigging includes the brake lever, the brake hanger, the brake pin, the brake beam and the brake shoes .

This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2022 ) Image gallery [ edit ] Journal boxes and axle boxes An American journal box showing a plain bearing [ 10 ] This Bettendorf -style freight car truck uses journal bearings in journal boxes that are integral parts of the side frames . The center pin can be seen pointing up from the bolster. It has coil springs .

Railroad car wheels are joined to a straight axle, allowing both wheels to rotate together. This is called a wheelset .

An archbar-type truck with American style journal boxes that are bolted to ends of the side frame A Bettendorf -style truck with axle boxes , which are not part of the side frames , at the wheels A Swiss axlebox Japanese archbar truck with  axleboxes at the wheels Diamond frame bogie, elliptical springs and American style journal boxes Closeup of a shared bogie with 4 specially adapted side bearings and an articulated connector between two sections of an articulated well car . The roller bearings are not enclosed by an axle box.

See also [ edit ] Axle track Ball bearings , or roller bearings , replaced journal bearings for interchange Glossary of North American railway terms Glossary of rail transport terms ICF Bogie Roller bearings , replaced journal bearings for interchange Rotation around a fixed axis Stuffing box Timmis system , an early form of coil spring used on railway axles.

Train wheel Wheelbase Wheelset References [ edit ] ^ "Railroad Dictionary: J" .

CSX.com . CSX Corporation. 2012. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014 . Retrieved 15 November 2014 .

^ Car and Locomotive Cyclopedia 1969 ^ a b "AAR M-1003 Certified Truck Component Manufacturing" .

Columbus Castings . Columbus, Ohio. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ a b "General Information" (PDF) .

Standard Car Truck Company . January 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ a b "The Evolution of Railway Axlebox Technology" .

Evolution . SKF. 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2014 .

^ "Glossary: A" .

Railway-Technical.com . Railway Technical Web Pages. 2014. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ a b c d "Railroad Dictionary: C" .

CSX.com . CSX Corporation. 2012. Archived from the original on 1 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 November 2014 .

^ "APTA PR-CS-RP-003-98 Recommended Practice for Developing a Clearance Diagram for Passenger Equipment" (PDF) .

APTA.com .

American Public Transportation Association . 26 March 1998. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 January 2015 .

^ a b "Railroad Dictionary: B" .

CSX.com . CSX Corporation. 2012. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014 . Retrieved 15 November 2014 .

^ CSX Dictionary J Archived 2014-07-29 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] US Army Field Manual FM 55-20, Figure 8-8, Department of the Army, Washington DC Car and Locomotive Cyclopedia 1970 Forney, Matthias N. (1879).

The Railroad Car Builder's Dictionary .

Dover Publications .

White, John H.

(1978).

The American Railroad Passenger Car . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press .

ISBN 0801819652 .

OCLC 2798188 .

White, John H. Jr.

(1993).

The American Railroad Freight Car: From the Wood-Car Era to the Coming of Steel . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press .

ISBN 0-8018-4404-5 .

OCLC 26130632 .

External links [ edit ] Bogies/Trucks v t e Locomotive design Cab positioning Short hood / Long hood Cab forward Sharknose Steeplecab Cab unit Hood unit Cowl unit Boxcab Dual Control Stand Wheel arrangement AAR wheel arrangement UIC classification Swiss classification Whyte notation Valve gear types Allan Baker Bagnall–Price Baguley Bulleid Caprotti Gab Gooch Gresley Hackworth Joy Kuhn slide Lentz Southern Stephenson Walschaerts Bogie types AAR type A switcher truck Arnoux system Articulated bogie Bissel truck Blomberg B Cleminson system Grovers bogie Jacobs bogie Krauss-Helmholtz bogie Mason Bogie Pony truck Radial steering truck Scheffel bogie Schwartzkopff-Eckhardt II bogie Other running gear elements Adams axle Axlebox Beugniot lever Carrying wheel Coupled wheel Driving wheel Equalising beam Gölsdorf axle Journal box Klien-Lindner axle Leading wheel Luttermöller axle Radial axle Railway tire Road–rail vehicle Trailing wheel Train wheel Wheelset Exhaust system types Giesl Kylchap Kylpor Lemaître Lempor Lemprex Common exhaust system elements Blastpipe Smokebox Chimney Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_railroad_truck_parts&oldid=1225483715 " Categories : Bogie Glossaries of rail transport Vehicle technology Car-related lists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Canadian English from January 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Use dmy dates from January 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from November 2014 Articles to be expanded from February 2022 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia glossaries using subheadings This page was last edited on 24 May 2024, at 18:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of railroad truck parts 1 language Add topic

