Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the United States Toggle In the United States subsection 1.1 Colorado 1.2 Florida 1.3 Oregon 1.4 Texas 2 Virginia 3 In Australia 4 In Europe 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Aquifer storage and recovery 4 languages العربية Español فارسی Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Injection of water into an aquifer for later use The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the English-speaking world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aquifer storage and recovery ( ASR ) is the direct injection of surface water supplies such as potable water , reclaimed water (i.e. rainwater), or river water into an aquifer for later recovery and use. The injection and extraction is often done by means of a well . In areas where the rainwater cannot percolate the soil or where it is not capable of percolating it fast enough (i.e.

urban areas ) and where the rainwater is thus diverted to rivers, rainwater ASR could help to keep the rainwater within an area. ASR is used for municipal, industrial and agricultural purposes .

In the United States [ edit ] Colorado [ edit ] The first ASR well with a downhole control valve was installed in Highlands Ranch, Colorado , in 1992 for Centennial Water and Sanitation District.

[ 1 ] Since then, over 40 ASR wells have been installed for many different municipalities.  These wells range in depths from 1,000 ft (300 m) to 3,000 ft (910 m) below ground surface, with injection rates commonly between 100 US gal (380 L; 83 imp gal) and 500 US gal (1,900 L; 420 imp gal) per minute (gpm) per well.

[ citation needed ] Florida [ edit ] The use of ASR in Florida has been examined to determine potential benefits for the Everglades and other Floridian water systems under the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan (CERP). An estimate of 333 ASR wells would be implemented as part of CERP and used to store, treat and supply excess surface water to the Everglades and other systems of water during dry periods.

[ 2 ] As of 2004, doubts remained about the benefit of introducing ASR in such large capacity to Florida due to a predominantly karst geography . Current or potential problems include: (1) poor recovery due to mixing of the injected fresh water with the existing brackish to saline water in the aquifer; (2) pre-existing quality of water introduced to ASR; and (3) potential risk of resulting water quality due to mixing of injected freshwater and existing aquifer.

[ 3 ] Oregon [ edit ] The first agriculture ASR wells were put into service in Oregon in the autumn of 2006 and have injected well over 3,000 acre-feet (3,700,000 m 3 ) of water during the winter and spring flood flow times using artificial recharge (AR) of flood water as their water source. This shallow recharged water is then recovered as potable water and injected into the deep basalt aquifer.

[ citation needed ] During the injection process, electrical energy can be generated by the head pressure of the water flowing back into the aquifer. This stored water is recovered during late summer and early autumn for irrigation needs.

[ citation needed ] Both of these well types use a down-hole control valve. ASR can also be used to re-inject water used by HVAC systems to maintain the ground water levels and store the thermal differences from summertime cooling for winter time heating. Industry can also capture cold winter waters and store it for summertime use and avoid the need for cooling water in the summer for industrial processes. This may also free up short supplies of summer time water for other beneficial uses. This reinjection process  may also avoid the cost of surface disposal and avoid the increased thermal load to the rivers and streams during the summer air conditioning season.

[ 4 ] Texas [ edit ] As of 2014, the Texan cities of El Paso , Kerrville and San Antonio used ASR, providing water resources to these water-vulnerable communities.

[ 5 ] A University of Florida report ranked daily per-capita water availability for 225 large urban areas across the U.S.

[ 6 ] The study weighed fresh water available to cities from naturally occurring and constructed sources such as reservoirs, aquifers and imports. Of the cities reviewed, San Antonio ranked last, or most vulnerable, and El Paso ranked as 10th-worst, though other Texas cities made the list.

[ 5 ] San Antonio stores drinking water in its Carrizo ASR facility, which contains more than 91,000 acre-feet of water and has a maximum capacity of 120,000 acre-feet.

[ 5 ] A 2010 Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) survey of Texas water utilities found four primary objections to ASR in other parts of Texas: legal and physical limitations, the quality of the recovered water, cost-effectiveness and the potential for other pumpers to capture the utility's stored water.

[ 5 ] Virginia [ edit ] In the Hampton Roads region, the Virginia Beach–Chesapeake–Norfolk metropolitan area, treated waste water is pumped back into the Potomac Aquifer , to limit the existing sinking and prevent saltwater contamination.

[ 7 ] In Australia [ edit ] Newly constructed wetland for final stage treatment of urban stormwater runoff for an ASR scheme in western Adelaide , South Australia [ 8 ] In South Australia, the City of Salisbury in northern Adelaide has since 1994 played a pioneering role in establishing the viability of the capture and treatment of urban stormwater runoff within artificial wetlands, and injecting the treated water into Tertiary aquifers in winter, for later use by industry, and for irrigation of city parks and school playing fields in summer.

[ 9 ] In 2009 the capacity of the Salisbury ASR schemes was around 5 gigalitres per annum (expected to rise to 14 GL by 2014) [ 10 ] and this success has led to other local government areas across Adelaide undertaking similar ASR projects.

[ citation needed ] In Europe [ edit ] In Spain, the SubSol ASR project is active [ 11 ] and in the Netherlands, there is the COASTAR project.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Acre-foot Groundwater recharge Groundwater banking References [ edit ] ^ "Baski Flow Control Valves, ASR Valves" .

www.baski.com . Retrieved 2016-01-22 .

^ "Aquifer Storage and Recovery Regional Study" (PDF) .

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-12-22 . Retrieved 2016-11-29 .

^ "Review of Aquifer Storage and Recovery in the Floridan Aquifer System of Southern Florida" .

U.S. Geological Survey .

^ Kent Madison (2008).

"Aquifer Storage and Recovery (ASR)" . 3R Valve . Retrieved 2008-12-26 .

^ a b c d Texas Water Report: Going Deeper for the Solution Archived 2017-02-15 at the Wayback Machine Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts. Retrieved 2/11/14.

^ Water availability ranking for 225 urban areas in the United States . Environmental Hydrology Laboratory at the University of Florida. Retrieved 2/11/14.

^ Shao, Elena (2022-10-20).

"There's Something in the Water in Virginia. Before You Say 'Yuck,' Wait" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-05-09 .

^ City of Charles Sturt > Major Projects > Water Proofing the West Accessed 23 March 2014.

^ City of Salisbury > Environment > Wetlands and Water Archived March 25, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Accessed 22 March 2014.

^ Haines, S. (2009): Towards Water Sensitive Cities City of Salisbury. Accessed 22 March 2014.

^ SubSol ^ COASTAR External links [ edit ] American Ground Water Trust ASR Info Aquifer Storage and Recovery, by California Water Science Center (November 20, 2018) v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aquifer_storage_and_recovery&oldid=1289517748 " Categories : Aquifers Building biology Building engineering Water supply Water and the environment Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2022 Anglophone-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 04:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aquifer storage and recovery 4 languages Add topic

