Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Model legislation and studies Toggle Model legislation and studies subsection 2.1 IVF model legislation 2.2 Abortion pill study 3 Judicial involvement and public comments 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethics and Public Policy Center Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US non-profit organization Ethics and Public Policy Center Formation 1976 ; 49 years ago ( 1976 ) Founder Ernest W. Lefever Headquarters 1730 M Street , N.W., Suite 910, Washington, D.C.

President Ryan T. Anderson Vice President Edward Whelan Revenue $8,450,000 [ 1 ] (2024) Expenses $7,320,000 [ 1 ] (2024) Website eppc .org This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Ethics and Public Policy Center ( EPPC ) is a conservative [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Washington, D.C.

–based think tank and advocacy group . Founded in 1976, the group describes itself as "working to apply the riches of the Jewish and Christian traditions to contemporary questions of law, culture, and politics, in pursuit of America's continued civic and cultural renewal." [ 4 ] Since February 2021, EPPC's president has been Ryan T. Anderson , who previously worked at the Heritage Foundation , succeeding Edward Whelan , [ 5 ] who serves as EPPC's vice president.

[ 6 ] Former president of EPPC from 1989 through June 1996, George Weigel , Catholic theologian and papal biographer, is also a distinguished senior fellow.

[ 7 ] EPPC is a 501(c)(3) organization .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] EPPC was founded in 1976 by Ernest W. Lefever , an American political theorist. He was nominated in 1981 for a United States Department of State position by U.S. President Ronald Reagan before ultimately being rejected for the opportunity for his controversial background.

[ 10 ] He served as president of EPPC until 1989 and continued to write scholarly articles for EPPC until his death in 2009.

[ 11 ] Lefever said upon founding the institute that "a small ethically oriented center" should "respond directly to ideological critics who insist the corporation is fundamentally unjust." [ 12 ] From 2003 to 2018, EPPC published The New Atlantis: A Journal of Technology and Society .

[ 13 ] In January 2018, The New Atlantis became independent of EPPC and is now published by the Center for the Study of Technology and Society.

[ 14 ] EPPC is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025 .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Model legislation and studies [ edit ] IVF model legislation [ edit ] In 2025, legislation based on proposals from the Ethics and Public Policy Center (EPPC) was enacted in Arkansas and Utah . In Arkansas, Governor Sarah Huckabee Sanders signed a law on April 22 addressing infertility through alternatives to in vitro fertilization (IVF), reflecting a model developed by EPPC policy analyst Natalie Dodson.

[ 17 ] The law followed the publication of an EPPC report outlining ethical treatments for infertility. In Utah, Governor Spencer Cox signed SB 334 into law on March 24. The law, based on model legislation by EPPC senior fellow Stanley Kurtz, requires students at Utah State University to complete a year-and-a-half course in Western civilization and a one-semester course in American civics.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Abortion pill study [ edit ] In April 2025, researchers Jamie Bryan Hall and Ryan T. Anderson published a large-scale observational study analyzing the safety of mifepristone , a drug commonly used for medication abortion. Using data from a comprehensive all-payer insurance claims database, the study examined 865,727 mifepristone abortions performed in the United States between 2017 and 2023. The study reported that 10.93 percent of women experienced serious adverse events within 45 days of taking mifepristone. These events included sepsis, infection, hemorrhage, surgery, and hospitalization. The reported complication rate was significantly higher than the less than 0.5 percent rate found in earlier clinical trials referenced by the U.S.

Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The authors attributed the discrepancy to differences between clinical trial conditions and real-world medical practice. They argued that current FDA safety protocols are insufficient and recommended reinstating earlier safeguards. These included physician-only prescribing, in-person medical supervision, and mandatory reporting of adverse events. The study concluded that the FDA should reassess the approval and regulation of mifepristone based on updated safety data.

[ 20 ] The study’s findings were referenced during a United States Senate hearing on May 14, 2025, when Senator Josh Hawley cited the data in a discussion with Secretary of Health and Human Services Robert Kennedy Jr.

[ 21 ] [ better source needed ] In response, Secretary Kennedy stated that he had requested Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Martin Makary to conduct a full review of the safety profile of mifepristone. On June 2, 2025, Commissioner Makary confirmed in a letter to Senator Hawley that such a review would be undertaken.

[ 22 ] [ better source needed ] Judicial involvement and public comments [ edit ] On May 1, 2025, Ryan T. Anderson was appointed to President Donald Trump ’s Religious Liberty Commission.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] EPPC staff submitted public comments supporting the Department of Health and Human Services ’ proposal to exclude gender-transition procedures from essential health benefits and encouraged the FDA to incorporate biological sex differences into its regulatory guidance.

[ 25 ] EPPC also urged the Drug Enforcement Administration to preserve state authority over the telemedical prescription of abortion drugs and cross-sex hormones .

[ 26 ] Additional comments addressed the Department of Veterans Affairs ’ rule mandating abortion-related benefits, which EPPC opposed, and supported revisions to the Department of Housing and Urban Development ’s Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing regulations, replacing earlier rules criticized for regulatory overreach.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Roberts, Andrea Suozzo, Alec Glassford, Ash Ngu, Brandon (May 9, 2013).

"Ethics And Public Policy Center Inc - Nonprofit Explorer" .

ProPublica .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Bravin, Jess (December 2, 2014).

"How Do You Solve a Problem Like Scalia? Set His Dissents to Music" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ Kamen, Al; Itkowitz, Colby (December 17, 2014).

"The nuclear option and its fallout" .

The Washington Post .

^ "About" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center .

^ "Ryan T. Anderson to Become Next EPPC President" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center .

^ "Staff" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center .

^ "Fellows and Scholars" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center .

^ "Support EPPC" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center .

^ Hoover’s Online. Ethics and Public Policy Center. Retrieved April 17, 2012 from Hoover's Online ^ "Ethics and Public Policy Center celebrates 40 years of championing the Judeo-Christian moral tradition" .

The Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Weigel, George.

"In Memory of Ernest W. Lefever" .

Ethics and Public Policy Center . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ "Ethics and Public Policy Center" .

Right Web - Institute for Policy Studies . 20 January 2012.

^ "About The New Atlantis" .

The New Atlantis . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ "The New Atlantis Becomes Independent" .

Ethics and Public Policy Center . 22 January 2018 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ "Advisory Board" .

The Heritage Foundation .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa (August 29, 2023).

"Conservative Groups Draw Up Plan to Dismantle the US Government and Replace It with Trump's Vision" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ "Arkansas Delivers Hope to Couples Struggling with Infertility with Passage of RESTORE Act" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ Drachman, Matthew (Mar 24, 2025).

" 'The most important bills of 2025': Cox signs two key civic education bills into law" .

abc4.com . Retrieved June 9, 2025 .

^ Pullmann, Joy (2025-03-25).

"Utah Law Instills 'Western Great Books' At All State Universities" .

The Federalist . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "The Abortion Pill Harms Women: Insurance Data Reveals One in Ten Patients Experiences a Serious Adverse Event" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ Josh Hawley (May 14, 2025).

"A new study on the chemical abortion drug shows 11% of women experience adverse effects serious enough to send them to the ER" .

X (formerly Twitter) . Archived from the original on 2025-05-19 . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ Josh Hawley (June 2, 2025).

"FDA chief Marty Makary just committed to me to do a full review of the chemical abortion drug's safety: "As Commissioner of Food and Drugs, I am committed to conducting a review of mifepristone" " .

X (formerly Twitter) .

^ "Donald Trump's Next Executive Order Will Establish Religious Liberty Commission" .

www.dailywire.com . 2025-05-01 . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "President Trump Announces Religious Liberty Commission Members" .

The White House . 2025-05-01 . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "EPPC Scholars Submit Comment Supporting HHS's Proposed Removal of Sex-Rejecting Procedures from Essential Health Benefits" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "EPPC Scholars Submit Comment Encouraging Agency to Ensure Telemedicine Rules Respect States' Rights" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "EPPC Scholars Urge Government Officials to Rescind Department of Veterans Affairs Rule Mandating Taxpayer-Funded Abortion Benefits" .

Ethics & Public Policy Center . Retrieved 2025-06-09 .

^ "EPPC Scholar Comment on HUD IFR "Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing Revisions," RIN 2529-AB08" (PDF) .

Ethics and Public Policy Center . April 28, 2025.

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Italy Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethics_and_Public_Policy_Center&oldid=1295929990 " Categories : Ethics and Public Policy Center Organizations established in 1976 Ethics organizations Charities based in Washington, D.C.

Conservative organizations in the United States Advocacy groups in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 18:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethics and Public Policy Center Add languages Add topic

