Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Dating 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Sisyphus (dialogue) 9 languages العربية Català Deutsch Français Íslenska Italiano Македонски 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Putative dialogue of Plato Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e The Sisyphus ( / ˈ s ɪ s ɪ f ə s / ; Greek : Σίσυφος ) is purported to be one of the dialogues of Plato . The dialogue is extant and was included in the Stephanus edition published in Geneva in 1578. It is now generally acknowledged to be spurious. The work probably dates from the fourth century BCE, and the author was presumably a pupil of Plato .

[ 1 ] Synopsis [ edit ] It is a dialogue between Socrates and Sisyphus of Pharsalus . Sisyphus believes that deliberation allows one to find the best course of action, but Socrates is puzzled by what deliberation is, and why it is supposed to be different from guesswork. By the end of the dialogue, it becomes clear that Sisyphus does not know what deliberation is.

[ 1 ] The dialogue seems to engage with an idea of good deliberation ( euboulia ) for which Isocrates was a noted exponent.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The author uses the term dialegesthai [ 3 ] in an un-Platonic fashion to refer, not to dialectic , but to what Plato considered eristic .

[ 4 ] Dating [ edit ] Carl Werner Müller [ de ] argues that the Sisyphus can be dated securely to the middle third of the fourth century BC, and, assuming that the reference to "Callistratus" [ 5 ] is to Callistratus of Aphidnae , to the period between Callistratus' death sentence in 361 and his execution (by 350), when no one needed to ask "Who is Callistratus?" but Callistratus' constantly changing location in exile made "Where is Callistratus?" a real question.

[ 6 ] Francesco Aronadio also dates the work to Plato's lifetime and places it within the circle of the Academy .

[ 7 ] Schleiermacher had opined that the Sisyphus could perhaps have been produced in the Megarian school .

[ 8 ] The dialogue is freely paraphrased in Dio Chrysostom 's On Deliberation (oration 26) , the earliest instance of a famous author making reference to a work of the Appendix Platonica ( notheuomenoi ).

[ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c D.S. Hutchinson, introduction to "Sisyphus," in John M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson (eds.), Plato, Complete works , Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997, pp. 1707-8.

^ Carl Werner Müller, Die Kurzdialoge der Appendix Platonica , Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 1975, pp. 79-82.

^ Pseudo-Plato, Sisyphus , 338d8, 390b6 ^ Müller 1975, p. 104 ^ Pseudo-Plato, Sisyphus , 388c ^ Müller 1975, p. 103 ^ John M. Dillon , review of F. Aronadio, Dialoghi spuri di Platone (Turin, 2008), in Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2010.03.05 .

^ Friedrich Schleiermacher, Kritische Gesamtausgabe , Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988, part 1 (Schriften und Entwürfe), vol. 3 (Schriften aus der Berliner Zeit, 1800-1802), p. 366.

^ C.W. Müller, " Appendix Platonica und Neue Akademie: Die pseudoplatonischen Dialoge Über die Tugend und Alkyon ," in Döring, Erler, and Schorn (eds.), Pseudoplatonica (Stuttgart, 2005), p. 155.

External links [ edit ] Sisyphus translated by George Burges Free public domain audiobook version of Sisyphus translated by George Burges Apocrypha public domain audiobook at LibriVox . Collection includes Sisyphus.

George Burges , translator (1855).

v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States This article about a philosophy -related book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sisyphus_(dialogue)&oldid=1288952126 " Categories : Dialogues of Plato Appendix Platonica Philosophy book stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with LibriVox links All stub articles This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 16:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sisyphus (dialogue) 9 languages Add topic

