Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Synopsis 3 Themes Toggle Themes subsection 3.1 Underdevelopment 3.2 Colonial education 3.3 Imperialism 3.4 Self-reliance and revolution 4 Impact and reception 5 Editions 6 References Toggle the table of contents How Europe Underdeveloped Africa 3 languages فارسی Italiano Kiswahili Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1972 book by Walter Rodney How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Author Walter Rodney Language English Genre Essay Publisher Bogle-L'Ouverture Publications Publication date 1972 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print ( hardcover , paperback ); e-book Pages 312 ISBN 0-9501546-4-4 Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e How Europe Underdeveloped Africa is a 1972 book written by Walter Rodney that describes how Africa was deliberately exploited and underdeveloped by European colonial regimes. One of his main arguments throughout the book is that Africa developed Europe at the same rate that Europe underdeveloped Africa.

Rodney argues that a combination of power politics and economic exploitation of Africa by Europeans led to the poor state of African political and economic development evident in the late 20th century. Though, he did not intend "to remove the ultimate responsibility for development from the shoulders of Africans... [He believes that] every African has a responsibility to understand the [capitalist] system and work for its overthrow." This book, along with Frantz Fanon's The Wretched of the Earth , is a popular example of 20th century books concerning African development and post-colonial theory .

Background [ edit ] Rodney was a Marxist scholar and activist from Guyana, educated at the University of the West Indies and the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London . His work was grounded in both historical research and his political commitment to Pan-Africanism , Black liberation, and anti- imperialism .

[ 1 ] First published in London by Bogle-L'Ouverture Publications in 1972 (in partnership with Tanzanian Publishing House ), the book shaped the study of Africa in many disciplines.

[ 2 ] Rodney wrote the text while lecturing in Tanzania at the University of Dar es Salaam , [ 3 ] during the presidency of Julius Nyerere . Tanzanian scholar Karim F Hirji has described the work as, "no doubt the 20th century's most important and influential book on African history." [ 4 ] Synopsis [ edit ] Rodney argues that to fully appreciate and understand the effect of European exploitation on Africa, four distinct issues need to be addressed: a reconstruction of pre-European Africa's developmental condition, that of pre-expansionist Europe, and their contributions to each other's present condition, developed or otherwise. After an introductory chapter in which he definitionally discusses development, underdevelopment, and associated terminologies in their historical and contemporary contexts, he devotes a chapter to each of these four issues. He concludes the book with a chapter critiquing arguments that promote the "supposed benefit of colonialism". In this chapter, he also explains the means through which colonialism is linked to Africa's present underdevelopment.

[ citation needed ] Themes [ edit ] Underdevelopment [ edit ] Rodney defines underdevelopment not as the absence of development, but as the active process by which certain societies become impoverished through their interaction with others. He writes: "The question is not whether Africa is underdeveloped but who and what made Africa underdeveloped." [ 5 ] Colonial education [ edit ] Rodney critiques colonial education as a tool for mental colonization, designed to create obedient clerks rather than empowered citizens or intellectuals.

[ 5 ] Imperialism [ edit ] The book situates African colonialism within a larger framework of imperialist expansion. Rodney emphasizes how capitalism in Europe required raw materials, cheap labor, and markets—all provided by Africa.

[ 6 ] Self-reliance and revolution [ edit ] Rodney concludes that African liberation depends on socialist development, popular mobilization, and Pan-African solidarity.

[ 5 ] Impact and reception [ edit ] How Europe Underdeveloped Africa became a cornerstone text for postcolonial African studies, revolutionary movements, and anti-imperialist scholarship. It has been taught in universities across the Global South and remains central to debates on development, reparations, and global inequality.

[ 1 ] The book has influenced generations of African and Caribbean intellectuals, including Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o and Samir Amin . It remains widely cited in academic and activist circles.

[ 7 ] While praised for its rigor and revolutionary spirit, the book has also been criticized by some Western scholars for its ideological stance and reliance on Marxist analysis. Nonetheless, its historical narrative and data have held up under decades of scrutiny.

[ 8 ] Editions [ edit ] (1972) London: Bogle-L'Ouverture Publications ( ISBN 0-9501546-4-4 ) (1974) Washington, DC: Howard University Press ( ISBN 0-88258-013-2 ) (1981) Howard University Press ( ISBN 0-88258-096-5 ) (1982) Howard University Press ( ISBN 0-88258-105-8 ) (2018) Verso Books ( ISBN 978-1-78873-118-8 ) References [ edit ] ^ a b "Walter Rodney's Radical Legacy" .

Boston Review . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ Rodney, Walter (2018).

How Europe Underdeveloped Africa . London: Verso. p. xxii.

ISBN 9781788731188 .

^ Zeilig, Leo (30 October 2019).

"Review: Walter Rodney and the Question of Development" .

Africa is a Country . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Hirji, Karim F (2017).

The Enduring Relevance of Walter Rodney's How Europe Underdeveloped Africa . Wakefield, Quebec: Daraja Press.

ISBN 9780995222397 .

^ a b c Rodney, Walter (1972).

How Europe Underdeveloped Africa . Bogle-L'Ouverture Publications . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ "Review: Walter Rodney, 'How Europe Underdeveloped Africa' " .

Theory, Culture & Society Blog . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ "Primary Documents – Walter Rodney" .

BlackPast . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Freund, Bill (1998).

The Making of Contemporary Africa . Palgrave.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=How_Europe_Underdeveloped_Africa&oldid=1305459495 " Categories : 1972 non-fiction books Books about Africa History books about Europe History books about Africa Imperialism studies 20th-century history books Walter Rodney Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 05:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents How Europe Underdeveloped Africa 3 languages Add topic

