Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Groups called monophysite 3 Verbal monophysitism 4 Political situation of monophysitism after Chalcedon 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Monophysitism 60 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christological doctrine Not to be confused with Miaphysitism .

Part of a series on Christology Concepts Christ (Messiah) Kyrios Son of God God the Son Logos Incarnation Pre-existence Active obedience Communicatio idiomatum Consubstantiality Exaltation Humiliation God-man Homoiōma Hypostatic union Person Prosopon Imitation Intercession Kenosis Syncatabasis Knowledge Love Perfection Wisdom Threefold office Redeemer Doctrines Christological doctrines Adoptionism Apollinarism Binitarianism Eutychianism Chalcedonism ( Neo ) Docetism Dyoenergism Monoenergism Dyothelitism Monothelitism Dyophysitism Monophysitism Miaphysitism Henotikon Homoousionism Homoiousianism Homoianism Nestorianism Theopaschism By denomination Extra calvinisticum Lutheran Christology v t e Monophysitism ( / m ə ˈ n ɒ f ɪ s aɪ t ɪ z əm / mə- NOF -ih-seye-tih-zəm [ 1 ] ) or monophysism ( / m ə ˈ n ɒ f ɪ z ɪ z əm / mə- NOF -ih-zih-zəm ; from Greek μόνος monos , "solitary" [ 2 ] and φύσις physis , " nature ") is a Christological doctrine that states that there was only one nature—the divine—in the person of Jesus Christ , who was the incarnated Word .

[ 3 ] It is rejected as heretical by the Catholic Church , Eastern Orthodox Church , Anglicanism , Lutheranism , Reformed Christianity ( Calvinist ), and all mainstream Protestant denominations, which hold to the dyophysitism of the 451 Council of Chalcedon —as well by Oriental Orthodoxy , which holds to miaphysitism .

Background [ edit ] The First Council of Nicaea (325) declared that Christ was both divine ( homoousios , consubstantial , of one being or essence, with the Father ) and human (was incarnate and became man). In the fifth century a heated controversy arose between the sees and theological schools of Antioch and Alexandria about how divinity and humanity existed in Christ, [ 4 ] with the former stressing the humanity, the latter the divinity of Christ.

Cyril of Alexandria succeeded in having Nestorius , a prominent exponent of the Antiochian school, condemned at the Council of Ephesus in 431, and insisted on the formula "one physis of the incarnate Word", claiming that any formula that spoke of two physeis represented Nestorianism . Some taught that in Christ the human nature was completely absorbed by the divine, leaving only a divine nature. In 451, the Council of Chalcedon , on the basis of Pope Leo the Great 's 449 declaration , defined that in Christ there were two natures united in one person .

[ 5 ] Those who insisted on the "one physis " formula were referred to as monophysites ( / m ə ˈ n ɒ f ɪ s aɪ t s / ), while those who accepted the  "two natures" definition were called dyophysites , a term applied also to followers of Nestorianism.

Groups called monophysite [ edit ] The forms of monophysism were numerous, and included the following: Acephali were monophysites who in 482 broke away from Peter III of Alexandria who made an agreement with Acacius of Constantinople , sanctioned by Emperor Zeno with his Henotikon edict that condemned both Nestorius and Eutyches, as the Council of Chalcedon had done, but ignored that council's decree on the two natures of Christ. They saw this as a betrayal of S. Cyrils use of "mia physis" and refused to be subject to the Chalcedonian Patriarch of Alexandria, preferring to be instead ecclesiastically ' headless ' ( Latin : acephalī ).

[ 6 ] For this, they were known as ' the headless ' or ' headless ones ' .

[ 7 ] Agnoetae , Themistians or Agnosticists, founded by Themistius Calonymus around 534, held that the nature of Jesus Christ, although divine, was like other men's in all respects, including limited knowledge.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] They must be distinguished from a fourth-century group called by the same name, who denied that God knew the past and the future.

[ 10 ] Aphthartodocetae , Phantasiasts or, after their leader Julian of Halicarnassus , Julianists believed "that the body of Christ, from the very moment of his conception, was incorruptible, immortal and impassible, as it was after the resurrection, and held that the suffering and death on the cross was a miracle contrary to the normal conditions of Christ's humanity".

[ 11 ] Emperor Justinian I wished to have this teaching adopted as orthodox, but died before he could put his plans into effect.

[ 12 ] Apollinarians or Apollinarists, named after Apollinaris of Laodicea (who died in 390) proposed that Jesus had a normal human body but had a divine mind instead of a regular human soul . This teaching was condemned by the First Council of Constantinople (381) and died out within a few decades.

[ 13 ] Cyril of Alexandria declared it a mad proposal.

[ 14 ] Docetists , not all of whom were monophysites, held that Jesus had no human nature: his humanity was only a phantasm, which, united with the impassible, immaterial divine nature, could not really suffer and die.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Eutychians taught that Jesus had only one nature, a union of the divine and human that is not an even compound, since what is divine is infinitely larger than what is human: the humanity is absorbed by and transmuted into the divinity, as a drop of honey, mixing with the water of the sea, vanishes. The body of Christ, thus transmuted, is not consubstantial homoousios with humankind.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In contrast to Severians, who are called verbal monophysites, Eutychianists are called real or ontological monophysites, [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and their teaching is "an extreme form of the monophysite heresy that emphasizes the exclusive prevalence of the divinity in Christ".

[ 22 ] Tritheists , a group of sixth-century monophysites said to have been founded by a monophysite named John Ascunages [ 23 ] of Antioch. Their principal writer was John Philoponus , who taught that the common nature of Father, Son and Holy Spirit is an abstraction of their distinct individual natures.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The Oriental Orthodox , or Severians , accept the reality of Christ's human nature to the extent of insisting that his body was capable of corruption, but argue that, since a single person has a single nature and Christ is one person, not two, he has only a single nature. Agreeing in substance, though not in words, with the Definition of Chalcedon, they are called "verbal monophysites" by some Eastern Orthodox .

[ 19 ] [ 26 ] The Oriental Orthodox reject the label of monophysitism and consider monophysitism a heresy, preferring to label their non-Chalcedonian beliefs as miaphysitism .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Verbal monophysitism [ edit ] Concerning verbal declarations of monophysitism, Justo L. González stated, "in order not to give an erroneous idea of the theology of the so-called monophysite churches, that have subsisted until the twentieth century, one should point out that all the extreme sects of monophysism disappeared within a brief span, and that the Christology of the present so-called monophysite churches is closer to a verbal than to a real monophysism".

[ 29 ] Political situation of monophysitism after Chalcedon [ edit ] Under Emperor Basiliscus , who ousted Emperor Zeno in 475, "the monophysites reached the pinnacle of their power" [ who said this?

] . In his Encyclion , which he issued in the same year, he revoked the Council of Chalcedon and recognized the Second Council of Ephesus of 449 except for its approval of Eutyches, whom Basiliscus condemned. He required his edict to be signed by each bishop. Among the signatures he obtained were those of three of the four Eastern Patriarchs, but the Patriarch and the populace of the capital protested so resolutely that in 476, seeing that his overthrow was imminent, he issued his Anti-Encyclion revoking his former edict. In the same year, Zeno returned victoriously.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Events had made it clear that there was a split between the population, staunchly Chalcedonian in sympathies, of Constantinople and the Balkans and the largely anti-Chalcedonian population of Egypt and Syria. In an attempt to reconcile both sides, Zeno, with the support of Acacius of Constantinople and Peter III of Alexandria , tried to enforce the compromise Henoticon (Formula of Union) decree of 482, which condemned Eutyches but ignored Chalcedon. Schisms followed on both sides.

Rome excommunicated Acacius (leading to the 35-year Acacian schism ), while in Egypt the Acephali broke away from Peter III. The Acacian schism continued under Zeno's successor, the monophysite Anastasius I Dicorus and ended only with the accession of the Chalcedonian Justin I in 518.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Justin I was succeeded by the Chalcedonian Justinian I (527–565), whose wife Empress Theodora protected and assisted the monophysites.

[ 34 ] Ghassanid patronage of the monophysite Syrian Church under phylarch Al-Harith ibn Jabalah was crucial for its survival, revival, and even its spread.

[ 35 ] Justinian I was followed by Justin II , who after being a monophysite, perhaps because of Theodora's influence, converted to the Chalcedonian faith before obtaining the imperial throne. Some time later, he adopted a policy of persecuting the monophysites.

[ 34 ] From Justinian I on, no emperor was a declared monophysite, although they continued their efforts to find compromise formulas such as monoenergism and monothelitism .

See also [ edit ] Miaphysitism Chalcedonian Christianity Non-Chalcedonian Christianity Barsanuphians , an Egyptian non-Chalcedonian sect of Monophysitism References [ edit ] ^ "monophysitism" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, μόνος" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ Orlando O. Espín; James B. Nickoloff (2007).

An Introductory Dictionary of Theology and Religious Studies . Liturgical Press. p. 902.

ISBN 978-0-8146-5856-7 .

^ Ted Campbell (1996).

Christian Confessions: A Historical Introduction . Westminster John Knox Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-664-25650-0 .

^ Christopher Kleinhenz (2004).

Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia .

Routledge . p. 762.

ISBN 978-1-135-94880-1 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Acephali" .

www.newadvent.org .

^ "A Reply to Fr. John Morris Concerning His Review of My Book, The Non-Orthodox" .

orthodoxinfo.com . Retrieved 2022-11-15 .

^ Frank Leslie Cross; Elizabeth A. Livingstone, eds. (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

^ Justo L. González (2010).

A History of Christian Thought Volume II: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation . Abingdon Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1-4267-2191-5 .

^ J. C. Cooper (2013).

Dictionary of Christianity . Routledge. p. 119.

ISBN 978-1-134-26546-6 .

^ Mary Clayton (1998).

The Apocryphal Gospels of Mary in Anglo-Saxon England . Cambridge University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-521-58168-4 .

^ William Holmes (2017).

The Age of Justinian . Jovian Press. p. 280.

ISBN 978-1-5378-1078-2 .

^ Sollier, Joseph. "Apollinarianism." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 8 February 2019 ^ McGuckin (1994).

St. Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy: Its History, Theology, and Texts . Brill. p. 109.

ISBN 978-90-04-31290-6 .

^ Daniel R. Streett (2011).

They Went Out from Us: The Identity of the Opponents in First John . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 978-3-11-024771-8 .

^ J.R.C. Cousland (2017).

Holy Terror: Jesus in the Infancy Gospel of Thomas . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-567-66817-2 .

^ E. A. Livingstone; M. W. D. Sparks; R. W. Peacocke (2013). "Monophysitism".

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-965962-3 .

^ Fred Sanders; Klaus Issler (2007).

Jesus in Trinitarian Perspective: An Introductory Christology . B&H Publishing Group. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-8054-4422-3 .

^ a b John D. Hannah (2019).

Invitation to Church History: World: The Story of Christianity . Kregel Academic. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-8254-2775-6 .

^ Hans van Loon (2009).

The Dyophysite Christology of Cyril of Alexandria . Brill. p. 33.

ISBN 978-90-474-2669-1 .

^ Bernhard Bischoff; Michael Lapidge (1994).

Biblical Commentaries from the Canterbury School of Theodore and Hadrian . Cambridge University Press. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-521-33089-3 .

^ "Eutyches | Orthodox abbot" .

^ Simplicius (2014).

On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.2-3 . A&C Black. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1-4725-0166-0 .

^ E. A. Livingstone; M. W. D. Sparks; R. W. Peacocke (2013).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . OUP Oxford. p. 573.

ISBN 978-0-19-965962-3 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Tritheists" .

www.newadvent.org .

^ Justo L. González (2010).

A History of Christian Thought Volume II: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation . Abingdon Press. pp.

77– 78, 81.

ISBN 978-1-4267-2191-5 .

^ Lotha, Gloria (2023-03-16).

"Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2023-04-24 .

^ Petruzzello, Melissa (2023-04-13).

"Monophysite" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2023-04-24 .

^ Justo L. González (1987).

A History of Christian Thought Volume 2: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation . Abingdon Press. p. 82.

ISBN 978-0-687-17183-5 .

^ E. Glenn Hinson (1996).

The Early Church: Origins to the Dawn of the Middle Ages . Abingdon Press. p. 298.

ISBN 978-0-687-00603-8 .

^ Philip Hughes (1948).

History of the Church: Volume 1: The World In Which The Church Was Founded . A&C Black. p. 265.

ISBN 978-0-7220-7981-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Bryan Ward-Perkins; Michael Whitby (2000).

The Cambridge ancient history. 14. Late antiquity: empire and successors, A.D. 425–600 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-0-521-32591-2 .

^ Justo L. González (2010).

A History of Christian Thought Volume II: From Augustine to the Eve of the Reformation . Abingdon Press. pp.

79– 82.

ISBN 978-1-4267-2191-5 .

^ a b John Wesley Barker (1966).

Justinian and the Later Roman Empire . Univ of Wisconsin Press. pp.

212– 213.

ISBN 978-0-299-03944-8 .

^ Rome in the East, Warwick Ball, Routledge, 2000, p. 105 v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal v t e Beliefs condemned as heretical by the Catholic Church ( list ) Antiquity Adoptionism Apollinarism Arianism Anomoeanism Semi-Arianism Antidicomarianites Audianism Docetism Donatism Circumcellions Collyridianism Dualism Ebionites Euchites Gnosticism Manichaeism Paulicianism Priscillianism Naassenes Ophites Sethianism Valentinianism Iconoclasm Luciferianism Macedonianism Marcionism Melchisedechians Modalism Monarchianism Athinganoi Modalistic Monophysitism Monothelitism Montanism Nestorianism Novatianism Patripassianism Pelagianism Semipelagianism Pneumatomachians Psilanthropism Sabellianism Subordinationism Valentinianism Middle Ages Arnoldism Bogomilism Bosnian Church Catharism Conciliarism Dulcinians Fraticelli Free Spirits Henricians Humiliati Hussites Impanation Josephines Lollardy Migetians Pasagians Spanish Adoptionism Taborites Waldensians Early modernity Antinomianism Consubstantiation Febronianism Gallicanism Jansenism Josephinism Pantheism Protestantism Anabaptism Arminianism Calvinism Lutheranism Quietism Modernity Americanism Community of the Lady of All Nations Feeneyism Indifferentism Jehovah's Witnesses Modernism Mormonism Narco-saints Maximón Santa Muerte Positive Christianity Reincarnationism Catholic Church portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monophysitism&oldid=1302291727 " Categories : Christian terminology Christianity in the Byzantine Empire Christianity in the Middle East Heresy in Christianity Schisms in Christianity Nature of Jesus Christ Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unattributed quotes This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monophysitism 60 languages Add topic

