Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lu Ji (Shiheng) 16 languages Беларуская Català Español Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська 文言 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese writer, general and official (261–303) Lu Ji 陸機 Born Family name : Lu (陸) Given name : Ji (機) Courtesy name : Shiheng (士衡) 261 Died c.

November 303 (aged 42) Occupation Essayist, military general, politician, writer Notable works Meng Hu Xing (猛虎行) Junzi Xing (君子行) Chang'an You Xia Xie Xing (長安有狹邪行) Fu Luo Dao Zhong Zuo (赴洛道中作) Bian Wang Lun (辯亡論) Relatives Lu Xun (grandfather) Lu Kang (father) Lu Yun (brother) Lu Jing (brother) In this Chinese name , the family name is Lu .

Lu Ji (c. 261 – c.

November 303 [ 1 ] ), courtesy name Shiheng , was a Chinese essayist, military general, politician, and writer who lived during the late Three Kingdoms period and Jin dynasty of China. He was the fourth son of Lu Kang , a general of the state of Eastern Wu in the Three Kingdoms period, and a grandson of Lu Xun , a prominent general and statesman who served as the third Imperial Chancellor of Eastern Wu.

Life [ edit ] Lu Ji was related to the imperial family of the state of Eastern Wu . He was the fourth son of the general Lu Kang , who was a maternal grandson of Sun Ce , the elder brother and predecessor of Eastern Wu's founding emperor, Sun Quan .

[ 2 ] His paternal grandfather, Lu Xun , was a prominent general and statesman who served as the third Imperial Chancellor of Eastern Wu. After the Jin dynasty conquered Eastern Wu in 280 and killed two of his brothers, Lu Ji and his brother Lu Yun fled to Hua Ting in exile.

[ 2 ] While in exile, Lu wrote Dialectic of Destruction on the fall of the Wu empire.

[ 2 ] In 290, Lu and his brother moved to the Jin imperial capital, Luoyang .

[ 2 ] He served as a writer under the Jin government and was appointed president of the imperial academy.

[ 2 ] In 296, he was appointed to a military position.

[ 2 ] Lu's army suffered major casualties in a battle against Sima Ai in November 303 as part of the War of the Eight Princes .

[ 2 ] Shortly thereafter, Lu, his sons, and his two brothers were charged with treason and executed.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Writings [ edit ] Pingfu Tie (平復帖) by Lu Ji, Palace Museum collection Lu Ji wrote much lyric poetry but is better known for writing fu , a mixture of prose and poetry. He is best remembered for the Wen fu (文賦; On Literature ), a piece of literary criticism that discourses on the principles of composition.

Achilles Fang commented: The Wen-fu is considered one of the most articulate treatises on Chinese poetics. The extent of its influence in Chinese literary history is equaled only by that of the sixth-century The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons of Liu Hsieh . In the original, the Wen-fu is rhymed, but does not employ regular rhythmic patterns: hence the term "rhymeprose." [ 4 ] English translations of the Wen fu were done by E.R. Hughes and Achilles Fang .

[ 2 ] Chen Shixiang translated Wen fu into verse because, although the piece was rightly called the beginning of Chinese literary criticism, Lu Ji wrote it as poetry.

[ 5 ] Poets influenced by Wen fu include Ezra Pound , Gary Snyder , Howard Nemerov , Eleanor Wilner , Carolyn Kizer , [ 2 ] and Olav H. Hauge .

[ 6 ] Lu Ji is also the writer of the oldest extant work of Chinese calligraphy , a short letter to his friends that has been named the Pingfutie (Consoling Letter).

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms Notes [ edit ] ^ Both vol. 85 of Zizhi Tongjian and Emperor Hui's biography in Jin Shu indicate that Lu Ji was defeated on the wu'shen day of the 10th month of the 2nd year of the Tai'an era; the date corresponds to 3 Nov 303 in the Julian calendar. The same volume in Tongjian and Lu Ji's biography in Jin Shu indicate that he was executed shortly after this defeat. Thus, Lu Ji likely died in November 303. His biography in Jin Shu says that he was 43 (by East Asian reckoning) when he died.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Lu, Ji (1991).

The Art of Writing: Lu Chi's Wen Fu . Sam Hamill, trans. Milkweed Editions. pp.

11– 26.

ISBN 0-915943-62-X .

OCLC 22890074 .

^ Weinberger, Eliot, ed. (2003).

The New Directions Anthology of Classical Chinese Poetry . New Directions. p. 240.

ISBN 0-8112-1540-7 .

^ Weinberger, Eliot, ed. (2003).

The New Directions Anthology of Classical Chinese Poetry . New Directions. p. 241.

ISBN 0-8112-1540-7 .

^ Lu (1952) , p. vii.

^ https://www.nb.no/items/b8fcb4f7319fd5a4aad4780984c560d3?page=27&searchText=olav%20h.%20hauges%20poetikk [ bare URL ] ^ Hua, Ning.

"A Consoling Letter (Pingfu tie)" .

The Palace Museum .

References [ edit ] 2005 Encyclopædia Britannica, copyrighted 1994-2005 Li, Siyong and Wei, Fengjuan, "Li Ji" .

Encyclopedia of China (Chinese Literature Edition), 1st ed.

Lu, Ji (1952).

Essay on Literature . Translated by Chen, Shixiang. Portland, Me.: Anthoensen Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Lu Ji (Shiheng) .

Lu Chi's Wen Fu - The Art of Writing - Jon Fosse on Olav H. Hauge's poetics - in Norwegian Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Italy Australia 2 Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Prominent people of Eastern Wu Emperors Sun Quan Sun Liang Sun Xiu Sun Hao Empresses and noblewomen Lady Xie Lady Xu Pan Shu Bu Lianshi Empress Dayi Empress Jinghuai Quan Huijie Empress Zhu Empress Dowager He Teng Fanglan Lady Zhang Lady Zhou Princes, princesses and royal figures Sun Deng Sun Lü Sun He Sun Ba Sun Fen Sun Luban Sun Luyu Sun Huan (Shuwu) Sun Shao Chancellors Sun Shao Gu Yong Lu Xun Bu Zhi Zhu Ju Sun Jun Sun Chen Puyang Xing Lu Kai Wan Yu Zhang Ti Civil officers Cai Kuan Cen Hun Cheng Bing Ding Gu Feng Xi Gu Cheng Gu Tan Gu Ti He Shao He Zhi Hu Zong Hua He Huang Xiang Ji Yan Ji Zhi Kan Ze Li Heng Li Su Liu Dun Liu Ji Lou Xuan Lu Mao Lü Yi Meng Zong Pan Jun Pan Zhu Quan Shang Si Dun Shen Heng Shi Wei Shi Xie Shi Yi Sun Hong Tang Gu Wang Fan Wei Zhao Wu Can Wu Fan Wei Jing Wei Teng Xie Ci Xie Jing Xue Zong Yan Jun Yin Li Yu Fan Yu Si Yu Zhong Yuan Ye Zhang Dun Zhang Wen Zhang Yan Zhang Zhao Zhao Da Zhao Zi Zheng Quan Zhi Chong Zhou Zhao Military officers Chen Biao Chen Chi Cheng Pu Ding Feng Fan Shen Gu Yu Guo Ma Han Dang Hao Pu He Qi Hua Rong Liang Yu Ling Tong Liu Lue Liu Zan Lu Jing Lu Kang Lu Yin Lü Dai Lü Ju Lü Fan Luo Tong Mi Fang Nie You Pan Zhang Quan Cong Shao Chou Shi Ji Song Qian Tang Zi Tao Huang Tao Jun Teng Xiu Teng Yin Wen Qin Wen Yang Wu Yan Xie Yuan Xu Biao Xu Ling Xu Sheng Xue Xu Xu Xiang Xue Ying Yin You Yuan Kan Zhang Bu Zhang Cheng Zhang Fen Zhang Xiu Zhongli Mu Zhou Chu Zhou Fang Zhou Tai Zhu Cai Zhu Huan Zhu Ran Zhu Yi Zhu Zhi Zhuge Jin Zhuge Jing Zhuge Ke Zhuge Rong Others women Lu Yusheng Lady Sun (Sun Jian's sister) Lady Sun (Yu clan) Sun Hanhua Lady Triệu Lady Xu Lady Zhao Others Cao Buxing Chen Zhuo Ge Xuan Kang Tai Lu Ji Zhang Bing Zhang Chang Zhi Qian Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lu_Ji_(Shiheng)&oldid=1301118761 " Categories : 261 births 303 deaths 4th-century executions Eastern Wu poets People executed by the Jin dynasty (266–420) Jin dynasty (266–420) essayists Jin dynasty (266–420) generals Jin dynasty (266–420) poets Jin dynasty (266–420) government officials People executed by the Jin dynasty (266–420) by decapitation Political office-holders in Shandong Rhetoricians Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 05:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lu Ji (Shiheng) 16 languages Add topic

