Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shakespeare 2 New Place, Stratford-on-Avon 3 Recent developments 4 Shakespeare's flora 5 Central Park 6 Cleveland 7 Colorado 8 List of Shakespeare gardens 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Shakespeare garden 7 languages Español Français 한국어 Magyar Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of themed garden An illustration from Walter Crane 's 1906 book, Flowers from Shakespeare's Garden: a Posy from the Plays A Shakespeare garden is a themed garden that cultivates some or all of the 175 plants mentioned in the works of William Shakespeare .  In English-speaking countries, particularly the United States, these are often public gardens associated with parks, universities, and Shakespeare festivals. Shakespeare gardens are sites of cultural, educational, and romantic interest and can be locations for outdoor weddings.

Signs near the plants usually provide relevant quotations. A Shakespeare garden usually includes several dozen species, either in herbaceous profusion or in a geometric layout with boxwood dividers. Typical amenities are walkways and benches and a weather-resistant bust of Shakespeare. Shakespeare gardens may accompany reproductions of Elizabethan architecture . Some Shakespeare gardens also grow species typical of the Elizabethan period but not mentioned in Shakespeare's plays or poetry.

Shakespeare [ edit ] In January or February 1631 Sir Thomas Temple, 1st Baronet, of Stowe , was eager to send his man for cuttings from the grapevines at New Place , Stratford, the home of Shakespeare's retirement. Temple's surviving letter, however, makes no note of a Shakespeare connection: he knew the goodness of the vines from his sister-in-law, whose house was nearby.

[ 1 ] The revival of interest in the flowers mentioned in Shakespeare's plays arose with the revival of flower gardening in the United Kingdom. An early document is Paul Jerrard, Flowers from Stratford-on-Avon (London 1852), in which Jerrard attempted to identify Shakespeare's floral references, in a purely literary and botanical exercise, such as those by J. Harvey Bloom ( Shakespeare's Garden London:Methuen, 1903) or F.G. Savage, ( The Flora and Folk Lore of Shakespeare Cheltenham:E.J. Burrow, 1923).

[ 2 ] This parallel industry continues today.

A small arboretum of some forty trees mentioned by Shakespeare was planted in 1988 to complement the garden of Anne Hathaway's Cottage in Shottery, a mile from Stratford-on-Avon. "Visitors can sit on the specially designed bench, gaze at the cottage, press a button and listen to one of four Shakespearean sonnets read by famous actors," the official website informs the prospective visitor.

[ 3 ] A live willow cabin made of growing willows, inspired by lines in Twelfth Night , [ 4 ] is another feature, and a maze of yew .

New Place, Stratford-on-Avon [ edit ] New Place Gardens, Stratford-upon-Avon The major Shakespeare garden is that imaginatively reconstructed by Ernest Law at New Place , Stratford-on-Avon, in the 1920s. He used a woodcut from Thomas Hill, The Gardiners Labyrinth (London 1586), noting in his press coverage when the garden was in the planning stage, that it was "a book Shakespeare must certainly have consulted when laying out his own Knott Garden ".

[ 5 ] The same engraving was used in laying out the Queen's Garden behind Kew Palace in 1969. Ernest Law's, Shakespeare's Garden, Stratford-upon-Avon (1922), with photographic illustrations showing quartered plats in patterns outlined by green and grey clipped edgings, each centred by roses grown as standards, must have supplied impetus to many flower-filled revivalist Shakespeare's gardens of the 20s and 30s. For Americans, Esther Singleton produced The Shakespeare Garden (New York, 1931).

[ 6 ] Singleton's and Law's plantings, as with most Shakespeare gardens, owed a great deal to the bountiful aesthetic of the partly revived but largely invented " English cottage garden " tradition dating from the 1870s.

[ 7 ] Few attempts were made in revived garden plans to keep strictly to historical plants, until the National Trust led the way in the 1970s with a knot garden at Little Moreton Hall , Cheshire, and the restored parterre at Hampton Court Palace (1977).

[ 8 ] Recent developments [ edit ] The conventions of Shakespeare Gardens were familiar enough in the 1920s that E. F. Benson sets the opening of Mapp and Lucia (1931) in the not-quite-recently widowed Lucia's " Perdita 's Garden" at Riseholme , in words that epitomise Benson's dry touch: Perdita's garden requires a few words of explanation. It was a charming little square plot in front of the timbered façade of the Hurst, surrounded by yew-hedges and intersected with paths of crazy pavement, carefully smothered in stone-crop, which led to the Elizabethan sundial from Wardour Street in the centre. It was gay in spring with those flowers (and no others) on which Perdita doted. There were 'violets dim', and primroses and daffodils, which came before the swallow dared and took the winds (usually of April) with beauty.

[ 9 ] But now in June the swallow had dared long ago, and when spring and the daffodils were over, Lucia always allowed Perdita's garden a wider, though still strictly Shakespearian scope. There was eglantine (Penzance briar) in full flower now, and honeysuckle and gillyflowers and plenty of pansies for thoughts, and yards of rue (more than usual this year), and so Perdita's garden was gay all the summer.

Here then, this morning, Lucia seated herself by the sundial, all in black, on a stone bench on which was carved the motto 'Come thou north wind, and blow thou south, that my garden spices may flow forth.' Sitting there with Pepino's poems and The Times she obscured about one-third of this text, and fat little Daisy would obscure the rest..." Shakespeare's flora [ edit ] Shakespeare grew up in a small town with gardens, surrounded by meadow, river and woodlands. His references to trees, herbs, kitchen and flower garden plants are correct botanically, and are a source for plants' names and uses in Elizabethan times. English ships exploring the New World brought back new plants to join the local ones being designed for estates or in the kitchen garden outside the tradeswoman's door. The Elizabethans gave symbolic meaning to certain plants, as Ophelia's speech (below) illustrates. Shakespeare uses individual plants, gardens, gardening knowledge and skills (e.g. pruning), forests and other landscapes to describe character and place, set or shift tone and mood, make allusions perhaps that in prose would prove politically dangerous.

[ citation needed ] The best known reference in Shakespeare of plants used for symbolic purposes, aside from passing mention, as in Romeo and Juliet , "What's in a name? That which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet." [ 10 ] is Ophelia 's speech from Hamlet : Ophelia : There's rosemary , that's for remembrance. Pray you, love, remember. And there is pansies , that's for thoughts.

Laertes : A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.

Ophelia : There's fennel for you, and columbines . There's rue for you, and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' Sundays.

O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy .  I would give you some violets , but they wither'd all when my father died. They say he made a good end.

[ 11 ] Shakespeare devotes five History plays Henry VI, Part 1 , 2 , 3 ; Richard III , Henry VIII to the Wars of the Roses which lasted from 1455 to 1485. This dynastic struggle between two houses (York and Lancaster) was resolved when Henry VII married Elizabeth of York, and founded the Tudor dynasty. Shakespeare uses the historic symbolism of the Red Rose of Lancaster, the White Rose of York, and ends this sequence of plays in Richard III (V,5,19) with the line "We will unite the white rose and the red." That union is the Tudor Rose with its white and red petals.

All the plants Shakespeare names in his plays are mentioned in classical medical texts or medieval herbal manuals .

[ 12 ] Central Park [ edit ] Shakespeare Garden in Central Park An early Shakespeare garden was added in the anniversary year 1916 [ 13 ] to Central Park , New York City. In honour of the Bard and the reading of literature, this area is one of eight designated Quiet Zones.

[ 14 ] It included a graft from a mulberry tree said to have been grafted from one planted by Shakespeare in 1602; that tree was cut down by Rev. Francis Gastrell, owner of New Place, however [ 15 ] The tree blew down in a summer storm in 2006 and was removed. This garden is located near the Delacorte Theater that houses the New York Shakespeare Festival .  According to information available on the Central Park web pages, the Shakespeare Garden there does still contain some of the flowers and plants mentioned in his plays.

Cleveland [ edit ] The rich weave of associations engendered by Shakespeare Gardens is exemplified in the Shakespeare Garden of Cleveland, Ohio, [ 16 ] where herb-bordered paths, converge on a bust of Shakespeare. The requisite mulberry tree was from a cutting sent by the critic Sir Sidney Lee , a slip said to be from the mulberry at New Place. Elms were planted by E. H. Sothen and Julia Marlowe , oaks by William Butler Yeats , and a circular bed of roses sent by the mayor of Verona, from the traditional tomb of Juliet, planted by Phyllis Neilson Terry, niece of Ellen Terry .

Birnam Wood was represented by sycamore maples from Scotland. The sundial was Byzantine, presented by the Shakespearean actor, Robert Mantell. Jars planted with ivy and flowers were sent by Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree , Rabindranath Tagore — as the "Shakespeare of India"— and Sarah Bernhardt .

The Shakespeare Garden inaugural exercises took place on April 14th, 1916, the tercentenary year... E. H. Sothen and Julia Marlowe were guests of honor. After speeches of welcome by city officials and Mayor Harry L. Davis, the orchestra played selections from Mendelssohn 's "Midsummer Night's Dream," and the Normal School Glee Club sang choral setting of "Hark, Hark, the Lark" and "Who Is Sylvia?" A group of high school pupils in Elizabethan costume escorted the guests to the garden entrance and stood guard during the planting of the dedicatory elms.... Miss Marlowe climaxed the proceedings by her readings of Perdita's flower scene from A Winter's Tale, the 54th Sonnet of Shakespeare, and verses from the Star Spangled Banner . Her leading of all present in the singing of the National Anthem brought the impressive event to a close." [ 16 ] In later years the Cleveland Shakespeare Garden continued to be enriched at every Shakespearean occasion. Willows flanking the fountain were planted by William Faversham and Daniel Frohman.

Vachel Lindsay planted a poplar and recited his own Shakespeare tribute. Novelist Hugh Walpole also planted a tree. Aline Kilmer, widow of the soldier poet, Joyce Kilmer , made a visit in 1919, and the actor, Otis Skinner and the humorist, Stephen Leacock .

David Belasco came to plant two junipers.

Colorado [ edit ] The Colorado Shakespeare Garden [ 17 ] is a Public Garden  founded in 1991 by herbalist Marlene Cowdrey. Eight gardens line a courtyard on the University of Colorado campus in Boulder, Colorado. The gardens are placed near to the WPA built Mary Rippon Theatre, which is the major performance space for the Colorado Shakespeare Festival.

[ 18 ] The gardens are: Founder's, Kitchen, War of the Roses, Midsummer Night's Dream, Knot, Canon, Elizabethan, and a Highlight garden featuring each performance season's plants. Members of the Colorado Shakespeare Gardens are volunteers interested in gardens or Shakespeare or both. They research, design, plant, and maintain the gardens with oversight from CU. The various gardens are designed to display Elizabethan gardening techniques as well as feature plants. There is an audio-visual tour.

List of Shakespeare gardens [ edit ] This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Location Site Reference Bethel Public Library , Bethel, Connecticut Public park or botanical garden [1] Brookfield Shakespeare's Garden, Brookfield, Connecticut Public park or botanical garden [2] Brooklyn Botanical Gardens , Brooklyn, New York Public park or botanical garden [3] Misericordia University University or college campus [4] Evanston, Illinois Public park or botanical garden [5] Cleveland, Ohio Public park or botanical garden Daphne High School
Daphne, Alabama
Created by Agricultural Dept., 2021 [6] Johannesburg Botanical Garden , South Africa Public park or botanical garden [7] Central Park , New York City Public park, Shakespeare festival [8] International Rose Test Garden , Portland, Oregon Public park or botanical garden [9] Golden Gate Park , San Francisco, California Public park or botanical garden [10] The Huntington , San Marino, California Public park or botanical garden [11] Vienna, Austria Public park or botanical garden [12] Herzogspark , Regensburg , Germany Public park or botanical garden Hilltop Garden and Nature Center at Indiana University, Bloomington, IN University or college campus [13] Moraine Valley Community College , Palos Hills, IL [14] Illinois State University University or college campus [15] Kilgore College University or college campus [16] Naugatuck Valley Community College , Waterbury University or college campus [17] Northwestern University University or college campus [18] St. Norbert College University or college campus [19] Mount Saint Mary Academy, Watchung, NJ High School Campus [20] Susquehanna University University or college campus [21] University College of the Fraser Valley University or college campus [22] University of Massachusetts University or college campus [23] The University of the South University or college campus [24] University of South Dakota University campus [25] Vassar College University or college campus [26] Blount Cultural Park of the Alabama Shakespeare Festival Shakespeare festival [27] Colorado Shakespeare Festival Shakespeare festival [28] Illinois Shakespeare Festival Shakespeare festival [29] Elizabethan Garden, Folger Shakespeare Library Public park or botanical garden [30] The Elizabethan Herb Garden, Mellon Park, Pittsburgh, PA Public park or botanical garden [31] The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga University campus [32] Shakespeare Garden in Cedar Brook Park , Plainfield, NJ Public park or botanical garden. Operated by the Union County Park system, it was established in 1927.  The Garden appears on the National Register of Historic Places.

[33] Dunedin Botanic Garden , New Zealand Public park or botanical garden.

[34] Shakespeare Garden in Stanley Park, Vancouver, BC, Canada Public park or botanical garden [ 19 ] Shakespearian Garden in Wagga Wagga Botanic Gardens, Wagga Wagga, New South Wales, Australia.

Public park or botanical garden [ 20 ] See also [ edit ] American Acclimatization Society List of garden types Garden design Man'yō botanical garden References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Thomas Temple, "A Document Concerning Shakespeare's Garden" The Huntington Library Bulletin No. 1 (May 1931), pp. 199–201.

^ All noted by Karl P. Wentersdorf, "Hamlet: Ophelia's Long Purples" Shakespeare Quarterly 29 .3 (Summer 1978, pp. 413–417) p. 414 note 10, and p 416 note 23.

^ "Anne Hathaway's Cottage" .

Shakespeare Birthplace Trust . Archived from the original on 20 July 2008.

^ "Make me a willow cabin at your gate" (Act I, scene v).

^ Brent Elliott, "Historical Revivalism in the Twentieth Century: A Brief Introduction" Garden History 28 .1 (Summer 2000, pp. 17–31) p 21 ^ Eleanour Sinclair Rohde, Shakespeare's Wild Flowers (London: Medici Society 1935), combines two gardening interests, the Shakespeare garden and the "wild garden".

^ Jane Taylor and Andrew Lawson, The English Cottage Garden ; Philip Edinger, Cottage Gardens : "In their lush celebration of color, form, and fragrance, the flower-filled cottage gardens we admire today are a far cry from their medieval English forebears..." ^ Elliott 2000:22.

^ "..."Daffodils, That come before the swallow dares, and take The winds of March with beauty; violets dim, But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses, That die unmarried, ere they can behold Bright Phœbus in his strength, a malady Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds." ( The Winter's Tale , IV,4) ^ Shakespeare, William (1 November 1997).

"The Tragedy of Romeo and Juliet" – via Project Gutenberg.

^ "Project Gutenberg" .

^ "Montgomery County, Maryland Department of Environmental Protection, site" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2006.

^ The tricentennial of Shakespeare's death.

^ "8 Places to Find Peace and Quiet in Central Park - Central Park Your Complete Guide at CentralPark.com" . 11 September 2021.

^ An episode noted in James Boswell 's, Life of Doctor Johnson .

^ a b Shakespeare Garden ^ "Colorado Shakespeare Gardens" .

www.coloradoshakespearegardens.org .

^ "Colorado Shakespeare Festival" .

CU Presents .

^ Vancouver, City of (1 June 2016).

"Gardens in Stanley Park" .

vancouver.ca . Retrieved 8 February 2018 .

^ "Wagga Wagga Botanic Gardens" (PDF) .

wagga.nsw.gov.au .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ellacombe, Henry Nicholson (1884).

The Plant-lore & Garden-craft of Shakespeare (2 ed.). London: W Satchell and Co.

Shakespeare's Wild Flowers: Fairy Lore, Gardens, Herbs, Gatherers of Simples and Bee Lore by Eleanour Sinclair Rohde (London: The Medici Society, 1985) Shakespeare's Flowers by Jessica Kerr, illustrated by Anne Ophelia Dowden (Thomas Y. Crowell Company, New York, 1969) Fantastic Garlands: An Anthology of Flowers and Plants from Shakespeare by Lys de Bray (Blandford Press: Poole, Dorset, 1982) The Shakespeare Garden by Esther Singleton (William Farquhar Payson, New York, 1922) The Flowers of Shakespeare by Doris Hunt (Webb & Bower Exeter, England, 1980) The Renaissance Garden In England by Sir Roy Strong (Thames & Hudson, London 1979, republished 1998) Shakespeare's Gardens by Jackie Bennett (Frances Lincoln in association with Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, 2016) External links [ edit ] Media related to Shakespeare gardens at Wikimedia Commons "Shakespeare’s Flowers," "Shakespeare's Garden," an online quiz Images and quotations from a Shakespeare garden in San Jose, California List of quotations from Purdue University "The Shakespeare Garden: Plants in Shakespeare’s Works" by Penny Duchene-Carson, Colorado State University v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e William Shakespeare Plays Comedies All's Well That Ends Well As You Like It The Comedy of Errors Cymbeline Love's Labour's Lost Measure for Measure The Merchant of Venice The Merry Wives of Windsor A Midsummer Night's Dream Much Ado About Nothing Pericles, Prince of Tyre ✻ The Taming of the Shrew The Tempest Twelfth Night The Two Gentlemen of Verona The Two Noble Kinsmen ✻ The Winter's Tale Tragedies Antony and Cleopatra Coriolanus Hamlet Julius Caesar King Lear Macbeth Othello Romeo and Juliet Timon of Athens Titus Andronicus Troilus and Cressida Histories King John Edward III ✻ Richard II Henry IV 1 2 Henry V Henry VI 1 ✻ 2 3 Richard III Henry VIII ✻ Early editions Quarto publications First Folio Second Folio Related Problem plays Late romances Henriad Characters A–K L–Z Ghost character Chronology Performances Settings Scenes Poems Shakespeare's sonnets comparison to Petrarch A Lover's Complaint The Phoenix and the Turtle The Rape of Lucrece Venus and Adonis Apocrypha Plays Arden of Faversham The Birth of Merlin Cardenio ✻† Double Falsehood Edmund Ironside Fair Em Locrine The London Prodigal Love's Labour's Won † The Merry Devil of Edmonton Mucedorus The Puritan The Second Maiden's Tragedy Sejanus His Fall Sir John Oldcastle Sir Thomas More ✻ The Spanish Tragedy Thomas Lord Cromwell Thomas of Woodstock Ur-Hamlet † Vortigern and Rowena A Yorkshire Tragedy Poems The Passionate Pilgrim To the Queen Life and works Birthplace Bibliography Complete Works Translations Coat of arms Collaborations Editors English Renaissance theatre Globe Theatre Handwriting Lord Chamberlain's Men / King's Men The Theatre Curtain Theatre Music New Place Portraits Religious views Sexuality Spelling of his name Stratford-upon-Avon Style Will Grave Legacy Attribution studies Authorship question Bardolatry Festivals Gardens Influence Memorials Screen adaptations Shakespeare and Star Trek Shakespeare's influence on Tolkien Works titled after Shakespeare Institutions Folger Shakespeare Library Shakespeare Quarterly Royal Shakespeare Company Royal Shakespeare Theatre Shakespeare Birthplace Trust Shakespeare's Globe (replica) Shakespeare Institute Family Anne Hathaway (wife) Susanna Hall (daughter) Hamnet Shakespeare (son) Judith Quiney (daughter) Elizabeth Barnard (granddaughter) John Shakespeare (father) Mary Arden (mother) Gilbert Shakespeare (brother) Joan Shakespeare (sister) Edmund Shakespeare (brother) Richard Shakespeare (grandfather) John Hall (son-in-law) Thomas Quiney (son-in-law) ✻ Shakespeare and other authors † Lost Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐int.eqiad.main‐7d669c784c‐crsv7
Cached time: 20250812022938
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.555 seconds
Real time usage: 0.730 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1848/1000000
Revision size: 25077/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92276/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4271/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 2/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57532/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.284/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6239717/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  558.634      1 -total
 31.16%  174.046      5 Template:Navbox
 24.96%  139.411      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening
 24.54%  137.103      1 Template:Reflist
 20.75%  115.891      9 Template:Cite_web
 14.27%   79.743      1 Template:Short_description
  8.05%   44.998      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.74%   43.214      1 Template:Cn
  7.10%   39.672      1 Template:External_links
  6.79%   37.954      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3949539:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022938 and revision id 1278981901. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shakespeare_garden&oldid=1278981901 " Categories : Types of garden William Shakespeare Garden design history of England Garden design history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 March 2025, at 20:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shakespeare garden 7 languages Add topic

