Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Skills 2 Lifespan 3 Retriever breeds Toggle Retriever breeds subsection 3.1 Other dogs with retrieving skill 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Retriever 34 languages العربية Asturianu Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dog type For other uses, see Retriever (disambiguation) .

This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( January 2022 ) Chesapeake Bay Retriever with duck A retriever is a type of gun dog that retrieves game for a hunter. Generally gun dogs are divided into three major classifications: retrievers, flushing spaniels , and pointing breeds . Retrievers were bred primarily to retrieve birds or other prey and return them to the hunter without damage; retrievers are distinguished in that nonslip retrieval is their primary function. As a result, retriever breeds are bred for soft mouths and a great willingness to please, learn, and obey.  A soft mouth refers to the willingness of the dog to carry game in its mouth without biting into it. "Hard mouth" is a serious fault in a hunting dog and is very difficult to correct. A hard-mouthed dog renders game unpresentable or at worst inedible.

The retriever's willingness to please, patient nature and trainability have made breeds such as the Labrador retriever and Golden retriever popular as a disability assistance dog . The outstanding reputation of the retriever has landed both the Labrador and the Golden retriever among the top 10 best dogs for children and families around the world.

[ 1 ] Skills [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Golden Retriever Labrador Retriever with pheasant American Water Spaniel To carry out the duties of a gun dog, a retriever should be trained to perform these tasks: Remain under control : Retrievers are typically used for waterfowl hunting . Since a majority of waterfowl hunting employs the use of small boats in winter conditions, retrievers are trained to remain under control sitting calmly and quietly until sent to retrieve.

[ 2 ] This is often referred to as "steadiness". Steadiness helps to avoid an accidental capsizing, disrupting the hunter's aim or the possible accidental discharge of a firearm which could cause serious harm or death to others in the hunting party or to the dog itself.  A steady dog is also better able to “mark” downed game.

Mark downed game : Marking is the process of watching for a falling bird or multiple birds. When the command "mark" is given, the dog should look up for incoming birds and remember where each bird falls. Well-trained retrievers are taught to follow the direction the gun barrel is pointing to mark where the birds fall. Once the game is downed, the handler will command the dog to retrieve the game. The dog's ability to remember multiple “marks” is extremely important, and trainers use techniques to improve a dog's marking and memory ability.

Perform a blind retrieve : When hunting waterfowl, a retriever's primary job is to retrieve downed birds. At times, a dog will not see the game fall, so retrievers are trained to take hand, voice, and whistle commands from the handler directing the dog to the downed game for retrieval. This is called a “blind retrieve”.  Precision between the dog and handler is extremely useful and desired so as to minimize retrieval time and limit the disturbance of surrounding cover.  The majority of blind retrieves in the field are made within 30-80 yards of the gun, but a good retriever/handler team can perform precise blind retrieves out to 100+ yards and more.

Retrieve to hand : Although some hunters prefer to have a bird dropped at their feet, the majority of handlers require the dog to deliver the game to hand, meaning once the dog has completed the retrieve, it will gently but firmly hold the bird until commanded to release it to the handler's hand. Delivery to hand reduces the risk of a crippled bird escaping, as the bird remains in the dog's mouth until the handler takes hold of it.

Honoring : When hunting with multiple dogs, a retriever should remain under control while other dogs work, and wait its turn. This is important because having multiple dogs retrieving game simultaneously can cause confusion. This is one reason why many handlers use the dog's name as the command to retrieve.

Shake on command : Following a retrieve, a well-trained dog will not shake off excess water from its fur until after the delivery is complete. A dog shaking water from its fur in a small boat at worst risks capsizing the craft in cold winter conditions and at best will most likely shower hunters and equipment. Also, a dog shaking while still holding the game in its mouth could damage the bird to the point of making it unfit for the table.  To avoid these mishaps, trainers use a distinct command releasing a dog to shake.

Quarter : Retrievers are often used in a secondary role as an upland flushing dog. Dogs must work in a pattern in front of the hunter seeking upland game birds. The retriever must be taught to stay within gun range to avoid flushing a bird outside of shooting distance.

Remain steady to wing and shot : When hunting upland birds, the flushing dog should be steady to wing and shot, meaning it sits when a bird rises or a gun is fired. It does this to mark the fall and to avoid flushing other birds by unnecessarily pursuing a missed bird.

Although most individual retrievers have the raw capacity to be trained to perform as a gun dog, a significant amount of thought and effort is given to breeding in specific desired traits into dogs from field bred lines that greatly enhance the training process.  When breeding retrievers for field work, extensive consideration is given to: Biddableness : Because producing a well-trained retriever capable of performing the tasks outlined above requires a significant amount of time and effort, an intelligent, controllable, and open-to-learning (biddable) retriever is of utmost importance.

Desire and drive : These traits covers a broad range of behaviors exhibited by the “good retriever”. Most notably, they demonstrate the desire to retrieve almost to the point of manic behavior and take on significant obstacles to make a retrieve. They also demonstrate an exceptional interest in birds, bird feathers, and bird scent, which is termed “birdiness”.

Marking and memory : Eyesight and depth perception are of paramount importance to a dog's ability to mark downed game. Remembering each fall is also critical. While retriever trainers use special techniques to help a dog to mark and remember downed game, a good retriever is born with these “raw tools”.

Nose : Dogs are led primarily by their nose. A good retriever uses its nose to find downed game in heavy cover and while quartering a field to locate and flush upland game birds.

Soft mouth : A soft-mouthed dog is needed to ensure retrieved game is fit for the table. A soft-mouthed dog picks up and holds game softly but firmly on the retrieve. Dogs that unnecessarily drop birds, crunch on, chew, or even eat the bird before delivery to the handler are considered “hard-mouthed” or are described as having “mouth problems”. While training can overcome most “mouth problems”, a dog with an inherently soft mouth is more desirable when starting the training process.

Hardiness : Waterfowl hunting is a cold-weather sport undertaken across a wide variety of locations  and conditions, from thick, flooded timber in the south US, to icy and ice-covered ponds in the Midwest to frigid seas along upper the New England coast. A good retriever willingly re-enters the water and makes multiple retrieves under these and other extreme conditions.

Lifespan [ edit ] The average lifespan of a retriever is about 10–12 years. Some may live up to 15 years.

[ 3 ] Retriever breeds [ edit ] Chesapeake Bay Retriever Curly Coated Retriever Flat Coated Retriever Golden Retriever Labrador Retriever Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Murray River Retriever Other dogs with retrieving skill [ edit ] A black Standard Poodle retrieving a Mallard . Poodles are one of the oldest breeds of retrievers, originally bred to retrieve ducks in Germany and France.

Golden Retriever charge. This dog was originally  bred in Scotland to hunt in marshy conditions.

American Cocker Spaniel American Water Spaniel Barbet Boykin Spaniel Blackmouth Cur Blue Lacy Brittany Clumber Spaniel Dutch Partridge Dog English Cocker Spaniel English Setter English Springer Spaniel Épagneul Bleu de Picardie Epagneul Pont-Audemer Frisian Pointer ( stabyhoun/stabij ) German Longhaired Pointer German Shorthaired Pointer German Wirehaired Pointer German Water Spaniel Gordon Setter Hungarian Vizsla Hungarian Wirehaired Vizsla Italian Spinone Irish Setter Irish Water Spaniel Newfoundland Pointer Poodle Portuguese Water Dog Spanish Water Dog Sussex Spaniel Tibetan Terrier Weimaraner Welsh Springer Spaniel Wire-haired Pointing Griffon See also [ edit ] Dogs portal List of dog breeds Field trial Hunt test St. John's water dog , also known as the Lesser Newfoundland, an extinct precursor of the Newfoundland dog and ancestor of the modern Retrievers, including Flat-coated, Chesapeake Bay, Golden, and Labrador.

References [ edit ] ^ "The 10 Best Dogs for Kids and Families" .

petMD . Retrieved 2018-12-31 .

^ "Golden Retriever Dog ==> +10.000 Free Articles, Videos & Pictures" .

Golden Retriever Dog And Puppies Information . Retrieved 2016-09-22 .

^ "Learn About the Enthusiastic Golden Retriever" .

Fergus, Charles.

Gun Dog Breeds: A Guide to Spaniels, Retrievers, and Pointing Dogs , The Lyons Press, 2002.

ISBN 1-58574-618-5 Smith, Steve (2002).

The Encyclopedia of North American Sporting Dogs: Written by Sportsmen for Sportsmen . Willow Creek Press. pp.

107– 125.

ISBN 1572235012 .

v t e Dogs Types African village dog Free-ranging dog Pye-dog Street dog Hairless dog Herding dog Collie Livestock guardian dog Sheep dog Hunting dog Cur Feist Lurcher Gun dog Pointer Retriever Setter Spaniel Water dog Hound Scenthound Basset Coonhound Foxhound Sighthound Longdog Terrier Bull-type terrier Pinscher Schnauzer Mastiff Bulldog Spitz Husky Laika Tugou Toy dog Bichon Turnspit dog Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dog Crossbreed Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dog Autism dog Guide dog Hearing dog Medical response dog Seizure dog Mobility assistance dog Therapy dog Psychiatric assistance dog Attack dog Bay dog Carriage dog Catch dog Companion dog Detection dog Fighting dog Guard dog Lap dog Meat dog Mercy dog Police dog usage by country Search and rescue dog Sled dog War dog Behavior Communication Barking Body language Howling Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–dog interaction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Cynanthropy Dog bite Dog beach Dog daycare Dog fighting Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dog grooming Dogs in religion Dogs in space Dog licence Dog meat Dog park Dog show Dog theft Dog sports Dog walking Fear of dogs Human–canine bond Origin of the domestic dog Therapy Health Aging ( List of longest-living dogs ) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Housebreaking Socialization Related Domesticated silver fox List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Lists of dogs Category Portal v t e Gundogs Pointers and setters Ariège Pointer Blue Picardy Spaniel Bracco Italiano Braque d'Auvergne Braque du Bourbonnais Braque Français Braque Saint-Germain Brittany Burgos Pointer Ca Mè Mallorquí Cesky Fousek Drentse Patrijshond English Setter French Spaniel German Longhaired Pointer German Roughhaired Pointer German Shorthaired Pointer German Wirehaired Pointer Gordon Setter Irish Red and White Setter Irish Setter Large Münsterländer Old Danish Pointer Pachón Navarro Picardy Spaniel Perdigueiro Galego Pointer Portuguese Pointer Pudelpointer Saint-Usuge Spaniel Slovakian Roughhaired Pointer Small Münsterländer Spinone Italiano Stabyhoun Vizsla Weimaraner Wirehaired Pointing Griffon Wirehaired Vizsla Retrievers Chesapeake Bay Retriever Curly-coated Retriever Flat-coated Retriever Golden Retriever Labrador Retriever Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever Spaniels American Cocker Spaniel Boykin Spaniel Clumber Spaniel English Cocker Spaniel English Springer Spaniel Field Spaniel German Spaniel Kooikerhondje Pont-Audemer Spaniel Russian Spaniel Sussex Spaniel Welsh Springer Spaniel Water dogs American Water Spaniel Barbet Cantabrian Water Dog Irish Water Spaniel Lagotto Romagnolo Poodle Portuguese Water Dog Spanish Water Dog Wetterhoun Extinct breeds Braque Dupuy English Water Spaniel Norfolk Spaniel Old Spanish Pointer Tweed Water Spaniel Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐7gl2s
Cached time: 20250812014728
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.309 seconds
Real time usage: 0.420 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1001/1000000
Revision size: 13134/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 52211/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 679/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40470/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.188/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5858098/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  325.546      1 -total
 24.37%   79.348      1 Template:Reflist
 22.50%   73.234      2 Template:Navbox
 22.13%   72.032      1 Template:Domestic_dog
 21.29%   69.297      3 Template:Cite_web
 17.94%   58.408      1 Template:Short_description
 11.03%   35.917      1 Template:Cleanup_rewrite
 10.75%   35.010      2 Template:Ambox
  9.72%   31.636      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.10%   29.620      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:375096:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014728 and revision id 1291866806. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Retriever&oldid=1291866806 " Categories : Retrievers Gundogs Hunting dogs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from January 2022 All articles needing rewrite Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 21:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Retriever 34 languages Add topic

