Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and evolution 2 Manufacture 3 Board notation 4 Variant boards 5 Other representations 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Chessboard 47 languages العربية Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית کٲشُر Latina Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any board used in the game chess You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Portuguese article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Tabuleiro (xadrez)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|pt|Tabuleiro (xadrez)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

A wooden chessboard with Staunton pieces A chessboard is a game board used to play chess . It consists of 64 squares, 8 rows by 8 columns, on which the chess pieces are placed. It is square in shape and uses two colors of squares, one light and one dark, in a checkered pattern. During play, the board is oriented such that each player's near-right corner square is a light square.

The columns of a chessboard are known as files , the rows are known as ranks , and the lines of adjoining same-colored squares (each running from one edge of the board to an adjacent edge) are known as diagonals . Each square of the board is named using algebraic , descriptive , or numeric chess notation ; algebraic notation is the FIDE standard. In algebraic notation, using White's perspective, files are labeled a through h from left to right, and ranks are labeled 1 through 8 from bottom to top; each square is identified by the file and rank that it occupies. The a- through d-files constitute the queenside , and the e- through h-files constitute the kingside ; the 1st through 4th ranks constitute White's side, and the 5th through 8th ranks constitute Black's side.

History and evolution [ edit ] a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h Ashtāpada board on which chaturanga was played The earliest known ancestor of the chessboard is the Ashtāpada board. Among other games, it was used to play chaturanga , a historical precursor to chess, beginning around the 6th century in India . The board uses a single color for all squares and is divided into eight columns by eight rows, with marked squares called castles in the corners of each quadrant. Unlike in Ashtāpada, castles serve no function in chaturanga.

[ 1 ] The chessboard acquired its modern checkered pattern in the 10th century with the arrival of chess in Europe.

[ 2 ] This pattern was based on that of the then-5×5 draughts board.

[ 3 ] As a result of this change, each diagonal was now highlighted by a continuous sequence of same-colored squares, which later facilitated the introduction of the modern bishop and queen movements in the 15th century.

[ 4 ] The Libro de los juegos (1283) contains a description of the chessboard, describing eight rows and columns as the ideal number, deeming the practice of chess on the 10×10 board too tiresome and on the 6×6 board too quick.

[ 5 ] In the 13th century, some players began using the convention that the first square of the far right column should be light-colored; this convention was endorsed by Pedro Damiano at the end of the 15th century.

[ 6 ] In contemporary chess, a digital board is a chess board connected to a computer that is capable of transmitting the moves to the computer itself: the information about the moves can be used to play a game against a chess engine , or simply to record the moves of a game automatically. A digital board uses sensors to detect the position of the pieces, and each piece move can be recorded.

In 1998, the 33rd Chess Olympiad was held in Elista . The games were digitally broadcast over the internet thanks to the introduction of digital chess boards developed by Digital Game Technology : 328 boards were used for the event.

[ 7 ] In 2003, ex-world champion Garry Kasparov faced chess engine X3D Fritz in a series of four matches in a virtual environment , where the computer-generated board hovered in the air in front of Kasparov, who used special glasses. This was the first man–machine game of chess performed in a completely simulated environment.

[ 8 ] Manufacture [ edit ] Chessboards have been made from numerous materials over the years, such as ebony , ivory , marble , metal , glass , and plastic . They can also be found as decorative elements in plazas, gardens, and living rooms.

High-level games generally use wooden boards, while vinyl , plastic , and cardboard are common for less important tournaments and matches, as well as for home use. Additionally, some very large chessboards are built into or drawn on the ground. Rarely, decorative glass and marble boards are permitted for games conducted by national or international chess federations.

Wooden boards are traditionally made of unstained woods that are light brown and dark brown in color. To reduce cost, some boards are made with veneers of more expensive woods glued to an inner piece of plywood or chipboard. A variety of color combinations are used for plastic, vinyl, and silicone boards. Common dark-light combinations are black and white, as well as brown, green or blue with buff or cream .

For international or continental championships, FIDE 's regulations state that wooden boards should be used. For other FIDE tournaments, wood , plastic , or cardboard boards may be used, and the board should be rigid in all instances. The board may also be made of marble , as long as there is an appropriate contrast between the light and dark squares. The finishing should be neutral or frosted but never shiny. The squares should be from 5 to 6 cm in length, at least twice the diameter of a pawn 's base. If the table and the board are two separate pieces, the latter must be fixed so it stays in place.

[ 9 ] Board notation [ edit ] Main article: Chess notation See also: Chess § Setup a b c d e f g h 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 a b c d e f g h A chessboard diagram with algebraic notation , generally used for printing or computer displays There are various systems for recording moves and referring to the squares of the chessboard; the standard contemporary system is algebraic notation . In algebraic notation, the files are identified by the letters a to h , from left to right from the White player's point of view, and the ranks by the numbers 1 to 8 , with 1 being closest to the White player. Each square on the board is identified by a unique coordinate pairing, from a1 to h8.

[ 10 ] In the older descriptive notation , the files are labelled by the piece originally occupying its first rank (e.g. queen, king's rook , queen's bishop ), and ranks by the numbers 1 to 8 from each player's point of view. This method is no longer commonly used. FIDE stopped using descriptive notation in 1981.

ICCF numeric notation assigns numbers to both files and ranks, with rank 1 being the one closest to the player with the white pieces. The file leftmost to the White player ( a in algebraic notation and QR in descriptive notation) is file one and the rightmost to them ( h in algebraic notation and KR in descriptive notation) is file eight.

Variant boards [ edit ] See also: Chess variant Variant chessboard shapes and sizes go back to the Persian origins of the game in the 10th century, when the book Muraj adh-dhahab (Board of the Gods) described six different variants of chess, including circular and cylinder chess .

[ 11 ] Due to the widespread creation of new variants, a wide variety of sizes can be found.

Gliński's hexagonal chess utilizes a board with 91 hexagonal spaces of three different colors. One innovation of the 13th century was the cylindrical board for use in cylinder chess.

[ 12 ] The board used for the Persian Tamerlane chess is one of the first recorded variant chessboards, with eleven columns by ten rows along with two citadels. Each player has a citadel to the right of their second rank, which may be occupied by the opponent's king , in which case that opponent may declare a draw .

[ 13 ] In 1617, Pietro Carrera proposed a variant that received his name, Carrera's Chess, with a 10×8 board, later used in other variants such as Capablanca chess and Gothic Chess. Other sizes, with ten rows by ten columns, are used in Omega Chess and Grand Chess ; Omega Chess has four additional squares, one in each corner of the board.

Los Alamos chess uses a smaller 6×6 board.

[ 14 ] Japanese shogi uses a board with nine columns by nine rows. The board of Chinese xianqi consists of nine columns by ten rows; here, the pieces are placed on the intersections of the lines that divide the squares, rather than within the squares themselves.

[ 15 ] Each player has a 3×3 palace in the central three columns and the closest three rows, within which the player's general and advisors must stay. Between the central two rows is a river that the elephant cannot cross and past which the soldier increases in strength.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] A similar board without a river is used in Korean janggi .

Chessboards during a match of Bughouse Raumschach gamespace Some chess variants use more than a single board per match.

Bughouse chess , for example, involves four players playing two simultaneous matches on separate boards.

[ 18 ] Alice Chess is a popular variant which is usually played on two boards to facilitate the movement of pieces between the boards.

[ 19 ] Three-dimensional boards are often represented by multiple two-dimensional boards. Variants may use anywhere from two to eight boards.

[ 20 ] For example, Raumschach utilizes five boards of twenty-five squares each, totaling 125 squares.

[ 20 ] Another noteworthy variant, Star Trek Chess, utilizes a board of sixty-four squares with movable parts divided into seven levels.

[ 21 ] In the initial position, each player occupies two of the movable four-square attack boards. The white pieces start in the lower level, using attack boards connected to this level and the first two rows of the board, while the black pieces start at the top, using the attack boards and first two rows of the third level.

[ 21 ] Other representations [ edit ] Illustration by Sir John Tenniel from the book Through the Looking-Glass by Lewis Carroll , where the chessboard is represented by fields and brooks that Alice must traverse The game of chess has been represented in the arts since its creation. Chess sets usually had considerable artistic value; they were made of noble materials, such as ebony and ivory, and in large sizes. Many of the pieces in these sets were offered to churches as relics. The book Liber miraculorum sancte Fidis tells a story in which a nobleman, after miraculously escaping from prison, is forced to carry a chessboard until a sanctuary as gesture of gratitude. More frequently, however, there are stories in which the chessboard is used as a weapon. The French tale of Ogier the Dane reports how the son of Charlemagne brutally kills one of Ogier's sons with a chessboard after losing a match, although there is no evidence confirming the veracity of the story.

[ 22 ] In 1250, a sermon called Quaedam moralitas de scaccario per Innocentium papum (The Innocent Morality) showed the world as being represented by a chessboard. The white and black squares represented the two conditions of life and death, or praise and censure; over these, the pieces, representing humanity, would confront each other in the adversities of the game, which symbolized life.

Due to its simple geometry, the chessboard is often used in mathematical puzzles or problems unrelated to chess, such as the wheat and chessboard problem and the mutilated chessboard problem . The term infinite chessboard is sometimes used to refer to a grid.

Gallery [ edit ] A chessboard is often painted or engraved on a chess table A folding wooden chessboard A Swedish competition standard chessboard made of masonite DGT Electronic Chessboard that detects moves and interfaces to chess clock and computers A decorative chessboard made of glass A portable green and buff vinyl rollup board A portable green and white mousepad style board designed to lie perfectly flat Social play on a vinyl board in a park in Kyiv A board of circular chess , one of the many variants of traditional chess Cylinder chess , another variant of traditional chess Gliński's hexagonal chess is a variant with a hexagonal board Chessboard adapted for visually impaired people Chessboard of the World Chess Championship 2018 A giant outdoor chessboard, with pieces about three feet (91 cm) tall Polish Węgiel board with pieces See also [ edit ] Chess portal Board representation (chess) Checkerboard Chess equipment Chess set Rules of chess White and Black in chess References [ edit ] ^ Wilkins, Sally E. D. (2002).

Sports and Games of Medieval Cultures . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

46– 48.

ISBN 9780313317118 .

^ Yalom 2004, p. 17.

^ "The Checkered History of Checkers" . Retrieved July 5, 2018 .

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 48.

^ Yalom 2004, p. 62.

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 47.

^ "DGT history" .

^ "Kasparov versus X3D Fritz" .

^ "FIDE Handbook C. General Rules and Technical Recommendations for Tournaments / 02. Standards of Chess Equipment, venue for FIDE Tournaments, rate of play and tie-break regulations" .

FIDE . Retrieved 12 July 2020 .

^ Just, Tim; Burg, Daniel B. (2003).

United States Chess Federation's Official Rules of Chess (Fifth ed.). Random House Puzzles & Games. p. 227.

ISBN 0-8129-3559-4 . Retrieved 5 December 2014 .

^ "Earliest books of chess" . Archived from the original on January 21, 2012 . Retrieved October 24, 2010 .

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 100.

^ Cazaux, Jean-Louis.

"Tamerlane Chess" . Retrieved July 5, 2018 .

^ "Carrera's Chess" . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 369.

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 78.

^ "Origins of chess" . 11 December 2008 . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ "Bughouse Chess" . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ Hooper & Whyld 1996, p. 11.

^ a b "Raumschach" . Retrieved July 5, 2018 .

^ a b "3D Chess from Star Trek" . Retrieved July 5, 2018 .

^ Yalom 2004, pp. 84–85.

Bibliography Hooper, David ; Whyld, Kenneth (1996) [First pub. 1992].

The Oxford Companion to Chess (2nd ed.).

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-280049-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chessboards .

Standards of Chess Equipment , at FIDE website Weisstein, Eric W.

"Chessboard" .

MathWorld .

v t e Chess Outline Chess theory Chess titles Grandmaster Computer chess glossary matches engines software Correspondence chess FIDE Glossary Online chess Premove Internet chess server list Rating system world rankings norms Variants List World records Equipment Chess set chessboard Dubrovnik chess set Staunton chess set Chess pieces King Queen Rook Bishop Knight Pawn Fairy Chess clock Chess table Score sheets History Timeline Versus de scachis Göttingen manuscript Charlemagne chessmen Lewis chessmen Romantic chess Hypermodernism Soviet chess school Top player comparison Geography of chess Africa South Africa China Europe Armenia Spain India Notable games List of chess players amateurs female grandmasters Women in chess Transgender people in chess Chess museums Bobby Fischer Center Gökyay Association Chess Museum World Chess Hall of Fame Rules Castling Cheating in chess Doping in chess Check Checkmate Draw by agreement Fifty-move rule Perpetual check Stalemate Threefold repetition En passant Pawn promotion Time control Fast chess Touch-move rule White and Black Terms Blunder Chess notation algebraic descriptive PGN annotation symbols symbols in Unicode Fianchetto Gambit Key square King walk Open file Half-open file Outpost Pawns backward connected doubled isolated passed Swindle Tempo Transposition Trap Tactics Artificial castling Battery Alekhine's gun Block Checkmate patterns Combination Decoy Deflection Desperado Discovered attack Double check Fork Interference Overloading Pawn storm Pin Sacrifice Queen sacrifice Skewer Undermining Windmill X-ray Zwischenzug Strategy Compensation Exchange the exchange Initiative first-move advantage Middlegame Pawn structure Hedgehog Isolated Queen's Pawn Maróczy Bind Minority attack Piece values Prophylaxis School of chess Openings Flank opening Benko Opening Bird's Opening Dunst Opening English Opening Grob's Attack Larsen's Opening Zukertort Opening King's Indian Attack Réti Opening King's Pawn Game Alekhine's Defence Caro–Kann Defence French Defence Modern Defence Nimzowitsch Defence Open Game Four Knights Game Giuoco Piano Italian Game King's Gambit Petrov's Defence Philidor Defence Ponziani Opening Ruy Lopez Semi-Italian Opening Scotch Game Two Knights Defense Vienna Game Owen's Defence Pirc Defence Austrian Attack Scandinavian Defense Sicilian Defence Alapin Dragon / Accelerated Dragon Najdorf Scheveningen Queen's Pawn Game Budapest Gambit Colle System Dutch Defence English Defence Indian Defence Benoni Defence Modern Benoni Bogo-Indian Defence Catalan Opening Grünfeld Defence King's Indian Defence Nimzo-Indian Defence Old Indian Defense Queen's Indian Defence London System Richter–Veresov Attack Queen's Gambit Accepted Declined Slav Defence Semi-Slav Defence Chigorin Defense Torre Attack Trompowsky Attack Other List of openings theory table List of chess gambits Irregular Bongcloud Attack Fool's mate Scholar's mate Endgames Bishop and knight checkmate King and pawn vs. king Opposite-coloured bishops Pawnless endgame Queen and pawn vs. queen Queen vs. pawn Queen vs. rook Rook and bishop vs. rook Rook and pawn vs. rook Lucena position Philidor position Strategy fortress opposition Tarrasch rule triangulation Zugzwang Study Tablebase Two knights endgame Wrong bishop Wrong rook pawn Tournaments List of strong chess tournaments Chess Olympiad Women Olympics Olympic Esports Series World Chess Championship List Candidates Tournament Chess World Cup FIDE Grand Prix Other world championships Women Team Rapid Blitz Junior Youth Senior Amateur Chess composition Solving Computer chess championships CCC CSVN North American TCEC WCCC WCSCC Art and media Caïssa Chess aesthetics Chess in the arts early literature film novels paintings poetry short stories Chess books opening books endgame literature Oxford Companion Chess libraries Chess newspaper columns Chess periodicals Related Arbiter Chess boxing Chess club Chess composer Chess engine AlphaZero Deep Blue Leela Chess Zero Mittens Stockfish Chess problem glossary joke chess Chess prodigy Elo rating system Mechanical Turk Simultaneous exhibition Tie-breaking in Swiss-system tournaments Solving chess Chess portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vhb2t
Cached time: 20250817200706
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.599 seconds
Real time usage: 0.793 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3786/1000000
Revision size: 17777/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 120552/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5406/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83653/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.314/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6872345/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  614.114      1 -total
 24.79%  152.210      1 Template:Reflist
 14.65%   89.985      1 Template:Chess
 14.64%   89.930      2 Template:Navbox
 14.45%   88.762      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.25%   69.070      1 Template:Expand_Portuguese
 10.83%   66.481      1 Template:Short_description
 10.50%   64.499      1 Template:Expand_language
  9.62%   59.104      1 Template:Ambox
  8.22%   50.507     11 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47449:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817200706 and revision id 1299139795. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chessboard&oldid=1299139795 " Category : Chess equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles needing translation from Portuguese Wikipedia Culture articles needing translation from Portuguese Wikipedia Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 19:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chessboard 47 languages Add topic

