Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Godesberg Program 17 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1959 German Social Democratic Party platform Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Godesberg Program Original title Godesberger Programm Ratified 15 November 1959 Location Bad Godesberg Signatories Social Democratic Party of Germany Subject Social democracy Purpose a fundamental change in the orientation and goals of the SPD The Godesberg Program ( German : Godesberger Programm ) of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) was ratified in 1959 at a convention in the town of Bad Godesberg near Bonn . It represented a fundamental change in the orientation and goals of the SPD, rejecting the aim of replacing capitalism while adopting a commitment to reform capitalism and a mass party orientation that appealed to ethical rather than class-based considerations. It also rejected nationalization as a major principle of socialism .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] The Godesberg Program eliminated the party's remaining orthodox Marxist policies and the SPD redefined its ideology as freiheitlicher Sozialismus ( liberal socialism ).

[ 2 ] With the adoption of the Godesberg Program, it renounced orthodox Marxist class conflict and economic determinism [ citation needed ] . The SPD replaced it with an ethical socialism based on humanism and emphasized that it was democratic, pragmatic and reformist.

[ 3 ] The most controversial decision of the Godesberg Program was its declaration stating that private ownership of the means of production "can claim protection by society as long as it does not hinder the establishment of social justice".

[ 4 ] By accepting free-market principles, the SPD argued that a truly free market would in fact have to be a regulated market to not degenerate into oligarchy . This policy also meant the endorsement of Keynesian economic management, social welfare and a degree of economic planning . Some argue that this was an abandonment of the classical conception of socialism as involving the replacement of the capitalist economic system.

[ 4 ] It declared that the SPD "no longer considered nationalization the major principle of a socialist economy but only one of several (and then only the last) means of controlling economic concentration of power of key industries" while also committing the SPD to an economic stance which promotes "as much competition as possible, as much planning as necessary".

[ 1 ] The decision to abandon the traditional anti-capitalist policy angered many in the SPD who had supported it.

[ 3 ] After those changes, the SPD enacted the two major pillars of what would become the modern social-democratic program, namely making the party a people's party rather than a party solely representing the working class and abandoning remaining Marxist policies aimed at destroying capitalism and replacing them with policies aimed at reforming capitalism.

[ 1 ] The Godesberg Program divorced its conception of socialism from Marxism, declaring that democratic socialism in Europe was "rooted in Christian ethics, humanism , and classical philosophy ".

[ 1 ] The Godesberg Program was a major revision of the SPD's policies and gained attention from beyond Germany.

[ 3 ] At the time of its adoption, the stance on the Godesberg Program in neighbouring France was not uniform. While the French Section of the Workers' International was divided on the Godesberg Program, the Unified Socialist Party denounced the Godesberg Program as a renunciation of socialism and an opportunistic reaction to the SPD's electoral defeats.

[ 3 ] The Godesberg program was also notable because the party abandoned and rejected Marxist theories of class conflict and revolution. This was consistent with Eduard Bernstein 's Marxist revisionism . In adopting the Godesberg Program, the SPD dropped its hostility to capitalism which had long been the core of party ideology and sought to move beyond its old working class base to embrace the full spectrum of potential voters, adopting a political ideology grounded in ethical appeals. Nonetheless, they adhered to the Marxist analysis put forward by social democrats such as Bernstein that socialism would arise as a result of the evolution of capitalism. In this sense, the Godesberg Program has been seen as involving the final victory of the reformist agenda of Bernstein over the orthodox Marxist agenda of Karl Kautsky .

[ 1 ] Labor unions had abandoned the old demands for nationalization and instead cooperated increasingly with industry, achieving labor representation on corporate boards and increases in wages and benefits. After losing federal elections in 1953 and 1957, the SPD moved toward an American-style image-driven electoral strategy that stressed personalities, specifically Berlin mayor Willy Brandt . As it prepared for the 1961 federal election , it proved necessary as well to drop opposition to rearmament and to accept NATO .

[ 5 ] The Godesberg Program was superseded in 1989 by the Berlin Program, resolved at the party congress held on 20 December 1989 in Berlin .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Gaitskellism Willi Eichler Ethical socialism The Future of Socialism Gotha Program Social democracy Reformism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Berman 2006 , p. 190.

^ Orlow 2000 , p. 108.

^ a b c d Orlow 2000 , p. 190.

^ a b Adams 2001 , p. 108.

^ Turner 1987 , pp. 80–82.

^ Hampton 1986 , p. 76; Egle et al. 2008 , p. 70.

Sources [ edit ] Adams, Ian (2001).

Political Ideology Today . Politics Today (2nd reprint, revised ed.). Manchester, England: Manchester University Press.

ISBN 9780719060199 .

Berman, Sheri (2006).

The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making of Europe's Twentieth Century . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521817998 .

Orlow, Dietrich (2000).

Common Destiny: A Comparative History of the Dutch, French, and German Social Democratic Parties, 1945–1969 (illustrated, reprinted ed.). New York City, New York: Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9781571811851 .

Hampton, Mary N. (1986). Hampton, Mary N.; Søe, Christian (eds.).

Between Bonn and Berlin: German Politics Adrift?

(illustrated ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780847690091 .

Egle, Christoph; Henkes, Christian; Merkel, Wolfgang; Petring, Alexander (2008).

Social Democracy in Power: The Capacity to Reform (illustrated ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781134071791 .

Turner, Henry Ashby (1987).

The Two Germanies Since 1945 (illustrated ed.). New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300038651 .

External links [ edit ] Berman, Sheri (2008).

Understanding Social Democracy (PDF) .

What's Left of the Left: Liberalism and Social Democracy in a Globalized World . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Minda de Gunzburg Center for European Studies, Harvard University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 January 2016 .

Social Democratic Party of Germany (15 November 1959).

"Godesberg Program" (PDF) .

German History Documents . Washington, D.C.: German Historical Institute . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

Social Democratic Party of Germany (15 November 1959).

"Godesberg Program" (in German). Berlin: Deutsches Historisches Museum. Archived from the original on 23 July 2014 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 .

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany This German history article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Godesberg_Program&oldid=1252593414 " Categories : 1959 documents 1959 establishments in West Germany Party platforms Political history of Germany Social Democratic Party of Germany German history stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 CS1 German-language sources (de) All stub articles This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 01:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Godesberg Program 17 languages Add topic

