Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Pyrena 6 languages Español Français Português Русский தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pit or stone within a drupe or fruit Diagram of a typical drupe, in this case a peach , illustrating the layers of both the fruit and the seed; the pyrene is the hardened endocarp which encloses the seed This article is about fruitstones. For the organelle within the chloroplast of some algae and hornworts, see pyrenoid . For other uses of "pyrene", see Pyrene (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Pirene .

A pyrena ( / p aɪ ˈ r iː n ə / ) or pyrene , commonly called a pit or stone , is the fruitstone within a drupe or drupelet produced by the ossification of the endocarp or lining of the fruit.

[ 1 ] It consists of a hard endocarp tissue surrounding one or more seeds (also called the "kernel").

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The hardened endocarp which constitutes the pyrene provides a protective physical barrier around the seed, shielding it from pathogens and herbivory .

[ 4 ] While many drupes are monopyrenous, containing only one pyrene, pome -type fruit with a hard, stony (rather than leathery) endocarp are typically polypyrenous drupes, containing multiple pyrenes.

[ 5 ] Development [ edit ] The hardening of the endocarp of a developing drupe occurs via secondary cell wall formation and lignification .

[ 4 ] The biopolymer lignin , also found in wood , provides a structure within secondary cell walls which supports the polymerisation of cellulose and hemicellulose ; together these polymers provide the endocarp with tensile strength and stiffness .

[ 4 ] Further hardening occurs during the biomineralisation of the endocarp. The biomineralisation of pyrenes during the life of the plant can aid the preservation of fruit remains in archaeological findings.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] Cross-section of a peach , a monopyrenous drupe, cut to reveal the pyrene inside Pyrene of a peach dissected to reveal a single seed inside Pyrenes extracted from a single fruit of Crataegus punctata , a polypyrenous drupe X-ray of a pyrene of Elaeocarpus ganitrus revealing 10 seed-bearing locules inside; the number of locules in E. ganitrus pyrenes is variable between individual fruits See also [ edit ] Nut (fruit) References [ edit ] ^ Eckel (2011) .

^ Beentje & Williamson (2010) .

^ Hickey & King (2001) .

^ a b c Dardick & Callahan (2014) .

^ Potter et al. (2007) .

^ Allué et al. (2015) .

^ Messager et al. (2010) .

Bibliography [ edit ] Allué, Ethel; Cáceres, Isabel; Expósito, Isabel; Canals, Antoni; Rodríguez, Anna; Rosell, Jordi; Bermúdez de Castro, José María; Carbonell, Eudald (2015). "Celtis remains from the Lower Pleistocene of Gran Dolina, Atapuerca (Burgos, Spain)".

Journal of Archaeological Science .

53 : 570– 577.

Bibcode : 2015JArSc..53..570A .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2014.11.016 .

Beentje, H.; Williamson, J. (2010).

The Kew Plant Glossary: an Illustrated Dictionary of Plant Terms . Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew: Kew Publishing.

Dardick, Chris; Callahan, Ann M. (2014).

"Evolution of the fruit endocarp: molecular mechanisms underlying adaptations in seed protection and dispersal strategies" .

Frontiers in Plant Science .

5 : 284.

doi : 10.3389/fpls.2014.00284 .

ISSN 1664-462X .

PMC 4070412 .

PMID 25009543 .

Eckel, P.M. (2011).

"A Grammatical Dictionary of Botanical Latin" . Missouri Botanical Garden.

Hickey, M.; King, C. (2001).

The Cambridge Illustrated Glossary of Botanical Terms . Cambridge University Press.

Messager, Erwan; Badou, Aïcha; Fröhlich, François; Deniaux, Brigitte; Lordkipanidze, David; Voinchet, Pierre (2010).

"Fruit and seed biomineralization and its effect on preservation" (PDF) .

Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences .

2 (1): 25– 34.

Bibcode : 2010ArAnS...2...25M .

doi : 10.1007/s12520-010-0024-1 .

S2CID 128691588 .

Potter, D.; Eriksson, T.; Evans, R.C.; Oh, S.; Smedmark, J.E.E.; Morgan, D.R.; Kerr, M.; Robertson, K.R.; Arsenault, M.; Dickinson, T.A.; Campbell, C.S. (2007).

"Phylogeny and classification of Rosaceae" .

Plant Systematics and Evolution .

266 ( 1– 2): 5– 43.

Bibcode : 2007PSyEv.266....5P .

doi : 10.1007/s00606-007-0539-9 .

S2CID 16578516 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pyrena&oldid=1292740288 " Categories : Plant anatomy Drupes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 15:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pyrena 6 languages Add topic

