Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Use in English Toggle Use in English subsection 3.1 Separating 3.1.1 Justification and line-wrapping 3.1.2 Prefixes and suffixes 3.1.3 Syllabification and spelling 3.2 Joining 3.2.1 Compound modifiers 3.2.2 Object–verbal-noun compounds 3.2.3 Personal names 3.2.4 Other compounds 3.2.5 Suspended hyphens 3.3 Other uses 3.4 Varied meanings 4 Use in computing Toggle Use in computing subsection 4.1 Hyphen-minuses 4.2 Soft and hard hyphens 4.3 Nonbreaking hyphens 4.4 "Unicode hyphen" 5 Use in date notation 6 Unicode 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Hyphen 67 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Punctuation mark used to join words This article is about the punctuation mark. For other uses, see Hyphen (disambiguation) .

‐ Hyphen - ‑ Hyphen-minus Non-breaking hyphen The hyphen ‐ is a punctuation mark used to join words and to separate syllables of a single word. The use of hyphens is called hyphenation .

[ 1 ] The hyphen is sometimes confused with dashes ( en dash – , em dash — and others), which are wider, or with the minus sign − , which is also wider and usually drawn a little higher to match the crossbar in the plus sign + .

As an orthographic concept, the hyphen is a single entity. In character encoding for use with computers, it is represented in Unicode by any of several characters . These include the dual-use hyphen-minus , the soft hyphen , the nonbreaking hyphen , and an unambiguous form known familiarly as the "Unicode hyphen", shown at the top of the infobox on this page. The character most often used to represent a hyphen (and the one produced by the key on a keyboard) is called the "hyphen-minus" in the Unicode specification because it also used as a minus sign . The name derives from its name in the original ASCII standard, where it was called "hyphen (minus)".

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word is derived from Ancient Greek ὑφ' ἕν ( huph' hén ), contracted from ὑπό ἕν ( hypó hén ), "in one" (literally "under one").

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] An (ἡ) ὑφέν ( (he) hyphén ) was an undertie -like ‿ sign written below two adjacent letters to indicate that they belong to the same word when it was necessary to avoid ambiguity, before word spacing was practiced.

History [ edit ] First page of the first volume: the epistle of St Jerome to Paulinus from the University of Texas copy. The page has 40 lines.

The first known documentation of the hyphen is in the grammatical works of Dionysius Thrax . At the time hyphenation was joining two words that would otherwise be read separately by a low tie mark between the two words.

[ 5 ] In Greek these marks were known as enotikon , officially romanized as a hyphen.

[ 6 ] With the introduction of letter spacing in the Middle Ages , the hyphen, still written beneath the text, reversed its meaning. Scribes used the mark to connect two words that had been incorrectly separated by a space. This era also saw the introduction of the marginal hyphen, for words broken across lines.

[ 7 ] The modern format of the hyphen originated with Johannes Gutenberg of Mainz, Germany, c.

1455 with the publication of his 42-line Bible . His tools did not allow for a sublinear hyphen, and he thus moved it to the middle of the line.

[ 8 ] Examination of an original copy on vellum (Hubay index #35) in the U. S. Library of Congress shows that Gutenberg's movable type was set justified in a uniform style, 42 equal lines per page. The Gutenberg printing press required words composed of individual movable type to be secured within a rigid, nonprinting frame. To ensure each line fit the frame uniformly, Gutenberg addressed differences in line length by inserting a hyphen at the end of a line at the right-hand margin. This interrupted the letters in the last word, requiring the remaining letters be carried over to the start of the line below. His double hyphen , ⸗ , appears throughout the Bible as a short, double line inclined to the right at a 60-degree angle.

[ citation needed ] Use in English [ edit ] For Wikipedia's own standards for hyphen use, see Wikipedia:Manual of Style § Hyphens .

This section possibly contains original research . Almost nothing in this section is tied to reliable sources, and there's a great deal of prescriptivist punditry about "codification" of various "rules".

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The English language does not have definitive hyphenation rules, [ 9 ] though various style guides provide detailed usage recommendations and have a significant amount of overlap in what they advise. Hyphens are mostly used to break single words into parts or to join ordinarily separate words into single words. Spaces are not placed between a hyphen and either of the elements it connects except when using a suspended or "hanging" hyphen that stands in for a repeated word (e.g., nineteenth- and twentieth-century writers ). Style conventions that apply to hyphens (and dashes) have evolved to support ease of reading in complex constructions; editors often accept deviations if they aid rather than hinder easy comprehension.

The use of the hyphen in English compound nouns and verbs has, in general, been steadily declining. Compounds that might once have been hyphenated are increasingly left with spaces or are combined into one word. Reflecting this changing usage, in 2007, the sixth edition of the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary removed the hyphens from 16,000 entries, such as fig-leaf (now fig leaf ), pot-belly (now pot belly ), and pigeon-hole (now pigeonhole ).

[ 10 ] The increasing prevalence of computer technology and the advent of the Internet have given rise to a subset of common nouns that might have been hyphenated in the past (e.g., toolbar , hyperlink , and pastebin ).

Despite decreased use, hyphenation remains the norm in certain compound-modifier constructions and, among some authors, with certain prefixes (see below ). Hyphenation is also routinely used as part of syllabification in justified texts to avoid unsightly spacing (especially in columns with narrow line lengths , as when used with newspapers ).

Separating [ edit ] Justification and line-wrapping [ edit ] When flowing text, it is sometimes preferable to break a word into two so that it continues on another line rather than moving the entire word to the next line. The word may be divided at the nearest break point between syllables ( syllabification ) and a hyphen inserted to indicate that the letters form a word fragment, rather than a full word. This allows more efficient use of paper, allows flush appearance of right-side margins ( justification ) without oddly large word spaces, and decreases the problem of rivers . This kind of hyphenation is most useful when the width of the column (called the "line length" in typography) is very narrow. For example: Justified text without hyphenation Justified text with hyphenation We,       therefore,      the representatives of the United States of America ...

We, therefore, the represen- tatives of the United States of America ...

Rules (or guidelines) for correct hyphenation vary between languages, and may be complex, and they can interact with other orthographic and typesetting practices.

Hyphenation algorithms , when employed in concert with dictionaries, are sufficient for all but the most formal texts.

It may be necessary to distinguish an incidental line-break hyphen from one integral to a word being mentioned (as when used in a dictionary ) or present in an original text being quoted (when in a critical edition ), not only to control its word wrap behavior (which encoding handles with hard and soft hyphens having the same glyph ) but also to differentiate appearance (with a different glyph).

Webster's Third New International Dictionary [ 11 ] and the Chambers Dictionary [ 12 ] use a double hyphen for integral hyphens and a single hyphen for line-breaks, whereas Kromhout's Afrikaans–English dictionary uses the opposite convention.

[ 13 ] The Concise Oxford Dictionary (fifth edition) suggested repeating an integral hyphen at the start of the following line.

[ 14 ] Prefixes and suffixes [ edit ] Prefixes (such as de- , pre- , re- , and non- [ 15 ] ) and suffixes (such as -less , -like , -ness , and -hood ) are sometimes hyphenated, especially when the unhyphenated spelling resembles another word or when the affixation is deemed misinterpretable, ambiguous, or somehow "odd-looking" (for example, having two consecutive monographs that look like the digraphs of English, like e+a, e+e, or e+i). However, the unhyphenated style, which is also called closed up or solid , is usually preferred, particularly when the derivative has been relatively familiarized or popularized through extensive use in various contexts. As a rule of thumb , affixes are not hyphenated unless the lack of a hyphen would hurt clarity.

The hyphen may be used between vowel letters (e.g., ee , ea , ei ) to indicate that they do not form a digraph . Some words have both hyphenated and unhyphenated variants: de-escalate /deescalate , co-operation /cooperation , re-examine /reexamine , de-emphasize /deemphasize , and so on. Words often lose their hyphen as they become more common, such as email instead of e-mail . When there are tripled letters, the hyphenated variant of these words is often more common (as in shell-like instead of shelllike ).

Closed-up style is avoided in some cases: possible homographs , such as recreation (fun or sport) versus re-creation (the act of creating again), retreat (turn back) versus re-treat (give therapy again), and un-ionized (not in ion form) versus unionized (organized into trade unions ); combinations with proper nouns or adjectives ( un-American , de-Stalinisation ); [ 16 ] [ 17 ] acronyms ( anti-TNF antibody , non-SI units ); or numbers ( pre-1949 diplomacy , pre-1492 cartography ). Although proto-oncogene is still hyphenated by both Dorland's and Merriam-Webster's Medical , the solid (that is, unhyphenated) styling ( protooncogene ) is a common variant, particularly among oncologists and geneticists.

[ citation needed ] A diaeresis may also be used in a like fashion, either to separate and mark off monographs (as in coöperation ) or to signalize a vocalic terminal e (for example, Brontë ). This use of the diaeresis peaked in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, but it was never applied extensively across the language: only a handful of diaereses, including coöperation and Brontë , are encountered with any appreciable frequency in English; thus reëxamine , reïterate , deëmphasize , etc. are seldom encountered. In borrowings from Modern French, whose orthography utilizes the diaeresis as a means to differentiate graphemes , various English dictionaries list the dieresis as optional (as in naive and naïve ) despite the juxtaposition of a and i.

[ citation needed ] Syllabification and spelling [ edit ] Hyphens are occasionally used to denote syllabification , as in syl-la-bi-fi-ca-tion . Various British and North American dictionaries use an interpunct (sometimes called a "middle dot" or "hyphenation point"), for this purpose, as in syl·la·bi·fi·ca·tion . This practice allows the hyphen to be reserved exclusively for instances where a true hyphen is intended –  for example, self-con·scious , un·self-con·scious , and long-stand·ing . Similarly, hyphens may be used to indicate the spelling of a word, as in W-O-R-D to represent word .

In nineteenth-century American literature, hyphens were also used irregularly to divide syllables in words from indigenous North American languages, without regard for etymology or pronunciation, [ 18 ] such as "Shuh-shuh-gah" (from Ojibwe zhashagi , "blue heron") in The Song of Hiawatha .

[ 19 ] This usage is now rare and deprecated, [ citation needed ] except in some place names such as Ah-gwah-ching .

Joining [ edit ] Compound modifiers [ edit ] Further information: Compound modifier and English compound § Hyphenated compound modifiers Compound modifiers are groups of two or more words that jointly modify the meaning of another word. When a compound modifier other than an adverb – adjective combination appears before a term, the compound modifier is often hyphenated to prevent misunderstanding, such as in American-football player or little-celebrated paintings . Without the hyphen, there is potential confusion about whether the writer means a "player of American football" or an "American player of football" and whether the writer means paintings that are "little celebrated" or "celebrated paintings" that are little.

[ 20 ] Compound modifiers can extend to three or more words, as in ice-cream-flavored candy , and can be adverbial as well as adjectival ( spine-tinglingly frightening ). However, if the compound is a familiar one, it is usually unhyphenated. For example, some style guides prefer the construction high school students , to high-school students .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Although the expression is technically ambiguous ("students of a high school"/"school students who are high"), it would normally be formulated differently if other than the first meaning were intended. Noun–noun compound modifiers may also be written without a hyphen when no confusion is likely: grade point average and department store manager .

[ 22 ] When a compound modifier follows the term to which it applies, a hyphen is typically not used if the compound is a temporary compound. For example, "that gentleman is well respected", not "that gentleman is well-respected"; or "a patient-centered approach was used" but "the approach was patient centered." [ 23 ] But permanent compounds, found as headwords in dictionaries, are treated as invariable, so if they are hyphenated in the cited dictionary, the hyphenation will be used in both attributive and predicative positions. For example, "A cost-effective method was used" and "The method was cost-effective" ( cost-effective is a permanent compound that is hyphenated as a headword in various dictionaries). When one of the parts of the modifier is a proper noun or a proper adjective , there is no hyphen (e.g., "a South American actor").

[ 24 ] When the first modifier in a compound is an adverb ending in -ly (e.g., "a poorly written novel"), various style guides advise no hyphen.

[ 24 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] However, some do allow for this use. For example, The Economist Style Guide advises: "Adverbs do not need to be linked to participles or adjectives by hyphens in simple constructions ... Less common adverbs, including all those that end -ly , are less likely to need hyphens." [ 25 ] In the 19th century, it was common to hyphenate adverb–adjective modifiers with the adverb ending in -ly (e.g., "a craftily-constructed chair"). However, this has become rare. For example, wholly owned subsidiary and quickly moving vehicle are unambiguous, because the adverbs clearly modify the adjectives: "quickly" cannot modify "vehicle".

However, if an adverb can also function as an adjective, then a hyphen may be or should be used for clarity, depending on the style guide.

[ 17 ] For example, the phrase more-important reasons ("reasons that are more important") is distinguished from more important reasons ("additional important reasons"), where more is an adjective. Similarly, more-beautiful scenery (with a mass-noun ) is distinct from more beautiful scenery . (In contrast, the hyphen in "a more-important reason" is not necessary, because the syntax cannot be misinterpreted.) A few short and common words—such as well , ill , little , and much —attract special attention in this category.

[ 25 ] The hyphen in "well-[past_participled] noun", such as in " well-differentiated cells ", might reasonably be judged superfluous (the syntax is unlikely to be misinterpreted), yet plenty of style guides call for it. Because early has both adverbial and adjectival senses, its hyphenation can attract attention; some editors, due to comparison with advanced-stage disease and adult-onset disease , like the parallelism of early-stage disease and early-onset disease . Similarly, the hyphen in little-celebrated paintings clarifies that one is not speaking of little paintings.

Hyphens are usually used to connect numbers and words in modifying phrases. Such is the case when used to describe dimensional measurements of weight, size, and time, under the rationale that, like other compound modifiers, they take hyphens in attributive position (before the modified noun), [ 26 ] although not in predicative position (after the modified noun). This is applied whether numerals or words are used for the numbers. Thus 28-year-old woman and twenty-eight-year-old woman or 32-foot wingspan and thirty-two-foot wingspan , but the woman is 28 years old and a wingspan of 32 feet .

[ a ] However, with symbols for SI units (such as m or kg )—in contrast to the names of these units (such as metre or kilogram )—the numerical value is always separated from it with a space: a 25 kg sphere . When the unit names are spelled out, this recommendation does not apply: a 25-kilogram sphere , a roll of 35-millimetre film .

[ 27 ] In spelled-out fractions , hyphens are usually used when the fraction is used as an adjective but not when it is used as a noun: thus two-thirds majority [ a ] and one-eighth portion but I drank two thirds of the bottle or I kept three quarters of it for myself .

[ 28 ] However, at least one major style guide [ 26 ] hyphenates spelled-out fractions invariably (whether adjective or noun).

In English, an en dash , – , sometimes replaces the hyphen in hyphenated compounds if either of its constituent parts is already hyphenated or contains a space (for example, San Francisco–area residents , hormone receptor–positive cells , cell cycle–related factors , and public-school–private-school rivalries ).

[ 29 ] A commonly used alternative style is the hyphenated string ( hormone-receptor-positive cells , cell-cycle-related factors ). (For other aspects of en dash–versus–hyphen use, see Dash § En dash .) Object–verbal-noun compounds [ edit ] When an object is compounded with a verbal noun, such as egg-beater (a tool that beats eggs), the result is sometimes hyphenated. Some authors do this consistently, others only for disambiguation; in this case, egg-beater, egg beater, and eggbeater are all common.

An example of an ambiguous phrase appears in they stood near a group of alien lovers , which without a hyphen implies that they stood near a group of lovers who were aliens; they stood near a group of alien-lovers clarifies that they stood near a group of people who loved aliens, as "alien" can be either an adjective or a noun. On the other hand, in the phrase a hungry pizza-lover , the hyphen will often be omitted (a hungry pizza lover), as "pizza" cannot be an adjective and the phrase is therefore unambiguous.

Similarly, a man-eating shark is nearly the opposite of a man eating shark ; the first refers to a shark that eats people, and the second to a man who eats shark meat .

A government-monitoring program is a program that monitors the government, whereas a government monitoring program is a government program that monitors something else.

Personal names [ edit ] See also: Spanish naming customs § Hyphenation , and Portuguese name § Hyphenation Some married couples compose a new surname (sometimes referred to as a double-barrelled name ) for their new family by combining their two surnames with a hyphen. Jane Doe and John Smith might become Jane and John Smith-Doe, or Doe-Smith, for instance. In some countries only the woman hyphenates her birth surname, appending her husband's surname.

With already-hyphenated names, some parts are typically dropped. For example, Aaron Johnson and Samantha Taylor-Wood became Aaron Taylor-Johnson and Sam Taylor-Johnson . Not all hyphenated surnames are the result of marriage. For example Julia Louis-Dreyfus is a descendant of Louis Lemlé Dreyfus whose son was Léopold Louis-Dreyfus.

Other compounds [ edit ] Connecting hyphens are used in a large number of miscellaneous compounds, other than modifiers, such as in lily-of-the-valley , cock-a-hoop , clever-clever , tittle-tattle and orang-utan . Use is often dictated by convention rather than fixed rules, and hyphenation styles may vary between authors; for example, orang-utan is also written as orangutan or orang utan , and lily-of-the-valley may be hyphenated or not.

Suspended hyphens [ edit ] A suspended hyphen (also called a suspensive hyphen or hanging hyphen , or less commonly a dangling or floating hyphen ) may be used when a single base word is used with separate, consecutive, hyphenated words that are connected by "and", "or", or "to". For example, short-term and long-term plans may be written as short- and long-term plans.

This usage is now common and specifically recommended in some style guides.

[ 22 ] Suspended hyphens are also used, though less commonly, when the base word comes first, such as in "investor-owned and -operated ". Uses such as "applied and sociolinguistics" (instead of "applied linguistics and sociolinguistics") are frowned upon; the Indiana University style guide uses this example and says "Do not 'take a shortcut' when the first expression is ordinarily open" (i.e., ordinarily two separate words).

[ 22 ] This is different, however, from instances where prefixes that are normally closed up (styled solidly) are used suspensively. For example, preoperative and postoperative becomes pre- and postoperative (not pre- and post-operative ) when suspended. Some editors prefer to avoid suspending such pairs, choosing instead to write out both words in full.

[ 26 ] Other uses [ edit ] A hyphen may be used to connect groups of numbers, such as in dates (see § Usage in date notation ), telephone numbers or sports scores .

It can also be used to indicate a range of values, although many styles prefer an en dash (see Dash § En dash §§ Ranges of values ).

It is sometimes used to hide letters in words ( filleting for redaction or censoring ), as in " G-d ", although an en dash can be used as well ("G–d").

[ 30 ] It is often used in reduplication .

[ 31 ] Due to their similar appearances, hyphens are sometimes mistakenly used where an en dash or em dash would be more appropriate.

[ 32 ] Varied meanings [ edit ] Some stark examples of semantic changes caused by the placement of hyphens to mark attributive phrases: Disease-causing poor nutrition is poor nutrition that causes disease.

Disease causing poor nutrition is a disease that causes poor nutrition.

A hard-working man is a man who works hard.

A hard working man is a working man who is tough.

A man-eating shark is a shark that eats humans.

A man eating shark is a man who is eating shark meat.

Three-hundred-year-old trees are an indeterminate number of trees that are each 300 years old.

Three hundred-year-old trees are three trees that are each 100 years old.

Three hundred year-old trees are 300 trees that are each a year old.

Use in computing [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hyphen-minuses [ edit ] Main article: Hyphen-minus In the ASCII character encoding, the hyphen (or minus) is character 45 10 .

[ 33 ] As Unicode is identical to ASCII (the 1967 version) for all encodings up to 127 10 , the number 45 10 (2D 16 ) is also assigned to this character in Unicode, where it is denoted as U+002D - HYPHEN-MINUS .

[ 34 ] Unicode has, in addition, other encodings for minus and hyphen characters: U+2212 − MINUS SIGN and U+2010 ‐ HYPHEN , respectively. The unambiguous § "Unicode hyphen" at U+2010 is generally inconvenient to enter on most keyboards and the glyphs for this hyphen and the hyphen-minus are identical in most fonts ( Lucida Sans Unicode is one of the few exceptions). Consequently, use of the hyphen-minus as the hyphen character is very common. Even the Unicode Standard regularly uses the hyphen-minus rather than the U+2010 hyphen.

The hyphen-minus has limited use in indicating subtraction; for example, compare 4+3−2=5 (minus) and 4+3-2=5 (hyphen-minus) — in most typefaces, the glyph for hyphen-minus will not have the optimal width, thickness, or vertical position, whereas the minus character is typically designed so that it does. Nevertheless, in many spreadsheet and programming applications the hyphen-minus must be typed to indicate subtraction, as use of the Unicode minus sign will not be recognised.

The hyphen-minus is often used instead of dashes or minus signs in situations where the latter characters are unavailable (such as type-written or ASCII-only text), where they take effort to enter (via dialog boxes or multi-key keyboard shortcuts ), or when the writer is unaware of the distinction. Consequently, some writers use two or three hyphen-minuses ( -- or --- ) to represent an em dash.

[ 35 ] In the TeX typesetting languages, a single hyphen-minus ( - ) renders a hyphen, a single hyphen-minus in math mode ( $-$ ) renders a minus sign, two hyphen-minuses ( -- ) renders an en dash, and three hyphen-minuses ( --- ) renders an em dash.

The hyphen-minus character is also often used when specifying command-line options . The character is usually followed by one or more letters that indicate specific actions. Typically it is called a dash or switch in this context. Various implementations of the getopt function to parse command-line options additionally allow the use of two hyphen-minus characters, -- , to specify long option names that are more descriptive than their single-letter equivalents. Another use of hyphens is that employed by programs written with pipelining in mind: a single hyphen may be recognized in lieu of a filename, with the hyphen then serving as an indicator that a standard stream , instead of a file, is to be worked with.

Soft and hard hyphens [ edit ] Further information: Soft hyphen Although software ( hyphenation algorithms ) can often automatically make decisions on when to hyphenate a word at a line break, it is also sometimes useful for the user to be able to insert cues for those decisions (which are dynamic in the online medium, given that text can be reflowed ). For this purpose, the concept of a soft hyphen (discretionary hyphen, optional hyphen) was introduced, allowing such manual specification of a place where a hyphenated break is allowed but not forced . That is, it does not force a line break in an inconvenient place when the text is later reflowed.

Soft hyphens are inserted into the text at the positions where hyphenation may occur. It can be a tedious task to insert the soft hyphens by hand, and tools using hyphenation algorithms are available that do this automatically. Current modules [ which?

] of the Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) standard provide language-specific hyphenation dictionaries.

In contrast, a hyphen that is always displayed and printed is called a "hard hyphen". This can be a Unicode hyphen, a hyphen-minus, or a nonbreaking hyphen (see below ). Confusingly, the term is sometimes limited to nonbreaking hyphens.

[ citation needed ] Nonbreaking hyphens [ edit ] The word segmentation rules of most text systems consider a hyphen to be a word boundary and a valid point at which to break a line when flowing text. This is not always desirable, it could lead to ambiguity (e.g.

retreat and re‑treat would be indistinguishable with a line break after re ), it can split off an ending as in " n ‑th" (though n th or " n th" could be used), and it is inappropriate in some languages other than English (e.g., a line break at the hyphen in Irish an t‑athair or Romanian s‑a would be undesirable). The non-breaking hyphen , nonbreaking hyphen , or no-break hyphen looks identical to the regular hyphen, but word processors do not break words at it. The nonbreaking space exists for similar reasons.

"Unicode hyphen" [ edit ] Because the conventional hyphen-minus mark on keyboards is ambiguous (it can be interpreted –  sometimes unexpectedly –  as a hyphen or a minus, depending on context), in addition the Unicode consortium allocated codepoints for an unambiguous minus and an unambiguous hyphen. The Unicode hyphen ( U+2010 ‐ HYPHEN ) is seldom used. Even the Unicode Standard uses U+002D instead of U+2010 in its text.

[ 36 ] Use in date notation [ edit ] Further information: Date format by country Use of hyphens to delineate the parts of a written date (rather than the slashes used conventionally in Anglophone countries) is specified in the international standard ISO 8601 . Thus, for example, 1789-07-14 is the standard way of writing the date of Bastille Day . This standard has been transposed as European Standard EN 28601 and has been incorporated into various national typographic style guides (e.g., DIN 5008 in Germany). Now all official European Union (and many member state) documents use this style.  This is also the typical date format used in large parts of Europe and Asia, although sometimes with other separators than the hyphen.

This method has gained influence within North America, as most common computer file systems make the use of slashes in file names difficult or impossible.

DOS , OS/2 and Windows use / to introduce and separate switches to shell commands, and on both Windows and Unix-like systems slashes in a filename introduce subdirectories which may not be desirable. Besides encouraging use of dashes, the Y-M-D order and zero-padding of numbers less than 10 are also copied from ISO 8601 to make the filenames sort by date order.

Unicode [ edit ] Unicode has multiple hyphen characters: [ 37 ] U+002D - HYPHEN-MINUS , a character of multiple uses U+00AD SOFT HYPHEN ( &shy; ) [ b ] U+2010 ‐ HYPHEN ( &dash;, &hyphen; ) U+2011 ‑ NON-BREAKING HYPHEN U+2E5D ⹝ OBLIQUE HYPHEN for medieval texts [ 38 ] And in non-Latin scripts: [ 37 ] U+058A ֊ ARMENIAN HYPHEN U+05BE ־ HEBREW PUNCTUATION MAQAF U+1806 ᠆ MONGOLIAN TODO SOFT HYPHEN U+1B60 ᭠ BALINESE PAMENENG (used only as a line-breaking hyphen) U+2E17 ⸗ DOUBLE OBLIQUE HYPHEN (used in ancient Near-Eastern linguistics and in blackletter typefaces) U+30FB ・ KATAKANA MIDDLE DOT (has the Unicode property of "Hyphen" despite its name) U+FE63 ﹣ SMALL HYPHEN-MINUS (compatibility character for a small hyphen-minus, used in East Asian typography) U+FF0D － FULLWIDTH HYPHEN-MINUS (compatibility character for a wide hyphen-minus, used in East Asian typography) U+FF65 ･ HALFWIDTH KATAKANA MIDDLE DOT (compatibility character for a wide katakana middle dot, has the Unicode property of "Hyphen" despite its name) Unicode distinguishes the hyphen from the general interpunct . The characters below do not have the Unicode property of "Hyphen" despite their names: [ 37 ] U+1400 ᐀ CANADIAN SYLLABICS HYPHEN U+2027 ‧ HYPHENATION POINT U+2043 ⁃ HYPHEN BULLET ( &hybull; ) U+2E1A ⸚ HYPHEN WITH DIAERESIS U+2E40 ⹀ DOUBLE HYPHEN U+30A0 ゠ KATAKANA-HIRAGANA DOUBLE HYPHEN U+10EAD 𐺭 YEZIDI HYPHENATION MARK U+10D6E 𐵮 GARAY HYPHEN (See interpunct and bullet (typography) for more round characters.) See also [ edit ] De-hyphenation – Concept in international relations Double hyphen – Historic punctuation mark (⹀) French orthography § Hyphens – Spelling and punctuation of the French language Hyphen War – Dispute over Czechoslovakia name after 1989 Greek hyphen – Form of hyphen used in ancient Greek ("Papyrological hyphen") Enhypen – South Korean boy band, whose name refers to the hyphen Notes [ edit ] ^ a b With numbers, where a plural noun would normally be used in an unhyphenated predicative position, the singular form of the noun is generally used in the hyphenated form used attributively. Thus a woman who is 28 years old becomes a 28-year-old woman . There are occasional exceptions to this general rule, for instance with fractions ( a two-thirds majority ) and irregular plurals ( a two-criteria review , a two-teeth bridge ).

^ The soft hyphen serves as an invisible marker that is used to specify a place in text where a hyphenated line break is preferred should one be needed. This avoids forcing a line break in an inconvenient place,  should the text be reflowed. It becomes visible only if word wrapping occurs at the end of a line.

References [ edit ] ^ " Hyphen Definition" .

dictionary.com . Retrieved 18 June 2015 .

^ "American National Standard X3.4-1977: American Standard Code for Information Interchange" (PDF) . National Institute of Standards and Technology. p. 10 (4.2 Graphic characters).

^ ὑφέν .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"hyphen" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Nicolas, Nick. " Greek Unicode Issues: Punctuation Archived 6 August 2012 at archive.today ". 2005. Accessed 7 October 2014.

^ Ελληνικός Οργανισμός Τυποποίησης [ Ellīnikós Organismós Typopoíīsīs , " Hellenic Organization for Standardization "].

ΕΛΟΤ 743, 2η Έκδοση [ ELOT 743, 2ī Ekdosī , "ELOT 743, 2nd ed.

"]. ELOT (Athens), 2001.

(in Greek) ^ Keith Houston (2013).

Shady Characters: The Secret Life of Punctuation, Symbols, and Other Typographical Marks . W.W. Norton & Company. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-393-06442-1 .

^ Keith Houston (2013).

Shady Characters: The Secret Life of Punctuation, Symbols, and Other Typographical Marks . W.W. Norton & Company. p. 132.

ISBN 978-0-393-06442-1 .

^ Wroe, Ann, ed. (2015).

The Economist Style Guide (11th ed.). London / New York: Profile Books / PublicAffairs. p. 74.

hyphens There is no firm rule to help you decide which words are run together, hyphenated or left separate.

^ "Small object of grammatical desire" .

BBC News . London: British Broadcasting Corporation . 20 September 2007.

.

^ Gove, Philip Babcock (1993).

Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged . Merriam-Webster. p. 14a, § 1.6.1.

ISBN 978-0-87779-201-7 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ Chambers, Allied (2006).

The Chambers Dictionary . Allied Publishers. p. xxxviii, § 8.

ISBN 978-8186062258 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ Kromhout, Jan (2001).

Afrikaans–English, English–Afrikaans Dictionary . Hippocrene Books. p.

182 , § 5.

ISBN 978-0-7818-0846-0 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 .

^ Hartmann, R. Rf. K. (1986).

The History of Lexicography: Papers from the Dictionary Research Centre Seminar at Exeter, March 1986 . John Benjamins Publishing. p. 9.

ISBN 978-9027245236 .

^ A fairly comprehensive list, although not exhaustive, is given at Prefix > List of English derivational prefixes .

^ "Hyphenated Words: A Guide", The Grammar Curmudgeon , City slide .

^ a b "Hyphens", Punctuation , Grammar book .

^ Liberman, Mark.

"American Indian Hyphens" .

Language Log .

^ Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth.

The Song of Hiawatha .

^ Gary Blake and Robert W. Bly , The Elements of Technical Writing , p. 48.

New York : Macmillan Publishers , 1993.

ISBN 0020130856 ^ E.g.

"H" .

Bloomberg School Style Manual . Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ a b c d E.g.

"H" .

The IU editorial style guide . Indiana University. Archived from the original on 14 June 2019 . Retrieved 9 March 2019 .

^ Davis, John (30 November 2004).

"Using Hyphens in Compound Adjectives (and Exceptions to the Rule)" (Grammar tip). UHV. Archived from the original on 9 January 2010 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 .

^ a b "Hyphenated Compound Words" .

englishplus.com . Retrieved 18 November 2014 .

^ a b Wroe, Ann, ed. (2015).

The Economist Style Guide (11th ed.). London / New York: Profile Books / PublicAffairs. pp.

77– 78.

hyphens ... 12. Adverbs: Adverbs do not need to be linked to participles or adjectives by hyphens in simple constructions [examples elided]. But if the adverb is one of two words together being used adjectivally, a hyphen may be needed [examples elided]. The hyphen is especially likely to be needed if the adverb is short and common, such as ill , little , much and well . Less common adverbs, including all those that end -ly , are less likely to need hyphens [example elided].

^ a b c Iverson, Cheryl (2007). "8.3.1".

AMA Manual of Style (10th ed.). Oxford, Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-517633-9 .

^ Bureau international des poids et mesures, Le Système international d'unités (SI) / The International System of Units (SI) , 9th ed.

(Sèvres: 2019), ISBN 978-92-822-2272-0 , sub§5.4.3, p. 149; "Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI)" , NIST Special Publication 811, National Institute of Standards and Technology , March 2008.

^ American Psychological Association (APA) (2010), The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.), Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, ISBN 978-1-4338-0562-2 .

^ Gary Lutz; Diane Stevenson (2005).

The Writer's Digest grammar desk reference . Writer's Digest Books. p. 296.

ISBN 978-1-58297-335-7 .

^ Davidson, Baruch (23 February 2011).

"Why Don't Jews Say G‑d's Name? - On the use of the word "Hashem" - Chabad.org" .

Chabad.org . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

It is customary to insert a dash in G-d's name when written or printed on a medium that could be defaced.

^ "Like vs. Like-Like: A Look at Reduplication in English" .

Dictionary.com . 26 September 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

^ Gunner, Jennifer (22 February 2010).

"When and How To Use a Hyphen ( - )" .

grammar.yourdictionary.com . Retrieved 15 April 2023 .

Many people confuse hyphens and dashes because they look similar in printing.

^ Haralambous, Yannis (2007). "ASCII".

Fonts & Encodings . O'Reilly Media. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0596102425 .

^ "3.1 General scripts" (PDF) .

Unicode Version 1.0 · Character Blocks . p. 30.

Loose vs. Precise Semantics.

Some ASCII characters have multiple uses, either through ambiguity in the original standards or through accumulated reinterpretations of a limited codeset. For example, 27 hex is defined in ANSI X3.4 as apostrophe (closing single quotation mark; acute accent), and 2D hex as hyphen minus.

^ Bringhurst, Robert (2004).

The elements of typographic style (third ed.). Hartley & Marks, Publishers. p. 80.

ISBN 978-0-88179-206-5 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 .

In typescript, a double hyphen (--) is often used for a long dash. Double hyphens in a typeset document are a sure sign that the type was set by a typist, not a typographer. A typographer will use an em dash, three-quarter em, or en dash, depending on context or personal style. The em dash is the nineteenth-century standard, still prescribed in many editorial style books, but the em dash is too long for use with the best text faces. Like the oversized space between sentences, it belongs to the padded and corseted aesthetic of Victorian typography.

^ Korpela, Jukka K. (December 2020).

"Dashes and hyphens" .

IT and Communication .

^ a b c "Unicode 16.0 UCD: PropList.txt" . 31 May 2024 . Retrieved 11 September 2024 .

^ Everson, Michael (12 January 2021).

"L2/21-036 Proposal to add the OBLIQUE HYPHEN" (PDF) . Retrieved 19 September 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Look up hyphen in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wiktionary list of English phrases spelled with a hyphen Economist Style Guide—Hyphens Using hyphens in English; rules and recommendations Jukka Korpela, Soft hyphen (SHY)—a hard problem?

(See also his article on word breaking, line breaks, and special characters (including hyphens) in HTML ).

Markus Kuhn, Unicode interpretation of SOFT HYPHEN breaks ISO 8859-1 compatibility . Unicode Technical Committee document L2/03-155R, June 2003.

United States Government Printing Office Style Manual 2000 6. Compounding Rules] v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category v t e Common punctuation and other typographical symbols space , comma : colon ; semicolon ‐ hyphen ’ ' apostrophe ′ ″ ‴ prime .

full stop & ampersand @ at sign ^ caret / slash \ backslash … ellipsis * asterisk ※ Reference mark ⁂ asterism • • • dinkus - hyphen-minus ‒ – — dash ⹀ ⸗ double hyphen ?

question mark !

exclamation mark ‽ interrobang ¡ ¿ inverted ! and ?

⸮ irony punctuation # number sign № numero sign º ª ordinal indicator % percent sign ‰ per mille ‱ basis point ° degree symbol ⌀ diameter sign + − plus and minus signs × multiplication sign ÷ division sign ~ tilde ± plus–minus sign ∓ minus-plus sign √ radical symbol _ underscore ⁀ tie | ¦ ‖ vertical bar • bullet · interpunct © copyright symbol ℗ sound recording copyright ® registered trademark SM service mark symbol TM trademark symbol ‘ ’ “ ” ' ' " " quotation mark ‹ › « » guillemet ( ) [ ] { } ⟨ ⟩ bracket ” ditto mark † ‡ dagger ❧ fleuron (hedera, aldus) ☞ manicule ◊ ⌑ lozenge ¶ ⸿ pilcrow (paragraph mark) § section mark Version of this table as a sortable list Currency symbols Diacritics (accents) Logic symbols Math symbols Whitespace Chinese punctuation Hebrew punctuation Japanese punctuation Korean punctuation Vietnamese punctuation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9j9xt
Cached time: 20250817212025
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.290 seconds
Real time usage: 1.601 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20960/1000000
Revision size: 48644/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 304215/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 42674/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 26/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 154788/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.742/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20848326/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1425.446      1 -total
 24.68%  351.753     26 Template:Unichar
 24.01%  342.248      2 Template:Reflist
 22.77%  324.536     26 Template:Unichar/main
 10.45%  148.957     26 Template:Unichar/name
  9.06%  129.155    133 Template:Nowrap
  8.43%  120.167      9 Template:Lang
  8.30%  118.276      4 Template:Navbox
  6.53%   93.049      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
  6.45%   91.928     14 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59347:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817212025 and revision id 1305223046. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hyphen&oldid=1305223046 " Categories : Punctuation Punctuation of English Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template archiveis links Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Articles that may contain original research from January 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from January 2016 Articles needing additional references from November 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles containing Irish-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 19:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hyphen 67 languages Add topic

