Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 In the doctrine of illumination 3 In popular culture and literature 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dionysius II of Syracuse 28 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Sicilianu Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th-century BC Sicilian tyrant This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dionysius II of Syracuse" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dionysius the Younger ( Greek : Διονύσιος ὁ Νεώτερος , c.

397 BC – 343 BC), or Dionysius II , was a Greek politician who ruled Syracuse, Sicily from 367 BC to 357 BC and again from 346 BC to 344 BC.

Biography [ edit ] Dionysius II of Syracuse was the son of Dionysius the Elder and Doris of Locri . When his father died in 367 BC, Dionysius, who was at the time under thirty years old, and completely inexperienced in public affairs, [ 1 ] inherited the supreme power and began ruling under the supervision of his uncle, Dion , whose disapproval of the young Dionysius's lavishly dissolute lifestyle compelled him to invite his teacher Plato to visit Syracuse. Together they attempted to restructure the government to be more moderate, with Dionysius as the archetypal philosopher-king (see the Seventh Letter of Plato ).

However, under the influence of opponents of Dion's reforms, Dionysius conspired with the historian Philistus and banished his uncle, taking complete power in 366 BC. Without Dion, Dionysius's rule became increasingly unpopular, as he was mostly incompetent in governing men and commanding soldiers. When Plato appealed for Dion's return, the irritated Dionysius interfered with Dion's property and finances and gave his wife to another man. Before this, Dion's Syracusan estates had financed his peaceful and comfortable life overseas in Athens , but Dionysius's last offence spurred him into action.

Dion formed a small army at Zacynthus and returned to Sicily in 357 BC, much to the delight of the Syracusans. As Dionysius was in Caulonia , Italy at the time, Dion took all but Syracuse's island citadel easily. Dionysius sailed back to Syracuse immediately, attempted attacks from the citadel and tried to negotiate peace treaties. When he was unsuccessful in all attempts, he sailed to Locri and left the citadel in the hands of his son Apollocrates .

While in exile, Dionysius took advantage of the friendly citizens of Locri and became the city's tyrant, treating the locals with great cruelty. He did not return to Syracuse until 346 BC, eight years after Dion's assassination by his officers. Soon after he left Locri, the locals drove out the remaining troops and took their revenge [ clarification needed ] on Dionysius's wife and daughters. Dionysius, who was still unpopular, was able to regain power in Syracuse only because of its great political instability. In the preceding years many other cities in Sicily defected from Syracuse and were ruled by local tyrants. Several of these cities joined the Syracusans in an attack against Dionysius which proved to be quite successful. Dionysius was forced back into the citadel. At this time, 344 BC, Timoleon arrived and began his invasion of Sicily. Dionysius, out of respect for Timoleon and aware he no longer had a chance of victory, arranged the surrender of the citadel and was given safe passage to Corinth . Dionysius died in the following year in Corinth, where he lived in increasingly miserable conditions.

[ 2 ] In the doctrine of illumination [ edit ] In the Seventh Letter Dionysius II is central to the detailed description of Plato's epistemological digression, known as doctrine of illumination in secondary literature .

[ 3 ] Following his second visit to Sicily, Plato received a letter from Archytas praising the progress Dionysius II had made in philosophy. Plato visits a third time and tests Dionysius II to determine whether he had really made as much progress in philosophy as reported. According to the Seventh Letter, the authenticity of a prospective philosopher could be tested by setting out the extent of the undertaking. Those possessing a divine quality would accept the challenge, while pseudo-philosophers would find the tasks so daunting they would abandon the pursuit of wisdom.

[ 4 ] According to the doctrine of illumination, a genuine philosopher will regulate and order all daily activities to enhance learning and reason. Disclosing the true and difficult nature of philosophical life was an infallible test to separate the wheat from the chaff. Plato's view was that philosophers had to develop a resolute character while engaging in philosophical education. Those who shun hard work, needed to be rejected. When Plato disclosed the nature of philosophical pursuits and the self-discipline needed to gain insights into higher matters, Dionysius II claimed to already know the most significant aspects of Plato's teachings. In the Seventh Letter, Plato also suspects that Dionysius II had published a treatise expounding his knowledge of philosophy as teachings. By disdaining further training, Dionysius II fails Plato's test.

[ 5 ] In popular culture and literature [ edit ] Often misattributed to Dionysius II, his father, Dionysius I, is one of the central characters in the legend of the Sword of Damocles .

[ 6 ] The anecdote apparently figured in the lost history of Sicily by Timaeus of Tauromenium (c. 356–260 BC).

Cicero used it in his Tusculanae Disputationes , 5. 61,[1] by which means it passed into the European cultural mainstream.

[ 7 ] Dionysius II has been argued by some as the "Dionysius of Sicily" referenced in Canto 12 of Dante's Inferno . This Dionysius is among the many souls named by Chiron that boil in blood for tyranny. However, his father, Dionysius I, is largely considered the true subject.

[ 8 ] The Renaissance alchemist Michael Maier relates a legend about Dionysius II in his book Atalanta Fugiens (1617), where he was shipwrecked at the Gulf of Corinth , and without his swimming skills he could have never reached the shore. At Corinth, although he lived poorly, he became a teacher. Maier uses this legend as an allegory to explain a certain point in the Magnum opus , when the "philosophical subject" (the stone) must ascend to the surface of the "philosophical water".

[ 9 ] Dionysius also features in Mary Renault 's The Mask of Apollo .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Plutarch (1859). John Dryden and Arthur Hugh Clough (ed.).

Plutarch's Lives: Dion . Vol. II.

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Dionysius s.v. Dionysius, known as "the Younger" " .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 284.

^ Joseph Cimakasky (2017).

The Role of Exaíphnes in Early Greek Literature: Philosophical Transformation in Plato's Dialogues and Beyond . Lexington Books. p. 62.

ISBN 9781498525428 .

^ Joseph Cimakasky (2017).

The Role of Exaíphnes in Early Greek Literature: Philosophical Transformation in Plato's Dialogues and Beyond . Lexington Books. pp.

61– 62.

ISBN 9781498525428 .

^ Joseph Cimakasky (2017).

The Role of Exaíphnes in Early Greek Literature: Philosophical Transformation in Plato's Dialogues and Beyond . Lexington Books. p. 62.

ISBN 9781498525428 .

^ "Cicero's Tusculan Disputations, On the Nature of the Gods, On the Commonwealth" .

www.gutenberg.org . Retrieved 2023-06-01 .

^ "Damocles | Legend, Sword, & Facts" .

^ Singleton, Charles S.

"Charles S. Singleton (1970-75), Inferno 12.107-108" .

dante.dartmouth.edu . Retrieved 2023-06-01 .

^ Maier, Michael (1617).

Atalanta Fugiens . trans. Peter Branwin. Johann Theodor de Bry. chapter 31.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Wood, James , ed. (1907).

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . London and New York: Frederick Warne.

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Preceded by: Dionysius the Elder Tyrant of Syracuse 367 BC – 356 BC Succeeded by: Dion Preceded by: – Tyrant of Locri 356 BC – 346 BC Succeeded by: – Preceded by: Nysaeos Tyrant of Syracuse 347 BC – 344 BC Succeeded by: Timoleon Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dionysius_II_of_Syracuse&oldid=1271760208 " Categories : 390s BC births 343 BC deaths Sicilian tyrants 4th-century BC Syracusans Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2015 CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Nuttall Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 25 January 2025, at 15:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dionysius II of Syracuse 28 languages Add topic

