Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Properties 3 Nomenclature 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Muonium 21 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of atom For atoms where muons have replaced one or more electrons, see Muonic atom . For the onium of a muon and an antimuon, see True muonium .

A muonium atom Antimatter Antiparticles Positron Antiproton Antineutron Antihydrogen Antihelium Onia Antiprotonic hydrogen Antiprotonic helium Muonium True muonium Pionium Positronium Quarkonium Concepts and phenomena Annihilation Baryogenesis Baryon asymmetry Comet CP violation Gravitational interaction Positron emission Devices Cloud chamber Particle accelerator Antiproton decelerator Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider Penning trap Uses Positron emission tomography Fuel Weapon Scientists Carl David Anderson Paul Dirac Andrei Sakharov CERN v t e Muonium ( / m juː ˈ oʊ n i ə m / ) is an exotic atom made up of an antimuon and an electron , [ 1 ] which was discovered in 1960 by Vernon W. Hughes [ 2 ] and is given the chemical symbol Mu. During the muon's 2.2 µs lifetime, muonium can undergo chemical reactions.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] Because, like a proton, the antimuon's mass is vastly larger than that of the electron, muonium ( μ + e − ) is more similar to atomic hydrogen ( p + e − ) than positronium ( e + e − ). Its Bohr radius and ionization energy are within 0.5% of hydrogen , deuterium , and tritium , and thus it can usefully be considered as an exotic light isotope of hydrogen.

[ 4 ] Properties [ edit ] Although muonium is short-lived, physical chemists study it using muon spin spectroscopy (μSR), [ 5 ] a magnetic resonance technique analogous to nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) or electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy . Like ESR, μSR is useful for the analysis of chemical transformations and the structure of compounds with novel or potentially valuable electronic properties. Muonium is usually studied by muon spin rotation , in which the muonium atom's spin precesses in a magnetic field applied transverse to the muon spin direction (since muons are typically produced in a spin-polarized state from the decay of pions ), and by avoided level crossing (ALC), which is also called level crossing resonance (LCR).

[ 5 ] The latter employs a magnetic field applied longitudinally to the polarization direction, and monitors the relaxation of muon spins caused by "flip/flop" transitions with other magnetic nuclei.

Because the muon is a lepton , the atomic energy levels of muonium can be calculated with great precision from quantum electrodynamics (QED), unlike in the case of hydrogen, where the precision is limited by uncertainties related to the internal structure of the proton . For this reason, muonium is an ideal system for studying bound-state QED and also for searching for physics beyond the Standard Model .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Normally in the nomenclature of particle physics, an atom composed of a positively charged particle bound to an electron is named after the positive particle with "-ium" replacing an "-on" suffix, in this case "muium".  Replacing "-on" with (or otherwise appending) "- onium " is mostly used for bound states of a particle with its own antiparticle. The exotic atom consisting of a muon and an antimuon (which is yet to be observed) is known as true muonium .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Muonic hydrogen Muon-catalyzed fusion References [ edit ] ^ IUPAC (1997).

"Muonium" . In A.D. McNaught, A. Wilkinson (ed.).

Compendium of Chemical Terminology (2nd ed.).

Blackwell Scientific Publications .

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.M04069 .

ISBN 978-0-86542-684-9 .

^ V.W. Hughes ; et al. (1960). "Formation of Muonium and Observation of its Larmor Precession".

Physical Review Letters .

5 (2): 63– 65.

Bibcode : 1960PhRvL...5...63H .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.5.63 .

^ W.H. Koppenol ( IUPAC ) (2001).

"Names for muonium and hydrogen atoms and their ions" (PDF) .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

73 (2): 377– 380.

doi : 10.1351/pac200173020377 .

S2CID 97138983 .

^ Walker, David C (1983-09-08).

Muon and Muonium Chemistry . Cambridge University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-521-24241-7 .

^ a b J.H. Brewer (1994). "Muon Spin Rotation/Relaxation/Resonance".

Encyclopedia of Applied Physics .

11 : 23– 53.

^ K.P. Jungmann (2004). "Past, Present and Future of Muonium".

Proceedings of the Memorial Symposium in Honor of Vernon Willard Hughes, New Haven, Connecticut, 14–15 Nov 2003 : 134– 153.

arXiv : nucl-ex/0404013 .

Bibcode : 2004shvw.conf..134J .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.261.4459 .

doi : 10.1142/9789812702425_0009 .

ISBN 978-981-256-050-6 .

S2CID 16164836 .

^ Arrell, Miriam (2022-11-29).

"Studying muonium to reveal new physics beyond the Standard Model" .

Phys.org . Retrieved 2023-01-06 .

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX This article needs additional or more specific categories .

Please help out by adding categories to it so that it can be listed with similar articles.

( October 2024 ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muonium&oldid=1298767141 " Categories : Exotic atoms Atomic physics Particle physics Spectroscopy Quantum electrodynamics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 Articles needing additional categories from October 2024 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muonium 21 languages Add topic

