Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Fighting the Noonday Devil 3 Return of the Strong Gods 4 The End of Interpretation: Reclaiming the Priority of Ecclesial Exegesis 5 Works 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents R. R. Reno 2 languages العربية مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American theologian R. R. Reno R. R. Reno (2024) Born 1959 (age 65–66) Baltimore, Maryland , U.S.

Education Haverford College ( BA ) Yale University ( MA , PhD ) Occupations Theology professor writer editor Title Editor of First Things Russell Ronald Reno III (born 1959), known as R. R. Reno or Rusty Reno , is an American theologian, political philosopher and the editor of First Things magazine.

[ 1 ] He was formerly a professor of theology and ethics at Creighton University .

[ 2 ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Biography [ edit ] Reno was born in Baltimore, Maryland , in 1959, and grew up in Towson, Maryland .  A graduate of Towson High School in 1978, after a year of mountaineering in Yosemite Valley , he attended Haverford College , receiving a B.A. in 1983.  He began graduate study at Yale University in the Department of Religious Studies in 1984 and completed his doctoral degree in 1990 in the area of religious ethics. While in graduate school he met and married Juliana Miller, with whom he has had two children, Rachel (born 1990) and Jesse (born 1992, died 2021). He received his first faculty appointment at Creighton University in 1990, where he taught until 2010 when he took an extended academic leave to work full-time at First Things.

A theological and political conservative, Reno was baptized into the Episcopal Church as an infant and grew up as a member of the Church of the Redeemer in Baltimore, Maryland . As an adult he was an active participant in the Episcopal Church, serving as Senior Warden of the Church of the Resurrection in Omaha, Nebraska, from 1991 to 1995, as deputy to the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in 1993, 1996, and 1999, and as a member of the Theology Committee of the Episcopal Church's House of Bishops from 2001 to 2003. On September 18, 2004, he was received into the Catholic Church . He explained his conversion in this way: "As an Episcopalian I needed a theory to stay put, and I came to realize that a theory is a thin thread easily broken. The Catholic Church needs no theories." [ 3 ] During the COVID-19 pandemic Reno downplayed the risks of the virus.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] He has since apologized for his comments regarding masks.

[ 7 ] Since 2011 Reno has been editor of First Things , a conservative Christian journal with a wide readership.

Fighting the Noonday Devil [ edit ] In Fighting the Noonday Devil: and Other Essays Personal and Theological , published in 2011, Reno writes essays that range from autobiographical renderings, to more admonitory arguments, positing that the sin of Acedia , rather than Pride, is the greatest spiritual malady of the modern age.

[ 8 ] Return of the Strong Gods [ edit ] In 2019 Reno published The Return of the Strong Gods: Nationalism, Populism, and the Future of the West where he argues that The West’s rejection of “strong gods” — defined as “the objects of men’s love and devotion, the sources of the passions and loyalties that unite societies” [ 9 ] — in favor of openness and weak solidarity has created a spiritual and cultural vacuum. Reno argues that populism and nationalism are rising today not because of a return to fascism, but as an expression of the desire for solidarity, meaning, and belonging that the liberal “post-war consensus” has failed to provide.

The End of Interpretation: Reclaiming the Priority of Ecclesial Exegesis [ edit ] In 2022 Reno published The End of Interpretation: Reclaiming the Priority of Ecclesial Exegesis , where he argues for theological exegesis against other methods of interpretation: “Historical study of the Bible has a legitimate and perhaps necessary role in our contemporary context. But it cannot be sufficient for Christian readers, because its methods operate at a studied distance from what men and women of faith implicitly or explicitly regard as the most reliable guide to the truths of scripture – church doctrine.” [ 10 ] Reno states that “[theological exegesis] represents a deliberate choice by modern readers to align themselves with the interpretive framework established by the church throughout history, affirming the coherence between Scripture and doctrine.” [ 11 ] The book received praise from figures such as Robert Barron , Kevin J. Vanhoozer , and the theologian Ephraim Radner who in a review of the book wrote: “Reno provides one of the finest and most accessible modern apologies for traditional Christian reading of the Bible in the face of its contemporary detractors, an apology that is intellectually substantive and religiously appealing.” [ 12 ] Works [ edit ] Return of the Strong Gods: Nationalism, Populism and the Future of the West (Regnery Gateway 2019) Resurrecting the Idea of a Christian Society (Salem 2016) Fighting the Noonday Devil — and Other Essays Personal and Theological (Eerdmans 2011) Genesis (Brazos Press 2010) Sanctified Vision: An Introduction to Early Christian Interpretation of the Bible (with John J. O’Keefe; Johns Hopkins 2005) In the Ruins of the Church (Baker 2002) Redemptive Change: Atonement and the Cure of the Soul (Trinity Press 2002) Heroism and The Christian Life (with Brian Stewart Hook; WJK 2000) References [ edit ] ^ "Masthead, First Things" .

Masthead . First Things . Retrieved August 30, 2011 .

^ "Faculty Page, Creighton University Department of Theology" .

Faculty Page – Russell Reno . Creighton University Department of Theology . Retrieved August 30, 2011 .

^ Reno, R. R.

"Out of the Ruins" . First Things . Retrieved June 18, 2014 .

^ Dreher, Rod (May 12, 2020).

"Rusty Reno Melts Down" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Silliman, Daniel.

"Pentecostal Pastor Won't Stop Church for COVID-19" .

News & Reporting . Retrieved May 27, 2020 .

^ Merritt, Jonathan (April 24, 2020).

"Some of the Most Visible Christians in America Are Failing the Coronavirus Test" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved April 28, 2023 .

Consider the popular pastor John Piper, who was asked what he would say to pastors who claim that the pandemic is God's judgment on sinful cities and arrogant nations. "God sometimes uses disease to bring particular judgments upon those who reject him and give themselves over to sin," Piper responded. Or perhaps look to R. R. Reno, the editor of the conservative Christian journal First Things , who argued that it's not worth a "mass shutdown of society" just to fight the virus. "There is a demonic side to the sentimentalism of saving lives at any cost," Reno wrote, decrying the "ill-conceived crusade against human finitude and the dolorous reality of death." ^ https://firstthings.com/an-apology/ ^ https://firstthings.com/fighting-the-noonday-devil/ ^ Reno, R. R. (2019).

Return of the Strong Gods: Nationalism, Populism, and the Future of the West . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Gateway. p. xxiv.

^ The End of Interpretation: Reclaiming the Priority of Ecclesial Exegesis, p. 27 ^ The End of Interpretation: Reclaiming the Priority of Ecclesial Exegesis, p. 6 ^ https://adfontesjournal.com/member-exclusive/end-of-interpretation/ External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to R. R. Reno .

Article on his conversion to Roman Catholicism Appearances on C-SPAN Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=R._R._Reno&oldid=1297697058 " Categories : 1959 births Living people Writers from Baltimore People from Towson, Maryland Converts to Roman Catholicism from Anglicanism American theologians Haverford College alumni Yale University alumni Creighton University faculty Catholics from Maryland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2012 Articles with hCards People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 22:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents R. R. Reno 2 languages Add topic

