Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Children 3 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Íñigo López de Mendoza, 1st Marquis of Santillana 18 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Íñigo López de Mendoza, marqués de Santillana ) Castilian politician Jorge Ingles, A portrait of the donor Don Íñigo López de Mendoza, Marqués de Santillana from the Altarpiece of Buitrago, c. 1455 Possible portrait of the Marquess of Santillana the house where Leonor Lasso de la Vega gave birth to Íñigo López de Mendoza, in Carrión de los Condes ( Palencia ) Íñigo López de Mendoza, 1st Marquess of Santillana (19 August 1398 – 25 March 1458) was a Castilian politician and poet who held an important position in society and literature during the reign of John II of Castile .

Biography [ edit ] He was born at Carrión de los Condes in Old Castile to a noble family which figured prominently in the arts.  His grandfather, Pedro González de Mendoza I, and his father, Diego Hurtado de Mendoza , Admiral of Castile , were both poets with close ties to the great literary figures of the time: Chancellor Lopez de Ayala , Fernán Pérez de Guzmán and Gómez Manrique .

His mother, Doña Leonor Lasso de la Vega , was a wealthy heiress belonging to the House of Lasso de la Vega .

Lopez de Mendoza's father died when he was five years old, which brought his family into financial difficulties. Part of his childhood was spent living in his grandmother's household, and in the home of his uncle, the future Archbishop of Toledo . As a youth, he spent time in the court king Alfonso V of Aragón , where he was exposed to the work of poets in the Provençal, Valencia and Catalan traditions, the classic Humanist works of Virgil and Dante Alighieri , and the lyricism of troubadours such as Enrique de Villena .

In 1412, Don Íñigo married a wealthy heiress, Catarina Suárez de Figueroa.  With this union, he acquired great fortune and became one of the most powerful nobles of his time.  His sixth son from the marriage would one day become Cardinal Mendoza .

As a politician, Don Íñigo remained loyal to Juan II throughout his life, for which he was richly rewarded with land and the title of Marquess of Santillana in 1445, after the First Battle of Olmedo . When his wife Doña Catarina de Figueroa died, the Marquess retired to his palace of Guadalajara to spend the rest of his life in peaceful study and contemplation.

Lopez de Mendoza was a great admirer of Dante Alighieri and his work is categorized within the allegorical-Dantesque School. He also assimilated Petrarch and Giovanni Boccaccio 's Humanism .

[ citation needed ] He is especially remembered for his " serranillas ", which are small poems that focus on commonplace subjects.  He also wrote pastoral novels inspired by French tradition, and was originator of the Castilian Sonnet.

Children [ edit ] Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, 1st Duke of the Infantado Pedro Lasso de Mendoza, señor del valle del Lozoya Íñigo López de Mendoza, 1st count of Tendilla Maria de Mendoza, married Francisco/Pedro Fernández de Velasco, 2nd Count of Haro Lorenzo Suárez de Mendoza y Figueroa, Conde de la Coruña Pedro González de Mendoza , cardinal and confidant of Queen Isabella I of Castile Juan Hurtado de Mendoza, señor de Colmenar, El Cardoso y El Vado MARIA DE MENDOZA, married  FRANCISCO FERNANDEZ-DE-VELASCO Leonor de la Vega y Mendoza, married Gastón I de la Cerda, 4th Count de Medinaceli Pedro Hurtado de Mendoza, señor de Tamajón Bibliography [ edit ] English Campbell, Gordon (2003).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Renaissance . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-860175-1 .

Foster, David William (1971).

The Marqués de Santillana . New York: Twayne Publishers.

Gerli, E. Michael (2003). "Lopez de Mendoza, Inigo". In Gerli, E. Michael (ed.).

Medieval Iberia : an encyclopedia . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-93918-6 .

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Santillana, Iñigo Lopez de Mendoza, Marquis of" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 194.

Spanish Moreno, Ángel Gómez.

"Íñigo López de Mendoza" .

Real Academia de la Historia .

Obras , edited by José Amador de los Ríos (Madrid, 1852) Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo , Antologia de poetas liricas castellanos (Madrid, 1894), vol. v. pp. 78–144 B. Sanvisenti , I Primi Influssi di Dante, del Petrarca e del Boccaccio suite letteratura spagnuola (Milan, 1902), pp. 127–186.

External links [ edit ] Spanish Wikisource has original text related to this article: Iñigo López de Mendoza Wikimedia Commons has media related to Íñigo López de Mendoza, 1st Marquess of Santillana .

Bías contra Fortuna —Facsimile edition from the original, 1545. Real Academia Española.

His works in the Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes Works by or about Marqués de Santillana at the Internet Archive Works by Marqués de Santillana at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Íñigo_López_de_Mendoza,_1st_Marquis_of_Santillana&oldid=1293351013 " Categories : Spanish male poets 1398 births 1458 deaths Marquesses of Spain People from Carrión de los Condes People from Guadalajara, Spain History of Cantabria 15th-century Castilian writers 15th-century Spanish poets Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 06:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Íñigo López de Mendoza, 1st Marquis of Santillana 18 languages Add topic

