Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Duties and tools 2 Education and training 3 Occupational hazards 4 In the United States 5 See also 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Glazier 16 languages Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski עברית Nederlands Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Profession For the surname, see Glazier (surname) .

Glazier A glazier at work, 1946 Occupation Occupation type Vocational Activity sectors Construction Description Competencies Heights, patience, steady hand, ability to read plans, physically strong Education required Apprenticeship Fields of employment Construction Related jobs Carpenter , electrician , plumber , plasterer A glazier is a tradesperson responsible for cutting, installing, and removing glass (and materials used as substitutes for glass, such as some plastics ).

[ 1 ] They also refer to blueprints to figure out the size, shape, and location of the glass in the building. They may have to consider the type and size of scaffolding they need to stand on to fit and install the glass. Glaziers may work with glass in various surfaces and settings, such as cutting and installing windows , doors , shower doors , skylights , storefronts , display cases , mirrors , facades , interior walls , ceilings , and tabletops .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Duties and tools [ edit ] A set of glazier tools The Occupational Outlook Handbook of the U.S. Department of Labor lists the following as typical tasks for a glazier: [ 3 ] Follow blueprints or specifications Remove any old or broken glass before installing replacement glass Cut glass to the specified size and shape Make or install sashes or moldings for glass installation Fasten glass into sashes or frames with clips, moldings, or other types of fasteners Add weather seal or putty around pane edges to seal joints.

The National Occupational Analysis recognized by the Canadian Council of Directors of Apprenticeship separates the trade into 5 blocks of skills, each with a list of skills, and a list of tasks and subtasks a journeyman is expected to be able to accomplish: [ 4 ] Block A – Occupational Skills Uses and maintains tools and equipment Organizes work Performs routine activities Block B – Commercial Window and Door Systems Fabricates commercial window and door systems Installs commercial window and door systems Block C – Residential Window and Door Systems Installs residential window systems
 Installs residential door systems Block D – Specialty Glass and Products Fabricates and installs specialty glass and products Installs glass systems on vehicles Block E – Servicing Services commercial window and door systems Services residential window and door systems Services specialty glass and products.

Tools used by glaziers "include cutting boards, glass-cutting blades, straightedges, glazing knives, saws, drills, grinders, putty,scrapers, sandpaper, sanding blocks, 5 in 1's respirator/dust mask and glazing compounds." [ 1 ] Some glaziers work specifically with glass in motor vehicles ; other work specifically with the safety glass used in aircraft. Others repair old antique windows and doors that need glass replaced.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Education and training [ edit ] Glaziers are typically educated at the high school diploma or equivalent level and learn the skills of the trade through an apprenticeship program, which in the U.S. is typically four years.

[ 3 ] In the U.S., apprenticeship programs are offered through the National Glass Association as well as trade associations and local contractors' associations. A large portion of glaziers in the United States are members of the IUPAT, the International Union of Painters and Allied Trades which offers its own apprenticeship program which consists of 8000 hours of on the job training and 4 years of classroom education. Because of this, IUPAT Glaziers tend to be well rounded in all aspects of the trade, and therefore carry a higher production rate, face fewer health & safety risks and command a higher pay rate.

[ 1 ] In Canada, glaziers usually go through a formal apprenticeship which includes about four years of on-the-job experience combined with classroom study in order to get certified. Unions and many employers offer these apprenticeships. To become an apprentice, one must be at least 18 years old and have a graduated high school. Once a person is certified, they will be eligible to apply for the Red Seal allowing the person to work anywhere in Canada without re-certifying.

[ 5 ] In Ontario, Canada , apprenticeships are offered at the provincial level and certified through the Ontario College of Trades .

[ 6 ] In Australia, while you do not need formal qualifications to work as a glazier, it is usual for apprentices to complete a Certificate III in Glass and Glazing as part of their training. Most apprentices choose to do the Certificate III in Glass and Glazing (MSF30418) part-time (three years). You can also choose to do the course full time (one year study). The Certificate II in Glass and Glazing (MSF20413) is also available for those who need additional study.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Occupational hazards [ edit ] Occupational hazards encountered by glaziers include the risks of being cut by glass or tools and falling from scaffolds or ladders or lead exposure from old lead paint on  antique windows.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The use of heavy equipment may also cause injury: the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) reported in 1990 that a journeyman glazier died in an industrial accident in Indiana after attempting to use a manlift to carry a thousand-pound case of glass which the manlift did not have capacity to carry.

[ 9 ] In the United States [ edit ] According to the Occupational Outlook Handbook , there are some 45,300 glaziers in the United States, with median pay of $38,410 per year in 2014.

[ 3 ] Two-thirds of Glaziers work in the foundation, structure, and building exterior contractors industry, with smaller numbers working in building material and supplies dealing, building finishing contracting, automotive repair and maintenance, and glass and glass product manufacturing.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Among the 50 states , only Connecticut and Florida require glaziers to hold a license .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Architectural glass Glazing in architecture Insulated glazing Stained glass Glass manufacturing Glassblowing Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Elizabeth H. Oakes, Ferguson Career Resource Guide to Apprenticeship Programs ( Infobase : 3d ed., 2006), p. 356.

^ a b Glaziers (profile in the Occupational Employment Statistics of the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor .

^ a b c d e f g Glaziers , Occupational Outlook Handbook , United States Department of Labor.

^ Canada, Employment and Social Development.

"Red Seal : Appendix F – Task Profile Chart" .

www.red-seal.ca . Archived from the original on 2016-10-28 . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

^ Canada, Employment and Social Development.

"Red Seal : Glazier" .

www.red-seal.ca . Archived from the original on 2016-10-26 . Retrieved 2016-10-27 .

^ "OIFSC - Student Visit - M&T Glass" . 6 April 2016.

^ Australia, Certificate III in Glass and Glazing (MSF30418).

"Glass Trade Centre: Glazier" . Retrieved 2021-02-15 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Glass Replacement Services - Empire Glass Australia" .

^ Journeyman glazier dies after being catapulted from manlift - Indiana , National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (April 1990, 1-7), NIOSHTIC No. 20024470.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Glaziers at Wikimedia Commons v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glazier&oldid=1301474429 " Categories : Construction trades workers Glass engineering and science Windows Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 01:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glazier 16 languages Add topic

