Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Proportionality as a general principle in law Toggle Proportionality as a general principle in law subsection 1.1 History 1.2 European Union law 1.3 European Convention on Human Rights 1.4 Australia 2 Criminal law 3 Laws of war Toggle Laws of war subsection 3.1 International humanitarian law 3.2 Jus ad bellum 3.2.1 Balancing aspects of war 3.2.2 Reprisal attacks 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Proportionality (law) 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Several distinct principles of law This article is about the legal principle. For other uses, see Proportionality .

Administrative law General principles Administrative court Delegated legislation Exhaustion of remedies Justiciability Judicial interpretation Ministerial act Ouster clause Prerogative writ Certiorari Habeas corpus Mandamus Prohibition Quo warranto Rulemaking Ultra vires Grounds for judicial review Fettering of discretion Legitimate expectation Nondelegation doctrine Procedural justice Natural justice Due process Abuse Fundamental justice Speedy trial Proportionality Unreasonableness Wednesbury Patent unreasonableness Administrative law in common law jurisdictions Australia Canada Singapore South Africa United Kingdom Scotland United States Administrative law in civil law jurisdictions China Mongolia Ukraine Related topics Constitutional law v t e Proportionality is a general principle in law which covers several separate (although related) concepts: The concept of proportionality is used as a criterion of fairness and justice in statutory interpretation processes, especially in constitutional law, as a logical method intended to assist in discerning the correct balance between the restriction imposed by a corrective measure and the severity of the nature of the prohibited act.

Within criminal law , the concept is used to convey the idea that the punishment of an offender should fit the crime.

Under international humanitarian law governing the legal use of force in an armed conflict , proportionality and distinction are important factors in assessing military necessity .

Under the United Kingdom's Civil Procedure Rules , costs must be "proportionately and reasonably incurred", or "proportionate and reasonable in amount", if they are to form part of a court ruling on costs.

[ 1 ] Proportionality as a general principle in law [ edit ] See also: Balancing test History [ edit ] A concept of proportionality that was testable in law was first developed in the German administrative courts in the late 19th century, notably the Prussian Oberverwaltungsgericht (appeals court of general administrative jurisdiction), to reign in the discretion to act granted to the police by statute.

[ 2 ] The proportionality test was later popularized by its application in the jurisprudence of the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany ( Bundesverfassungsgericht ), which took its existence for granted and transferred it to the field of constitutional law. In particular, it required statutes limiting fundamental rights and acts resting on such statutes to also satisfy the proportionality test.

[ 3 ] European Union law [ edit ] See also: European Union law In European Union law there are generally acknowledged to be four stages to a proportionality test, namely, [ 4 ] there must be a legitimate aim for a measure the measure must be suitable to achieve the aim (potentially with a requirement for evidence to show it will have that effect) the measure must be necessary to achieve the aim, that there cannot be any less onerous way of doing it the measure must be reasonable , considering the competing interests of different groups at hand.

It is, however, often seen that the third and fourth criteria are often merged into one by the European Court of Justice , depending on the margin of discretion that the Court sees as being afforded to the member state. Examples are found in R (Seymour-Smith) v Secretary of State for Employment , where the ECJ points out that a member state has some discretion in the policies it pursues, surrounding unfair dismissal , in reducing unemployment. Further examples of the proportionality test are seen in Mangold v Helm and Kücükdeveci v Swedex GmbH & Co KG .

European Convention on Human Rights [ edit ] In the European Convention on Human Rights , proportionality is one of main principles utilised by the European Court of Human Rights for scrutinizing actions adopted by national authorities which restrict rights granted by the Convention.

[ 5 ] The other is the margin of appreciation .

Australia [ edit ] While the European Union has placed a consistent focus on the proportionality test in the context of policy issues, namely human rights, the proportionality test in the Australian context is a matter of constitutional interpretation with respect to legislative power under the Constitution. Unlike Europe, the proportionality test as a means to characterize whether Commonwealth legislation falls under a head of power under section 51 of the Constitution of Australia , [ 6 ] has attracted divergent viewpoints, in which Kirby J has remarked that the 'test has not enjoyed universal favour'.

[ 7 ] However, Owen Dixon CJ made clear that 'the question is essentially one of connexion, not appropriateness of proportionality, and where a sufficient connexion is established, it is not for the Court to judge whether the law is inappropriate or disproportionate'.

[ 8 ] Criminal law [ edit ] Judicial remedies Legal remedies ( Damages ) Compensatory damages Consequential damages Incidental damages Liquidated damages Punitive damages Deterrence (penology) Disfranchisement Loss of rights due to criminal conviction Proportionality (law) Treble damages Reliance damages Statutory damages Equitable remedies Injunction Specific performance Constructive trust Account of profits Rescission Rectification Subrogation Related issues Adequate remedy Civil penalty Collateral consequences of criminal conviction Conviction rate Court costs Criminal costs Criminal justice Declaratory relief Election of remedies Fine (penalty) Provisional remedy Recidivism Reparation (legal) Restitution Right to an effective remedy Tort reform Tracing v t e In criminal law, the principle of proportional justice is used to describe the idea that the punishment of a certain crime should be in proportion to the severity of the crime itself. In practice, systems of law differ greatly on the application of this principle. The principle of guilt is an absolute standard from which the 17th century Bloody Code of England emerged, which specified the death penalty even for minor crimes. In the 18th century Cesare Beccaria published On Crimes and Punishments which was to form the basis of penology based on the relative standard of culpability .

As a result, Jeremy Bentham developed the idea of the panopticon in which prisoners would simply be watched, rather than subjected to corporal punishment . The idea in practice became a cruel and ineffective corrective. In some systems, proportionality was interpreted as lex talionis , (an eye for an eye). In others, it has led to a more restrictive manner of sentencing: for example, all European Union countries have accepted as a treaty obligation that no crime warrants the death penalty , whereas some other countries in the world do use it.

In self-defense cases, the amount of force employed by the defender must be proportionate to the threatened aggressive force. If deadly force is used to defend against non-deadly force, the harm inflicted by the actor (death or serious bodily harm) will be greater than the harm avoided (less than serious bodily harm). Even if deadly force is proportionate, its use must be necessary. Otherwise, unlawful conduct will only be justified when it involves the lesser harm of two harmful choices. If countering with non-deadly force or with no force at all avoids the threatened harm, defensive use of deadly force is no longer the lesser evil of only two choices. Alternatives involving still less societal harm are available.

In United States Law , the United States Supreme Court proposed the Proportionality Doctrine in three cases during the 1980s, namely Enmund v. Florida (1982), Solem v. Helm (1983) and Tison v. Arizona (1987), to clarify this key principle of proportionality within the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause of the Eighth Amendment . The fundamental principle behind proportionality is that the punishment should fit the crime. In 1983, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that courts must do three things to decide whether a sentence is proportional to a specific crime: [ 9 ] Compare the nature and gravity of the offense and the harshness of the penalty, Compare the sentences imposed on other criminals in the same jurisdiction ; i.e., whether more serious crimes are subject to the same penalty or to less serious penalties, and Compare the sentences imposed for commission of the same crime in other jurisdictions.

Proportionality is also present in other areas of municipal law in the United States, such as civil procedure. For example, it is embodied in Fed.R.Civ.P. 26(b)(2)(C), which considers whether the burden or expense of the proposed discovery outweighs its likely benefit.

[ 10 ] Proportionality is a key consideration in the discovery process, and has been applied to e-discovery, where it has been attributed with significant cost-savings.

[ 11 ] It is likely that proportionality will be applied to new and developing areas of law, such as the law of legal technology.

Laws of war [ edit ] The term "proportionate" means two different things in the context of laws of war : jus ad bellum and jus in bello .

[ 12 ] International humanitarian law [ edit ] The jus in bello principles which apply during a war require that the harm caused to protected civilians or civilian property must be proportional and not "excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated" by an attack on a military objective.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Luis Moreno-Ocampo was the Chief Prosecutor at the International Criminal Court who investigated allegations of war crimes during the 2003 invasion of Iraq . He published an open letter containing his findings; in a section titled "Allegations concerning War Crimes", he elucidates this use of proportionality : Under international humanitarian law and the Rome Statute , the death of civilians during an armed conflict, no matter how grave and regrettable, does not in itself constitute a war crime. International humanitarian law and the Rome Statute permit belligerents to carry out proportionate attacks against military objectives, [ 13 ] even when it is known that some civilian deaths or injuries will occur. A crime occurs if there is an intentional attack directed against civilians (principle of distinction) (Article 8(2)(b)(i)) or an attack is launched on a military objective in the knowledge that the incidental civilian injuries would be clearly excessive in relation to the anticipated military advantage (principle of proportionality) (Article 8(2)(b)(iv)).

Article 8(2)(b)(iv) criminalizes: Intentionally launching an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life or injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated; Article 8(2)(b)(iv) draws on the principles in Article 51(5)(b) of the 1977 Additional Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions , but restricts the criminal prohibition to cases that are " clearly " excessive. The application of Article 8(2)(b)(iv) requires, inter alia , an assessment of: (a) the anticipated civilian damage or injury; (b) the anticipated military advantage; (c) and whether (a) was "clearly excessive" in relation to (b).

— Luis Moreno-Ocampo .

[ 15 ] Jus ad bellum [ edit ] In jus ad bellum , regarding whether it is lawful to go to war, proportionality has several meanings: Balancing aspects of war [ edit ] In the philosophy of war , a war can only be just if it meets a number of criteria. One of those criteria, sometimes called "proportionality", is that the benefits projected from a war must be greater than the destruction, death and displacement likely to be caused by the war in total.

[ 16 ] Reprisal attacks [ edit ] Whether reprisal attacks are legal in the first place is controversial. However, The Practical Guide to Humanitarian Law states that for reprisals to be legal "they must be carried out in response to a previous attack, they must be proportionate to that attack, and they must be directed only at combatants and military objectives".

[ 17 ] The proportionality of the reprisal attack is measured in at least two ways. First is that the reprisal attack must not be "excessive" compared to the illegal action it is punishing. Second, the reprisal must stop if the illegal actions it is punishing have also stopped.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Non-combatant Casualty Value Civilian casualty ratio Budapest Convention on Cybercrime Israeli bombing of the Gaza Strip Let the punishment fit the crime R. v. Oakes [1986] 1 S.C.R. 103 Ryuichi Shimoda et al. v. The State Strict scrutiny Subsidiarity (European Union) Notes [ edit ] ^ Ministry of Justice , Part 44: General Rules about Costs , rule 44.4, accessed 14 November 2022 ^ L. Hirschberg (1978/79), Der Grundsatz der Verhältnismäßigkeit [ The Principle of Proportionality ] (Göttingen: Schwartz, 1981), ISBN 3-509-01147-3 , at  p. 6 – cited in Grimm 2007 , p. 385. According to T. Kingreen/R. Poscher, Polizei- und Ordnungsrecht , 12. ed. (Munich: C.H. Beck, 2022), § 1, at margin note 12, further court decisions of importance were PrOVGE (Berlin: Heymanns.

OCLC 1366431715 ) 13 (1887), 426 (at p. 427–428); E 38 (1901), 421 (at p. 421 and pp. 426–427); E 51 (1908), 284 (at p. 288).

^ Grimm 2007 , p. 385, referring to German Federal Constitutional Court (1954) E 3, 383, at p. 399 – available via Das Fallrecht / University of Berne .

^ P Craig and G de Burca, EU Law (5th edn OUP 2011) 526 ^ Dolzhikov, Alexey V. (December 9, 2011).

"The European Court of Human Rights on the Principle of Proportionality in 'Russian' Cases" . Rochester, NY.

SSRN 2695159 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Constitution (Cth) s 51 .

^ Leask v Commonwealth [1996] HCA 29 , (1996) 187 CLR 579, High Court (Australia).

^ Burton v Honan [1952] HCA 30 , (1952) 86 CLR 169 , High Court (Australia).

^ "FindLaw | Cases and Codes" . Caselaw.lp.findlaw.com . Retrieved June 19, 2013 .

^ "Rule 26. Duty to Disclose; General Provisions Governing Discovery | Federal Rules of Civil Procedure | LII / Legal Information Institute" . Law.cornell.edu . Retrieved June 19, 2013 .

^ Kozubek, Michael (March 1, 2011).

"Proportionality Doctrine Reduces E-Discovery Costs and Abuses" . Insidecounsel.com . Retrieved June 19, 2013 .

^ "The Laws of War" .

www.americanbar.org . Retrieved January 7, 2025 .

^ a b Article 52 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions provides a widely accepted definition of military objective: "In so far as objects are concerned, military objectives are limited to those objects which by their nature, location, purpose or use make an effective contribution to military action and whose total or partial destruction, capture or neutralization, in the circumstances ruling at the time, offers a definite military advantage", ( Moreno-Ocampo 2006 , p. 5, footnote 11) ^ Shamash 2005–2006 .

^ Moreno-Ocampo 2006 , pp. 4–5. See section "Allegations concerning War Crimes".

^ "The Ethics of War and Peace: Just War Theory" (PDF) .

^ a b "Doctors without borders | The Practical Guide to Humanitarian Law" .

guide-humanitarian-law.org . Archived from the original on December 20, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2025 .

References [ edit ] Grimm, Dieter [in German] (Spring 2007).

"Proportionality in Canadian and German Constitutional Jurisprudence" .

University of Toronto Law Journal .

57 (2). University of Toronto Press: 383– 397.

doi : 10.1353/tlj.2007.0014 .

ISSN 1710-1174 .

JSTOR 4491725 .

Moreno-Ocampo, Luis (February 9, 2006), OTP letter to senders re Iraq (PDF) , International Criminal Court, archived from the original (PDF) on March 27, 2009 Shamash, Hamutal Esther (2005–2006), "How Much is Too Much? An Examination of the Principle of Jus in Bello Proportionality", Israel Defense Forces Law Review , 2 , SSRN 908369 Luebbe-Wolff, Gertrude (2014), "The Principle of Proportionality in the Case-Law of the German Federal Constitutional Court", Human Rights Law Journal : 12– 17 Billis, Emmanouil et al. (eds.) (2021), Proportionality in Crime Control and Criminal Justice , Hart Publishing {{ citation }} : |first= has generic name ( help ) External links [ edit ] Engle, Eric Allen (2012), "The History of the General Principle of Proportionality" , Dartmouth Law Journal , 10 (1): 1– 11, SSRN 1431179 Hampson, Françoise (2011).

"Military Necessity" . Crimes of War Education Project. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐x9lfg
Cached time: 20250814224104
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.680 seconds
Real time usage: 0.862 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2439/1000000
Revision size: 18997/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81819/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4266/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86387/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.478/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15994388/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  747.215      1 -total
 20.53%  153.431      1 Template:Reflist
 18.38%  137.366      2 Template:Lang
 12.70%   94.924      1 Template:Administrative_law
 10.42%   77.889      1 Template:Short_description
  7.29%   54.502      1 Template:Law
  7.04%   52.592      1 Template:Navbox
  6.82%   50.954      1 Template:ISBN
  6.29%   46.999      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.24%   46.649      2 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4877595:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224104 and revision id 1301151565. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proportionality_(law)&oldid=1301151565 " Categories : Law of war legal terminology International law Legal doctrines and principles European Union law Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2019 CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 errors: generic name This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 09:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proportionality (law) 23 languages Add topic

