Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Size 2 Development 3 Structure 4 Effects and climatology 5 Notable MCCs 6 See also 7 References 8 External links and sources Toggle the table of contents Mesoscale convective complex 6 languages Deutsch Français Nederlands Português Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of mesoscale convective system This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A MCC moving through Minnesota early on August 7, 2021 A mesoscale convective complex ( MCC ) is a unique kind of thunderstorm mesoscale convective system which is defined by characteristics observed in infrared satellite imagery .  They are long-lived, often form nocturnally, and commonly contain heavy rainfall , wind , hail , lightning , and possibly tornadoes .

[ 1 ] Size [ edit ] A mesoscale convective complex has either an area of cloud top of 100,000 km 2 or greater with temperature less than or equal to −32 °C, or an area of cloud top of 50,000 km 2 with temperature less than or equal to −52 °C. Size definitions must be met for 6 hours or greater. Its maximum extent is defined as when cloud shield reaches maximum area. Its eccentricity (minor axis/major axis) is greater than or equal to 0.7 at maximum extent.

Development [ edit ] MCCs commonly develop from the merging of thunderstorms into a squall line which eventually meet the MCC criteria. Furthermore, some MCC formation can be tracked from the plains in Colorado back to the Rocky Mountains .  These are called "orogenic" complexes.

[ 2 ] The characteristics of the meteorological environment that MCCs form in are strong warm air advection into the formation environment by a southerly low-level jet stream (wind maximum), strong moisture advection which increases the relative humidity of the formation environment, convergence of air near the surface, and divergence of air aloft.  These conditions are most prominent in the region ahead of an upper level trough.

The systems begin in the afternoon as scattered thunderstorms which organize overnight in the presence of wind shear (wind speed and direction changes with height).

The probability for severe weather is highest in the early stages of formation, during the afternoon.

The MCC persists at its mature and strongest stage overnight and into the early morning in which the rainfall is characterized as stratiform rainfall (rather than convective rainfall which occurs with thunderstorms).

Dissipation of the MCC commonly occurs during the morning.

After dissipation, a remnant mid-level circulation known as a mesoscale convective vortex can initiate another round of thunderstorms later in the day.

Structure [ edit ] The structure of an MCC can be separated into three layers. The low-levels of the MCC near the surface, the mid-levels in the middle of the troposphere , and the upper-levels in the upper-troposphere.  Near the surface, the MCC exhibits high pressure, with an outflow boundary , or mesoscale cold front, at its leading edge.  This high pressure is caused by the cooling of the air from the evaporation of rainfall (commonly referred to as a cold pool). In the mid-levels (mid-troposphere), the MCC exhibits a cyclonic (counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere) rotating low pressure which is warm compared to the surrounding environment (referred to as a warm core).  This mid-level circulation is referred to as a Mesoscale Convective Vortex.  The upper-levels contain an anti-cyclonic (clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere) rotating high pressure which is a sign of divergence of air. This high pressure is colder relative to its surrounding environment.  This divergence at upper-levels and convergence of air at the surface along the cool pool's outflow boundary results in rising motion which aids maintenance of the MCC.

Effects and climatology [ edit ] MCCs produce heavy rainfall which can lead to flooding and other hydrological impacts.  MCCs are found in the United States during the spring and summer months (warm season), the Indian monsoon region, the West Pacific and throughout Africa and South America . In particular, the heavy rainfall from MCCs accounts for a significant portion of the precipitation during the warm season in the United States.

[ 3 ] As the warm season progresses, the favorable regions for MCC formation shift from the southern plains of the United States northward.  By July and August, the north-central states become the most favorable.

[ 4 ] The mid-level low pressure areas of MCCs have also been tracked to the origin of some tropical cyclones , and on rare occasions, tropical cyclones can generate MCCs.

Notable MCCs [ edit ] One of the most notable MCCs occurred overnight on 19 July 1977, in western Pennsylvania .  The MCC resulted in heavy rainfall which led to the disastrous flooding of Johnstown, Pennsylvania . The complex was tracked 96 hours back to South Dakota and produced copious amounts of rain throughout the northern United States before producing up to 12 inches (300 mm) of rain in Johnstown.

A second notable MCC brought destructive straight-line winds to southern Ontario , Upstate New York , Vermont , Massachusetts , Connecticut , and Rhode Island on the morning of 15 July 1995.  The MCC produced winds in excess of 160 km/h (100 mph) and was responsible for seven deaths, widespread destruction of forests in the Adirondack and Berkshire Mountains , and over $500 million in property damage.

[ 5 ] The formation of large MCCs over the same general area for a large percentage of the nights between April 1993 and July 1993 and their tendency to persist well into the next day was a large part of the cause for the flooding in much of the central United States that year.

[ citation needed ] A significant mesoscale convective complex, containing the remnant mid-level circulation of Atlantic Tropical Storm Barry , along with tropical east Pacific remnant moisture, caused catastrophic and deadly flooding in July 2025 in the Texas Hill Country .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Over 130 died as a result, including many children attending Camp Mystic along the Guadalupe River .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Mesoscale convective system Supercell Tropical cyclone Convective storm detection Mesoscale convective vortex Derecho References [ edit ] ^ Maddox, R. A., 1980: Mesoscale convective complexes. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, Vol. 61, 1374–1387.

^ Wetzel, P. J., W. R. Cotton, and R. L. McAnelly, 1983: A long-lived mesoscale convective complex, Part II: Evolution and structure of the mature complex. Monthly Weather Review, Vol. 105, 1919–1937.

^ Fritsch, J. M., R. A. Maddox, and A. G. Barnston, 1981: The character of mesoscale convective complex precipitation and its contribution to warm season rainfall in the United States. Preprints, 4th Conference on Hydrometeorology, Reno, Nev., American Meteorological Society, Boston, 94–99.

^ Maddox, R. A., K. W. Howard, D. L. Bartels, and D. M. Rogers: Chapter 17: Mesoscale Convective Complexes in the Middle Latitudes. Mesoscale Meteorology and Forecasting, American Meteorological Society, 1986.

^ Stephen F. Corfidi, Jeffry S. Evans, and Robert H. Johns, 2015: JULY 1995 DERECHO SERIES.

Retrieved on 2015-02-18.

^ Otto, Richard (July 4, 2025).

Mesoscale Precipitation Discussion 0584 (Report). College Park, Maryland: Weather Prediction Center . Retrieved July 14, 2025 .

^ Masters, Jeff; Henson, Bob (July 5, 2025).

"Devastating flash floods slam Texas Hill Country; Tropical Storm Chantal heads for Carolinas" . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale Climate Connection . Retrieved July 14, 2025 .

^ Riess, Taylor Romine, Dalia Faheid, Hanna Park, Laura Sharman, Alaa Elassar, Tori B. Powell, Rebekah (July 5, 2025).

"Live updates: Rescuers search for over 20 girls from Texas camp as flooding death toll rises to 32" .

CNN . Retrieved July 5, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Mistry, Ishani (July 7, 2025).

"Weather tracker: supercharged storms hit Texas's 'Flash Flood Alley' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal External links and sources [ edit ] Forecasting MCC's - Hydrometeorological Prediction Center MCC description - Pennsylvania State University MCC description - University of Illinois MCC page - UCAR NOAA Glossary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mesoscale_convective_complex&oldid=1300526737 " Categories : Mesoscale meteorology Severe weather and convection Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing context from September 2018 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 21:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mesoscale convective complex 6 languages Add topic

