Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 1964–1966: Paris 2.2 1967–1974: Minimalism: From Strung Out to Music in 12 Parts 2.3 1975–1979: Another Look at Harmony: The Portrait Trilogy 2.4 1980–1986: Completing the Portrait Trilogy: Akhnaten and beyond 2.5 1987–1991: Operas and the turn to symphonic music 2.6 1991–1996: Cocteau trilogy and symphonies 2.7 1997–2004: Symphonies, opera, and concertos 2.8 2005–2007: Songs and Poems 2.9 2008–present: Chamber music, concertos, and symphonies 3 Influences and collaborations 4 Music for film 5 Other business ventures Toggle Other business ventures subsection 5.1 Record labels 5.2 Looking Glass Studios 6 Personal life 7 Critical reception 8 Compositions 9 Awards and nominations 10 Honorary awards 11 Bibliography 12 Works about Glass 13 See also 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Philip Glass 59 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American composer (born 1937) Philip Glass Glass in 1993 Born ( 1937-01-31 ) January 31, 1937 (age 88) Baltimore , Maryland , U.S.

Occupation Composer Organizations Philip Glass Ensemble Known for Minimal music Works List of compositions Website philipglass .com Philip Glass (born January 31, 1937) is an American composer and pianist . He is widely regarded as one of the most influential composers of the late 20th century.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Glass's work has been associated with minimalism , being built up from repetitive phrases and shifting layers.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He described himself as a composer of "music with repetitive structures", [ 7 ] which he has helped to evolve stylistically.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Glass founded the Philip Glass Ensemble in 1968. He has written 15 operas , numerous chamber operas and musical theatre works, 14 symphonies , 12 concertos , nine string quartets , various other chamber music pieces, and many film scores . He has received nominations for four Grammy Awards , including two for Best Contemporary Classical Composition for Satyagraha (1987) and String Quartet No. 2 (1988). He has received three Academy Award for Best Original Score nominations for Martin Scorsese 's Kundun (1997), Stephen Daldry 's The Hours (2002), and Richard Eyre 's Notes on a Scandal (2006). He also composed the scores for Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (1985), Hamburger Hill (1987), The Thin Blue Line (1988), Candyman (1992), The Truman Show (1998), and The Illusionist (2006).

Glass is known for composing the operas Einstein on the Beach (1976), Satyagraha (1980), Akhnaten (1983), The Voyage (1992), and The Perfect American (2013). He also wrote the scores for Broadway productions such as the revivals of The Elephant Man (2002), The Crucible (2016), and King Lear (2019). For the latter he won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in a Play .

Glass has received many accolades, including a BAFTA Award , a Drama Desk Award, and a Golden Globe Award , as well as nominations for three Academy Awards , four Grammy Awards, and a Primetime Emmy Award . He has also received the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 1995, the National Medal of Arts in 2010, the Kennedy Center Honors in 2018, and the Grammy Trustees Award in 2020. In 2025, he received a Lifetime Achievement from the World Soundtrack Academy .

Early life and education [ edit ] Glass was born in Baltimore , Maryland , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] on January 31, 1937, [ 12 ] the son of Ida (née Gouline) and Benjamin Charles Glass.

[ 13 ] His family were Latvian-Jewish and Russian-Jewish emigrants.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] His father owned a record store and his mother was a librarian .

[ 17 ] In his memoir, Glass recalls that at the end of World War II his mother aided Jewish Holocaust survivors , inviting recent arrivals to America to stay at their home until they could find a job and a place to live.

[ 18 ] : 14 She developed a plan to help them learn English and develop skills so they could find work.

[ 18 ] : 15 His sister, Sheppie, would later do similar work as an active member of the International Rescue Committee .

[ 18 ] : 15 Glass developed his appreciation of music from his father, discovering later that his father's side of the family had many musicians. His cousin Cevia was a classical pianist , while others had been in vaudeville . He learned his family was also related to Al Jolson .

[ 18 ] : 16 Glass's father often received promotional copies of new recordings at his music store. Glass spent many hours listening to them, developing his knowledge of and taste in music. This openness to modern sounds affected Glass at an early age: My father was self-taught, but he ended up having a very refined and rich knowledge of classical, chamber, and contemporary music. Typically he would come home and have dinner, and then sit in his armchair and listen to music until almost midnight. I caught on to this very early, and I would go and listen with him.

[ 18 ] : 17 The elder Glass promoted both new recordings and a wide selection of composers to his customers, sometimes convincing them to try something new by allowing them to return records they did not like.

[ 18 ] : 17 His store soon developed a reputation as Baltimore's leading source of modern music.

[ 19 ] Glass built a sizable record collection from the unsold records in his father's store, including modern classical music such as Hindemith , Bartók , Schoenberg , [ 20 ] Shostakovich and Western classical music including Beethoven's string quartets and Schubert 's B ♭ Piano Trio . Glass cites Schubert's work as a "big influence" growing up.

[ 21 ] In a 2011 interview, Glass stated that Franz Schubert—with whom he shares a birthday—is his favorite composer.

[ 22 ] He studied the flute as a child at the Peabody Preparatory of the Peabody Institute of Music . At the age of 15, he entered an accelerated college program at the University of Chicago where he studied mathematics and philosophy.

[ 23 ] In Chicago, he discovered the serialism of Anton Webern and composed a twelve-tone string trio .

[ 24 ] In 1954, Glass traveled to Paris, where he encountered the films of Jean Cocteau , which made a lasting impression on him. He visited artists' studios and saw their work; Glass recalls, "the bohemian life you see in [Cocteau's] Orphée was the life I ... was attracted to, and those were the people I hung out with." [ 25 ] Glass studied at the Juilliard School of Music where the keyboard was his main instrument. His composition teachers included Vincent Persichetti and William Bergsma . Fellow students included Steve Reich and Peter Schickele . In 1959, he was a winner in the BMI Foundation 's BMI Student Composer Awards, an international prize for young composers. In the summer of 1960, he studied with Darius Milhaud at the summer school of the Aspen Music Festival and composed a violin concerto for a fellow student, Dorothy Pixley-Rothschild.

[ 26 ] After leaving Juilliard in 1962, Glass moved to Pittsburgh and worked as a school-based composer-in-residence in the public school system, composing various choral, chamber, and orchestral music.

[ 27 ] Career [ edit ] 1964–1966: Paris [ edit ] Glass studied in Paris with Nadia Boulanger .

In 1964, Glass received a Fulbright Scholarship ; his studies in Paris with the eminent composition teacher Nadia Boulanger , from autumn of 1964 to summer of 1966, influenced his work throughout his life, as the composer admitted in 1979: "The composers I studied with Boulanger are the people I still think about most— Bach and Mozart ." [ 28 ] Glass later wrote in his autobiography Music by Philip Glass in 1987 that the new music performed at Pierre Boulez 's Domaine Musical concerts in Paris lacked any excitement for him (with the notable exceptions of music by John Cage and Morton Feldman ), but he was deeply impressed by new films and theatre performances. His move away from modernist composers such as Boulez and Stockhausen was nuanced, rather than outright rejection: "That generation wanted disciples and as we didn't join up it was taken to mean that we hated the music, which wasn't true. We'd studied them at Juilliard and knew their music. How on earth can you reject Berio ? Those early works of Stockhausen are still beautiful. But there was just no point in attempting to do their music better than they did and so we started somewhere else." [ 29 ] During this time, he encountered revolutionary films of the French New Wave , such as those of Jean-Luc Godard and François Truffaut , which upended the rules set by an older generation of artists, [ 30 ] and Glass made friends with American visual artists (the sculptor Richard Serra and his wife Nancy Graves ), [ 31 ] actors and directors ( JoAnne Akalaitis , Ruth Maleczech , David Warrilow , and Lee Breuer , with whom Glass later founded the experimental theatre group Mabou Mines ). Together with Akalaitis (they married in 1965), Glass in turn attended performances by theatre groups including Jean-Louis Barrault 's Odéon theatre, The Living Theatre and the Berliner Ensemble in 1964 to 1965.

[ 32 ] These significant encounters resulted in a collaboration with Breuer for which Glass contributed music for a 1965 staging of Samuel Beckett 's Comédie ( Play , 1963). The resulting piece (written for two soprano saxophones ) was directly influenced by the play's open-ended, repetitive and almost musical structure and was the first one of a series of four early pieces in a minimalist, yet still dissonant , idiom.

[ 24 ] After Play , Glass also acted in 1966 as music director of a Breuer production of Brecht 's Mother Courage and Her Children , featuring the theatre score by Paul Dessau .

In parallel with his early excursions in experimental theatre, Glass worked in winter 1965 and spring 1966 as a music director and composer [ 33 ] on a film score ( Chappaqua , Conrad Rooks, 1966) with Ravi Shankar and Alla Rakha , which added another important influence on Glass's musical thinking. His distinctive style arose from his work with Shankar and Rakha and their perception of rhythm in Indian music as being entirely additive. He renounced all his compositions in a moderately modern style resembling Milhaud 's, Aaron Copland 's, and Samuel Barber 's, and began writing pieces based on repetitive structures of Indian music and a sense of time influenced by Samuel Beckett: a piece for two actresses and chamber ensemble, a work for chamber ensemble and his first numbered string quartet (No. 1, 1966).

[ 34 ] Glass then left Paris for northern India in 1966, where he came in contact with Tibetan refugees and began to gravitate towards Buddhism . He met Tenzin Gyatso , the 14th Dalai Lama , in 1972, and has been a strong supporter of the Tibetan independence ever since.

1967–1974: Minimalism: From Strung Out to Music in 12 Parts [ edit ] See also: Minimalist music Chuck Close 's portrait of Glass in the New York City Subway 's 86th Street station Glass' musical style is instantly recognizable, with its trademark churning ostinatos , undulating arpeggios and repeating rhythms that morph over various lengths of time atop broad fields of tonal harmony. That style has taken permanent root in our pop-middlebrow sensibility. Glass' music is now indelibly a part of our cultural lingua franca , just a click away on YouTube.

John von Rhein, Chicago Tribune writer [ 23 ] Shortly after arriving in New York City in March 1967, Glass attended a performance of works by Steve Reich (including the ground-breaking minimalist piece Piano Phase ), which left a deep impression on him; he simplified his style and turned to a radical " consonant vocabulary".

[ 24 ] Finding little sympathy from traditional performers and performance spaces, Glass eventually formed an ensemble with fellow ex-student Jon Gibson , and others, and began performing mainly in art galleries and studio lofts of SoHo . The visual artist Richard Serra provided Glass with Gallery contacts, while both collaborated on various sculptures, films and installations; from 1971 to 1974, he was Serra's regular studio assistant.

[ 31 ] [ 35 ] Between summer of 1967 and the end of 1968, Glass composed nine works, including Strung Out (for amplified solo violin, composed in summer of 1967), Gradus (for solo saxophone, 1968), Music in the Shape of a Square (for two flutes, composed in May 1968, an homage to Erik Satie ), How Now (for solo piano, 1968) and 1+1 (for amplified tabletop, November 1968) which were "clearly designed to experiment more fully with his new-found minimalist approach".

[ 36 ] The first concert of Glass's new music was at Jonas Mekas 's Film-Makers Cinemathèque ( Anthology Film Archives ) in September 1968. This concert included the first work of this series with Strung Out (performed by the violinist Pixley-Rothschild) and Music in the Shape of a Square (performed by Glass and Gibson). The musical scores were tacked on the wall, and the performers had to move while playing. Glass's new works met with a very enthusiastic response by the audience which consisted mainly of visual and performance artists who were highly sympathetic to Glass's reductive approach.

Apart from his music career, Glass had a moving company with his cousin, the sculptor Jene Highstein, and also worked as a plumber and cab driver (during 1973 to 1978). He recounts installing a dishwasher and looking up from his work to see an astonished Robert Hughes , Time magazine's art critic, staring at him.

[ 37 ] During this time, he made friends with other New York-based artists such as Sol LeWitt , Nancy Graves , Michael Snow , Bruce Nauman , Laurie Anderson , and Chuck Close (who created a now-famous portrait of Glass).

[ 38 ] (Glass returned the compliment in 2005 with A Musical Portrait of Chuck Close for piano.) With 1+1 and Two Pages (composed in February 1969), Glass turned to a more "rigorous approach" to his "most basic minimalist technique, additive process", [ 39 ] pieces which were followed in the same year by Music in Contrary Motion and Music in Fifths (a kind of homage to his composition teacher Nadia Boulanger , who pointed out " hidden fifths " in his works but regarded them as cardinal sins). Eventually Glass's music grew less austere, becoming more complex and dramatic, with pieces such as Music in Similar Motion (1969), and Music with Changing Parts (1970). These pieces were performed by the Philip Glass Ensemble in the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1969 and in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in 1970, often encountering hostile reaction from critics, [ 24 ] but Glass's music was also met with enthusiasm from younger artists such as Brian Eno and David Bowie (at the Royal College of Art ca. 1970).

[ 40 ] Eno described this encounter with Glass's music as one of the "most extraordinary musical experiences of [his] life", as a "viscous bath of pure, thick energy", concluding "this was actually the most detailed music I'd ever heard. It was all intricacy, exotic harmonics ".

[ 41 ] In 1970, Glass returned to the theatre, composing music for the theatre group Mabou Mines , resulting in his first minimalist pieces employing voices: Red Horse Animation and Music for Voices (both 1970, and premiered at the Paula Cooper Gallery ).

[ 42 ] After differences of opinion with Steve Reich in 1971, [ 24 ] Glass formed the Philip Glass Ensemble (while Reich formed Steve Reich and Musicians ), an amplified ensemble including keyboards, wind instruments (saxophones, flutes), and soprano voices.

Glass's music for his ensemble culminated in the four-hour-long Music in Twelve Parts (1971–1974), which began as a single piece with twelve instrumental parts but developed into a cycle that summed up Glass's musical achievement since 1967, and even transcended it—the last part features a twelve-tone theme, sung by the soprano voice of the ensemble. "I had broken the rules of modernism and so I thought it was time to break some of my own rules", according to Glass.

[ 43 ] Though he finds the term minimalist inaccurate to describe his later work, Glass does accept this term for pieces up to and including Music in 12 Parts , excepting this last part which "was the end of minimalism" for Glass. As he pointed out: "I had worked for eight or nine years inventing a system, and now I'd written through it and come out the other end." [ 43 ] He now prefers to describe himself as a composer of "music with repetitive structures".

[ 23 ] 1975–1979: Another Look at Harmony: The Portrait Trilogy [ edit ] A scene from a 2017 rehearsal of Einstein on the Beach , a 1975 opera by Glass in Dortmund , Germany External images Philip Glass and Robert Wilson (1976) by Robert Mapplethorpe Philip Glass and Robert Wilson (2008) by Georgia Oetker Glass continued his work with a series of instrumental works, called Another Look at Harmony (1975–1977). For Glass, this series demonstrated a new start, hence the title: "What I was looking for was a way of combining harmonic progression with the rhythmic structure I had been developing, to produce a new overall structure. ... I'd taken everything out with my early works and it was now time to decide just what I wanted to put in—a process that would occupy me for several years to come." [ 43 ] Parts 1 and 2 of Another Look at Harmony were included in a collaboration with Robert Wilson , a piece of musical theater later designated by Glass as the first opera of his portrait opera trilogy: Einstein on the Beach . Composed in spring to fall of 1975 in close collaboration with Wilson, Glass's first opera was first premiered in summer 1976 at the Festival d'Avignon , and in November of the same year to a mixed and partly enthusiastic reaction from the audience at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. Scored for the Philip Glass Ensemble, solo violin, chorus, and featuring actors (reciting texts by Christopher Knowles , Lucinda Childs and Samuel M. Johnson), Glass's and Wilson's essentially plotless opera was conceived as a " metaphorical look at Albert Einstein : scientist, humanist, amateur musician—and the man whose theories ... led to the splitting of the atom", evoking nuclear holocaust in the climactic scene, as critic Tim Page pointed out.

[ 44 ] As with Another Look at Harmony , " Einstein added a new functional harmony that set it apart from the early conceptual works".

[ 44 ] Composer Tom Johnson came to the same conclusion, comparing the solo violin music to Johann Sebastian Bach , and the "organ figures ... to those Alberti basses Mozart loved so much".

[ 45 ] The piece was praised by The Washington Post as "one of the seminal artworks of the century".

Einstein on the Beach was followed by further music for projects by the theatre group Mabou Mines such as Dressed like an Egg (1975), and again music for plays and adaptations from prose by Samuel Beckett , such as The Lost Ones (1975), Cascando (1975), Mercier and Camier (1979). Glass also turned to other media; two multi-movement instrumental works for the Philip Glass Ensemble originated as music for film and TV: North Star (1977 score for the documentary North Star: Mark di Suvero by François de Menil and Barbara Rose ) and four short cues for the children's TV series Sesame Street named Geometry of Circles (1979).

Another series, Fourth Series (1977–79), included music for chorus and organ ("Part One", 1977), organ and piano ("Part Two" and "Part Four", 1979), and music for a radio adaption of Constance DeJong 's novel Modern Love ("Part Three", 1978). "Part Two" and "Part Four" were used (and hence renamed) in two dance productions by choreographer Lucinda Childs (who had already contributed to and performed in Einstein on the Beach ). "Part Two" was included in Dance (a collaboration with visual artist Sol LeWitt , 1979), and "Part Four" was renamed as Mad Rush , and performed by Glass on several occasions such as the first public appearance of the 14th Dalai Lama in New York City in fall 1981. The piece demonstrates Glass's turn to more traditional models: the composer added a conclusion to an open-structured piece which "can be interpreted as a sign that he [had] abandoned the radical non-narrative, undramatic approaches of his early period", as the pianist Steffen Schleiermacher points out.

[ 46 ] In spring 1978, Glass received a commission from the Netherlands Opera (as well as a Rockefeller Foundation grant) which "marked the end of his need to earn money from non-musical employment".

[ 47 ] With the commission Glass continued his work in music theater, composing his opera Satyagraha (composed in 1978–1979, premiered in 1980 at Rotterdam), based on the early life of Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa, Leo Tolstoy , Rabindranath Tagore , and Martin Luther King Jr.

For Satyagraha , Glass worked in close collaboration with two " SoHo friends": the writer Constance deJong , who provided the libretto, and the set designer Robert Israel. This piece was in other ways a turning point for Glass, as it was his first work since 1963 scored for symphony orchestra, even if the most prominent parts were still reserved for solo voices and chorus. Shortly after completing the score in August 1979, Glass met the conductor Dennis Russell Davies , whom he helped prepare for performances in Germany (using a piano-four-hands version of the score); together they started to plan another opera, to be premiered at the Stuttgart State Opera .

[ 30 ] 1980–1986: Completing the Portrait Trilogy: Akhnaten and beyond [ edit ] A scene from a 2017 performance in Berlin of Satyagraha , an opera by Glass While planning a third part of his "Portrait Trilogy", Glass turned to smaller music theatre projects such as the non-narrative Madrigal Opera (for six voices and violin and viola, 1980), and The Photographer , a biographic study on the photographer Eadweard Muybridge (1982). Glass also continued to write for the orchestra with the score of Koyaanisqatsi ( Godfrey Reggio , 1981–1982). Some pieces which were not used in the film (such as Façades ) eventually appeared on the album Glassworks (1982, CBS Records), which brought Glass's music to a wider public.

The "Portrait Trilogy" was completed with Akhnaten (1982–1983, premiered in 1984), a vocal and orchestral composition sung in Akkadian , Biblical Hebrew , and Ancient Egyptian . In addition, this opera featured an actor reciting ancient Egyptian texts in the language of the audience.

Akhnaten was commissioned by the Stuttgart Opera in a production designed by Achim Freyer . It premiered simultaneously at the Houston Opera in a production directed by David Freeman and designed by Peter Sellars . At the time of the commission, the Stuttgart Opera House was undergoing renovation, necessitating the use of a nearby playhouse with a smaller orchestra pit. Upon learning this, Glass and conductor Dennis Russell Davies visited the playhouse, placing music stands around the pit to determine how many players the pit could accommodate. The two found they could not fit a full orchestra in the pit. Glass decided to eliminate the violins, which had the effect of "giving the orchestra a low, dark sound that came to characterize the piece and suited the subject very well".

[ 30 ] As Glass remarked in 1992, Akhnaten is significant in his work since it represents a "first extension out of a triadic harmonic language", an experiment with the polytonality of his teachers Persichetti and Milhaud , a musical technique which Glass compares to "an optical illusion, such as in the paintings of Josef Albers ".

[ 48 ] Glass again collaborated with Robert Wilson on another opera, the CIVIL warS (1983, premiered in 1984), which also functioned as the final part (the Rome section) of Wilson's epic work by the same name, originally planned for an "international arts festival that would accompany the Olympic Games in Los Angeles".

[ 49 ] (Glass also composed a prestigious work for chorus and orchestra for the opening of the Games, The Olympian: Lighting of the Torch and Closing ). The premiere of The CIVIL warS in Los Angeles never materialized [ clarification needed ] and the opera was in the end premiered at the Opera of Rome. Glass's and Wilson's opera includes musical settings of Latin texts by the 1st-century-Roman playwright Seneca and allusions to the music of Giuseppe Verdi and from the American Civil War , featuring the 19th century figures Giuseppe Garibaldi and Robert E. Lee as characters.

In the mid-1980s, Glass produced "works in different media at an extraordinarily rapid pace".

[ 50 ] Projects from that period include music for dance ( Glass Pieces choreographed for New York City Ballet by Jerome Robbins in 1983 to a score drawn from existing Glass compositions created for other media including an excerpt from Akhnaten ; and In the Upper Room , Twyla Tharp , 1986), music for theatre productions Endgame (1984) and Company (1983). Beckett vehemently disapproved of the production of Endgame at the American Repertory Theater (Cambridge, Massachusetts), which featured JoAnne Akalaitis 's direction and Glass's Prelude for timpani and double bass, but in the end, he authorized the music for Company , four short, intimate pieces for string quartet that were played in the intervals of the dramatization. This composition was initially regarded by the composer as a piece of Gebrauchsmusik ('music for use')—"like salt and pepper ... just something for the table", as he noted.

[ 51 ] Eventually Company was published as Glass's String Quartet No. 2 and in a version for string orchestra, being performed by ensembles ranging from student orchestras to renowned formations such as the Kronos Quartet and the Kremerata Baltica .

This interest in writing for the string quartet and the string orchestra led to a chamber and orchestral film score for Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters ( Paul Schrader , 1984–85), which Glass recently described as his "musical turning point" that developed his "technique of film scoring in a very special way".

[ 52 ] Glass also dedicated himself to vocal works with two sets of songs, Three Songs for chorus (1984, settings of poems by Leonard Cohen , Octavio Paz and Raymond Lévesque ), and a song cycle initiated by CBS Masterworks Records : Songs from Liquid Days (1985), with texts by songwriters such as David Byrne , Paul Simon , in which the Kronos Quartet is featured (as it is in Mishima ) in a prominent role. Glass also continued his series of operas with adaptations from literary texts such as The Juniper Tree (an opera collaboration with composer Robert Moran , 1984), Edgar Allan Poe 's The Fall of the House of Usher (1987), and also worked with novelist Doris Lessing on the opera The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 (1985–86, and performed by the Houston Grand Opera and English National Opera in 1988).

1987–1991: Operas and the turn to symphonic music [ edit ] Compositions such as Company , Facades and String Quartet No. 3 (the last two extracted from the scores to Koyaanisqatsi and Mishima ) gave way to a series of works more accessible to ensembles such as the string quartet and symphony orchestra , in this returning to the structural roots of his student days. In taking this direction his chamber and orchestral works were also written in a more and more traditional and lyrical style. In these works, Glass often employs old musical forms such as the chaconne and the passacaglia —for instance in Satyagraha , [ 24 ] the Violin Concerto No. 1 (1987), Symphony No. 3 (1995), Echorus (1995) and also recent works such as Symphony No. 8 (2005), [ 53 ] and Songs and Poems for Solo Cello (2006).

A series of orchestral works originally composed for the concert hall commenced with the three-movement Violin Concerto No. 1 (1987). This work was commissioned by the American Composers Orchestra and written for and in close collaboration with the violinist Paul Zukofsky and the conductor Dennis Russell Davies, who since then has encouraged the composer to write numerous orchestral pieces. The Concerto is dedicated to the memory of Glass's father: "His favorite form was the violin concerto, and so I grew up listening to the Mendelssohn , the Paganini , the Brahms concertos. ... So when I decided to write a violin concerto, I wanted to write one that my father would have liked." [ 54 ] Among its multiple recordings, in 1992, the Concerto was performed and recorded by Gidon Kremer and the Vienna Philharmonic . This turn to orchestral music was continued with a symphonic trilogy of "portraits of nature", commissioned by the Cleveland Orchestra , the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra , and the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra : The Light (1987), The Canyon (1988), and Itaipu (1989).

While composing for symphonic ensembles, Glass also composed music for piano, with the cycle of five movements titled Metamorphosis (adapted from music for a theatrical adaptation of Franz Kafka 's The Metamorphosis ), and for the Errol Morris film The Thin Blue Line , 1988. In the same year Glass met the poet Allen Ginsberg by chance in a book store in the East Village of New York City, and they immediately "decided on the spot to do something together, reached for one of Allen's books and chose Wichita Vortex Sutra ", [ 55 ] a piece for reciter and piano which in turn developed into a music theatre piece for singers and ensemble, Hydrogen Jukebox (1990).

Glass also returned to chamber music; he composed two String Quartets ( No. 4 Buczak in 1989 and No. 5 in 1991), and chamber works which originated as incidental music for plays, such as Music from "The Screens" (1989/1990). This work originated in one of many theater music collaborations with the director JoAnne Akalaitis , who originally asked the Gambian musician Foday Musa Suso "to do the score [for Jean Genet 's The Screens ] in collaboration with a western composer".

[ 56 ] Glass had already collaborated with Suso in the film score to Powaqqatsi ( Godfrey Reggio , 1988).

Music from "The Screens" is on occasion a touring piece for Glass and Suso (one set of tours also included percussionist Yousif Sheronick ), and individual pieces found their way into the repertoire of Glass and the cellist Wendy Sutter. Another collaboration was a collaborative recording project with Ravi Shankar , initiated by Peter Baumann (a member of the band Tangerine Dream ), which resulted in the album Passages (1990).

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Glass's projects also included two highly prestigious opera commissions based on the life of explorers: The Voyage (1992), with a libretto by David Henry Hwang , was commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera for the 500th anniversary of the discovery of America by Christopher Columbus ; and White Raven (1991), about Vasco da Gama , a collaboration with Robert Wilson and composed for the closure of the 1998 World Fair in Lisbon. Especially in The Voyage , the composer "explore[d] new territory", with its "newly arching lyricism", " Sibelian starkness and sweep", and "dark, brooding tone ... a reflection of its increasingly chromatic (and dissonant ) palette", as one commentator put it.

[ 24 ] Glass remixed the S'Express song "Hey Music Lover", for the b-side of its 1989 release as a single.

[ 57 ] 1991–1996: Cocteau trilogy and symphonies [ edit ] Glass performing in Florence , Italy in 1993 After these operas, Glass began working on a symphonic cycle, commissioned by the conductor Dennis Russell Davies, who told Glass at the time: "I'm not going to let you ... be one of those opera composers who never write a symphony ".

[ 58 ] Glass responded with a pair of three-movement symphonies ( "Low" [1992], and Symphony No. 2 [1994]); his first in an ongoing series of symphonies is a combination of the composer's own musical material with themes featured in prominent tracks of the David Bowie/Brian Eno album Low (1977), [ 59 ] whereas Symphony No. 2 is described by Glass as a study in polytonality . He referred to the music of Honegger , Milhaud , and Villa-Lobos as possible models for his symphony.

[ 60 ] With the Concerto Grosso (1992), Symphony No. 3 (1995), a Concerto for Saxophone Quartet and Orchestra (1995), written for the Rascher Quartet (all commissioned by conductor Dennis Russell Davies), and Echorus (1994/95), a more transparent, refined, and intimate chamber-orchestral style paralleled the excursions of his large-scale symphonic pieces. In the four movements of his Third Symphony, Glass treats a 19-piece string orchestra as an extended chamber ensemble. In the third movement, Glass re-uses the chaconne as a formal device; one commentator characterized Glass's symphony as one of the composer's "most tautly unified works".

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The third Symphony was closely followed by a fourth, subtitled Heroes (1996), commissioned the American Composers Orchestra . Its six movements are symphonic reworkings of themes by Glass, David Bowie, and Brian Eno (from their album "Heroes" , 1977); as in other works by the composer, it is also a hybrid work and exists in two versions: one for the concert hall, and another, shorter one for dance, choreographed by Twyla Tharp .

Another commission by Dennis Russell Davies was a second series for piano, the Etudes for Piano (dedicated to Davies as well as the production designer Achim Freyer ); the complete first set of ten Etudes has been recorded and performed by Glass himself.

Bruce Brubaker and Dennis Russell Davies have each recorded the original set of six. Most of the Etudes are composed in the post-minimalist and increasingly lyrical style of the times: "Within the framework of a concise form, Glass explores possible sonorities ranging from typically Baroque passagework to Romantically tinged moods".

[ 63 ] Some of the pieces also appeared in different versions such as in the theatre music to Robert Wilson's Persephone (1994, commissioned by the Relache Ensemble ) or Echorus (a version of Etude No. 2 for two violins and string orchestra, written for Edna Mitchell and Yehudi Menuhin 1995).

Glass's prolific output in the 1990s continued to include operas with an opera triptych (1991–1996), which the composer described as an "homage" to writer and film director Jean Cocteau , based on his prose and cinematic work: Orphée (1950), La Belle et la Bête (1946), and the novel Les Enfants terribles (1929, later made into a film by Cocteau and Jean-Pierre Melville , 1950). In the same way the triptych is also a musical homage to the work of the group of French composers associated with Cocteau, Les Six (and especially to Glass's teacher Darius Milhaud), as well as to various 18th-century composers such as Gluck and Bach whose music featured as an essential part of the films by Cocteau.

The inspiration of the first part of the trilogy, Orphée (composed in 1991, and premiered in 1993 at the American Repertory Theatre ) can be conceptually and musically traced to Gluck's opera Orfeo ed Euridice ( Orphée et Euridyce , 1762/1774), [ 24 ] which had a prominent part in Cocteau's 1949 film Orphee .

[ 64 ] One theme of the opera, the death of Eurydice , has some similarity to the composer's personal life: the opera was composed after the unexpected death in 1991 of Glass's wife, artist Candy Jernigan : "... One can only suspect that Orpheus' grief must have resembled the composer's own", K. Robert Schwartz suggests.

[ 24 ] The opera's "transparency of texture, a subtlety of instrumental color, ... a newly expressive and unfettered vocal writing" [ 24 ] was praised, and The Guardian 's critic remarked "Glass has a real affinity for the French text and sets the words eloquently, underpinning them with delicately patterned instrumental textures".

[ 65 ] For the second opera, La Belle et la Bête (1994, scored for either the Philip Glass Ensemble or a more conventional chamber orchestra), Glass replaced the soundtrack (including Georges Auric 's film music) of Cocteau's film, wrote "a new fully operatic score and synchronize[d] it with the film".

[ 25 ] This reimagining of a score took what had been common in turning opera into film and turned it on its head, turning film into opera. This brought the music that would otherwise be subordinate to the film to the forefront so that the two were equal with each other; taking a new spin on an old tradition.

[ 66 ] The final part of the triptych returned again to a more traditional setting with the "Dance Opera" Les Enfants terribles (1996), scored for voices, three pianos and dancers, with choreography by Susan Marshall . The characters are depicted by both singers and dancers. The scoring of the opera evokes Bach's Concerto for Four Harpsichords , but in another way also "the snow, which falls relentlessly throughout the opera ... bearing witness to the unfolding events. Here time stands still. There is only music, and the movement of children through space" (Glass).

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] 1997–2004: Symphonies, opera, and concertos [ edit ] In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Glass's lyrical and romantic styles peaked with a variety of projects: operas, theatre and film scores ( Martin Scorsese 's Kundun , 1997, Godfrey Reggio 's Naqoyqatsi , 2002, and Stephen Daldry 's The Hours , 2002), a series of five concerts, and three symphonies centered on orchestra-singer and orchestra-chorus interplay. Two symphonies, Symphony No. 5 "Choral" (1999) and Symphony No. 7 " Toltec " (2004), and the song cycle Songs of Milarepa (1997) have a meditative theme. The operatic Symphony No. 6 Plutonian Ode (2002) for soprano and orchestra was commissioned by the Brucknerhaus, Linz, and Carnegie Hall in celebration of Glass's sixty-fifth birthday, and developed from Glass's collaboration with Allen Ginsberg (poet, piano—Ginsberg, Glass), based on his poem of the same name.

Besides writing for the concert hall, Glass continued his ongoing operatic series with adaptions from literary texts: The Marriages of Zones 3, 4 and 5 ([1997] story-libretto by Doris Lessing), In the Penal Colony (2000, after the story by Franz Kafka ), and the chamber opera The Sound of a Voice (2003, with David Henry Hwang), which features the Pipa , performed by Wu Man at its premiere. Glass also collaborated again with the co-author of Einstein on the Beach , Robert Wilson , on Monsters of Grace (1998), and created a biographic opera on the life of astronomer Galileo Galilei (2001).

In the early 2000s, Glass started a series of five concerti with the Tirol Concerto for Piano and Orchestra (2000, premiered by Dennis Russell Davies as conductor and soloist), and the Concerto Fantasy for Two Timpanists and Orchestra (2000, for the timpanist Jonathan Haas). The Concerto for Cello and Orchestra (2001) had its premiere performance in Beijing, featuring cellist Julian Lloyd Webber ; it was composed in celebration of his fiftieth birthday.

[ 69 ] These concertos were followed by the concise and rigorously neo-Baroque Concerto for Harpsichord and Orchestra (2002), demonstrating in its transparent, chamber orchestral textures Glass's classical technique, evocative in the "improvisatory chords" of its beginning a toccata of Froberger or Frescobaldi , and 18th century music.

[ 70 ] Two years later, the concerti series continued with Piano Concerto No. 2: After Lewis and Clark (2004), composed for the pianist Paul Barnes . The concerto celebrates the pioneers' trek across North America, and the second movement features a duet for piano and Native American flute . With the chamber opera The Sound of a Voice , Glass's Piano Concerto No. 2 might be regarded as bridging his traditional compositions and his more popular excursions to World Music , also found in Orion (also composed in 2004).

2005–2007: Songs and Poems [ edit ] Glass in December 2007 Waiting for the Barbarians , an opera from J. M. Coetzee 's novel (with the libretto by Christopher Hampton ), had its premiere performance in September 2005. Glass defined the work as a "social/political opera", as a critique on the Bush administration 's war in Iraq, a "dialogue about political crisis ", and an illustration of the "power of art to turn our attention toward the human dimension of history".

[ 71 ] While the opera's themes are Imperialism , apartheid , and torture , the composer chose an understated approach by using "very simple means, and the orchestration is very clear and very traditional; it's almost classical in sound", as the conductor Dennis Russell Davies notes.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Two months after the premiere of this opera, in November 2005, Glass's Symphony No. 8 , commissioned by the Bruckner Orchestra Linz , was premiered at the Brooklyn Academy of Music in New York City. After three symphonies for voices and orchestra, this piece was a return to purely orchestral and abstract composition; like previous works written for the conductor Dennis Russell Davies (the 1992 Concerto Grosso and the 1995 Symphony No. 3), it features extended solo writing. Critic Allan Kozinn described the symphony's chromaticism as more extreme, more fluid, and its themes and textures as continually changing, morphing without repetition, and praised the symphony's "unpredictable orchestration", pointing out the "beautiful flute and harp variation in the melancholy second movement".

[ 74 ] Alex Ross , remarked that "against all odds, this work succeeds in adding something certifiably new to the overstuffed annals of the classical symphony. ... The musical material is cut from familiar fabric, but it's striking that the composer forgoes the expected bustling conclusion and instead delves into a mood of deepening twilight and unending night." [ 75 ] The Passion of Ramakrishna (2006), was composed for the Pacific Symphony orchestra, the Pacific Chorale and the conductor Carl St. Clair . The 45 minutes choral work is based on the writings of Indian spiritual leader Ramakrishna , which seem "to have genuinely inspired and revived the composer out of his old formulas to write something fresh", as one critic remarked, whereas another noted "The musical style breaks little new ground for Glass, except for the glorious Handelian ending ... the composer's style ideally fits the devotional text".

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] A cello suite, composed for the cellist Wendy Sutter, Songs and Poems for Solo Cello (2005–2007), was equally lauded by critics. It was described by Lisa Hirsch as "a major work, ... a major addition to the cello repertory" and "deeply Romantic in spirit, and at the same time deeply Baroque ".

[ 78 ] Another critic, Anne Midgette of The Washington Post , noted the suite "maintains an unusual degree of directness and warmth"; she also noted a kinship to a major work by Johann Sebastian Bach : "Digging into the lower registers of the instrument, it takes flight in handfuls of notes, now gentle, now impassioned, variously evoking the minor-mode keening of klezmer music and the interior meditations of Bach's cello suites ".

[ 79 ] Glass himself pointed out "in many ways it owes more to Schubert than to Bach".

[ 80 ] In 2007, Glass also worked alongside Leonard Cohen on an adaptation of Cohen's poetry collection Book of Longing . The work, which premiered in June 2007 in Toronto, is a piece for seven instruments and a vocal quartet, and contains recorded spoken word performances by Cohen and imagery from his collection.

Appomattox , an opera surrounding the events at the end of the American Civil War, was commissioned by the San Francisco Opera and premiered on October 5, 2007. As in Waiting for the Barbarians , Glass collaborated with the writer Christopher Hampton, and as with the preceding opera and Symphony No. 8, the piece was conducted by Glass's long-time collaborator Dennis Russell Davies, who noted "in his recent operas the bass line has taken on an increasing prominence,... (an) increasing use of melodic elements in the deep register, in the contrabass , the contrabassoon —he's increasingly using these sounds and these textures can be derived from using these instruments in different combinations. ... He's definitely developed more skill as an orchestrator, in his ability to conceive melodies and harmonic structures for specific instrumental groups. ... what he gives them to play is very organic and idiomatic." [ 73 ] Apart from this large-scale opera, Glass added a work to his catalogue of theater music in 2007, and continuing—after a gap of twenty years—to write music for the dramatic work of Samuel Beckett. He provided a "hypnotic" original score for a compilation of Beckett's short plays Act Without Words I , Act Without Words II , Rough for Theatre I and Eh Joe , directed by JoAnne Akalaitis and premiered in December 2007. Glass's work for this production was described by The New York Times as "icy, repetitive music that comes closest to piercing the heart".

[ 81 ] 2008–present: Chamber music, concertos, and symphonies [ edit ] Glass performing Book of Longing in Milan in September 2008 Philip Glass by Luis Alvarez Roure , a 2016 oil on board portrait at the Smithsonian Institution 's National Portrait Gallery in Washington, D.C.

Glass at the world premiere of Passacaglia for Piano at Musikhuset Aarhus in Denmark, 2017 Between 2008 and 2010, Glass continued to work on a series of chamber music pieces which started with Songs and Poems : the Four Movements for Two Pianos (2008, premiered by Dennis Russell Davies and Maki Namekawa in July 2008), a Sonata for Violin and Piano composed in "the Brahms tradition" (completed in 2008, premiered by violinist Maria Bachman and pianist Jon Klibonoff in February 2009); a String sextet (an adaption of the Symphony No. 3 of 1995 made by Glass's musical director Michael Riesman) followed in 2009.

Pendulum (2010, a one-movement piece for violin and piano), a second Suite of cello pieces for Wendy Sutter (2011), and Partita for solo violin for violinist Tim Fain (2010, first performance of the complete work 2011), are recent entries in the series.

[ 82 ] Other works for the theater were a score for Euripides ' The Bacchae (2009, directed by JoAnne Akalaitis ), and Kepler (2009), yet another operatic biography of a scientist or explorer. The opera is based on the life of 17th century astronomer Johannes Kepler , against the background of the Thirty Years' War , with a libretto compiled from Kepler's texts and poems by his contemporary Andreas Gryphius . It is Glass's first opera in German, and was premiered by the Bruckner Orchestra Linz and Dennis Russell Davies in September 2009. LA Times critic Mark Swed and others described the work as " oratorio -like"; Swed pointed out the work is Glass's "most chromatic, complex, psychological score" and "the orchestra dominates ... I was struck by the muted, glowing colors, the character of many orchestral solos and the poignant emphasis on bass instruments".

[ 83 ] In 2009 and 2010, Glass returned to the concerto genre.

Violin Concerto No. 2 in four movements was commissioned by violinist Robert McDuffie , and subtitled "The American Four Seasons" (2009), as an homage to Vivaldi 's set of concertos The Four Seasons . It premiered in December 2009 by the Toronto Symphony Orchestra , and was subsequently performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra in April 2010.

[ 84 ] The Double Concerto for Violin and Cello and Orchestra (2010) was composed for soloists Maria Bachmann and Wendy Sutter and also as a ballet score for the Nederlands Dans Theater .

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Other orchestral projects of 2010 are short orchestral scores for films; to a multimedia presentation based on the novel Icarus at the Edge of Time by theoretical physicist Brian Greene , which premiered on June 6, 2010, and the score for the Brazilian film Nosso Lar (released in Brazil on September 3, 2010). Glass also donated a short work, Brazil , to the video game Chime , which was released on February 3, 2010.

In August 2011, Glass presented a series of music, dance, and theater performances as part of the Days and Nights Festival.

[ 87 ] Along with the Philip Glass Ensemble, scheduled performers include Molissa Fenley and Dancers, John Moran with Saori Tsukada, as well as a screening of Dracula with Glass's score.

[ 88 ] Other works completed since 2010 include Symphony No. 9 (2010–2011), Symphony No. 10 (2012), Cello Concerto No. 2 (2012, based on the film score to Naqoyqatsi ) as well as String Quartet No. 6 and No. 7. Glass's Ninth Symphony was co-commissioned by the Bruckner Orchestra Linz, the American Composers Orchestra and the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra . The symphony's first performance took place on January 1, 2012, at the Brucknerhaus in Linz, Austria (Dennis Russell Davies conducting the Bruckner Orchestra Linz); the American premiere was on January 31, 2012, (Glass's 75th birthday), at Carnegie Hall (Dennis Russell Davies conducting the American Composers Orchestra), and the West Coast premiere with the Los Angeles Philharmonic under the baton of John Adams on April 5.

[ 89 ] Glass's Tenth Symphony, written in five movements, was commissioned by the Orchestre français des jeunes for its 30th anniversary. The symphony's first performance took place on August 9, 2012, at the Grand Théâtre de Provence in Aix-en-Provence under Dennis Russell Davies.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] The opera The Perfect American was composed in 2011 to a commission from Teatro Real Madrid.

[ 94 ] The libretto is based on a book of the same name by Peter Stephan Jungk and covers the final months of the life of Walt Disney .

[ 95 ] The world premiere was at the Teatro Real, Madrid, on January 22, 2013, with British baritone Christopher Purves taking the role of Disney.

[ 95 ] The UK premiere took place on June 1, 2013, in a production by the English National Opera at the London Coliseum .

[ 96 ] The US premiere took place on March 12, 2017, in a production by Long Beach Opera .

[ 97 ] It was met with
mixed to negative reviews.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] His opera The Lost [ fr ] , based on a play by Austrian playwright and novelist Peter Handke , Die Spuren der Verirrten (2007), premiered at the Musiktheater Linz in April 2013, conducted by Dennis Russell Davies and directed by David Pountney .

On June 28, 2013, Glass's piano piece Two Movements for Four Pianos was premiered at the Museum Kunstpalast , performed by Katia and Marielle Labèque , Maki Namekawa, and Dennis Russell Davies.

[ 101 ] On January 17, 2014, Glass's collaboration with Angélique Kidjo Ifé: Three Yorùbá Songs for Orchestra premiered at the Philharmonie Luxembourg .

[ 102 ] In May 2015, Glass's Double Concerto for Two Pianos was premiered by Katia and Marielle Labèque , Gustavo Dudamel and the Los Angeles Philharmonic .

Glass published his memoir, Words Without Music , in 2015.

[ 103 ] His 11th symphony , commissioned by the Bruckner Orchestra Linz, the Istanbul International Music Festival , and the Queensland Symphony Orchestra , premiered on January 31, 2017, Glass's 80th birthday, at Carnegie Hall, Dennis Russell Davies conducting the Bruckner Orchestra.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] On September 22, 2017, his Piano Concerto No. 3 was premiered by pianist Simone Dinnerstein with the strings of the chamber orchestra A Far Cry at Jordan Hall at the New England Conservatory of Music , Boston, Massachusetts.

[ 106 ] Glass' String Quartet No. 8 was premiered by the JACK Quartet at Centennial Concert Hall in Winnipeg, Canada on February 1, 2018. The work was commissioned by the Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra New Music Festival, the Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra , and Carnegie Hall .

[ 107 ] Glass's 12th symphony was premiered by the Los Angeles Philharmonic under John Adams at the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles on January 10, 2019. Commissioned by the orchestra, the work is based on David Bowie's 1979 album Lodger , it completes Glass's trilogy of symphonies based on Bowie's Berlin Trilogy of albums.

[ 108 ] In collaboration with stage auteur, performer and co-director (with Kirsty Housley) Phelim McDermott , Glass composed the score for the new work Tao of Glass , which premiered at the 2019 Manchester International Festival [ 109 ] before touring to the 2020 Perth Festival .

During the COVID-19 pandemic, Glass continued composing, with three major works for opera and symphony premiering in 2021 and 2022. Glass' opera Circus Days and Nights was commissioned by Cirkus Cirkor.

[ 110 ] The libretto by David Henry Hwang and Tilde Björfors is based on a book of poems by Robert Lax . The world premiere was at the Malmö Opera on May 29, 2021.

[ 111 ] Glass's Symphony No. 14 was premiered by the LGT Young Soloists at the Royal College of Music in London on September 17, 2021. The work was commissioned by the orchestra.

[ 112 ] Glass's Symphony No. 13 was premiered by the National Arts Centre Orchestra under Alexander Shelley at the Roy Thomson Hall in Toronto on March 30, 2022. Commissioned by the orchestra, the work was written as a tribute to Canadian journalist Peter Jennings .

[ 113 ] On November 7, 2023, Glass and Artisan Books released Philip Glass Piano Etudes: The Complete Folios 1–20 & Essays from Fellow Artists a nine-pound deluxe boxed set of Glass' piano etudes and Studies in Time: Essays on the Music of Philip Glass.

[ 114 ] Influences and collaborations [ edit ] Glass describes himself as a "classicist", pointing out he is trained in harmony and counterpoint and studied such composers as Franz Schubert , Johann Sebastian Bach , and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart with Nadia Boulanger .

[ 115 ] Jean Sibelius 's influence can be heard in the lyrical, sweeping, and stark qualities of his music.

[ 116 ] [ page needed ] Aside from composing in the Western classical tradition, his music has ties to rock, ambient music , electronic music , and world music . Early admirers of his minimalism include musicians Brian Eno and David Bowie .

[ 117 ] In the 1990s, Glass composed the aforementioned symphonies Low (1992) and Heroes (1996), thematically derived from the Bowie-Eno collaboration albums Low and "Heroes" composed in late 1970s Berlin.

Glass has collaborated with recording artists such as Paul Simon , [ 118 ] Suzanne Vega , [ 119 ] Mick Jagger , [ 120 ] Leonard Cohen , David Byrne , Uakti , Natalie Merchant , [ 121 ] S'Express (Glass remixed their track Hey Music Lover in 1989) [ 122 ] and Aphex Twin (yielding an orchestration of "Icct Hedral" in 1995 on the Donkey Rhubarb EP). Glass's compositional influence extends to musicians such as Mike Oldfield (who included parts from Glass's North Star in Platinum ), and bands such as Tangerine Dream and Talking Heads . Glass and his sound designer Kurt Munkacsi produced the American post-punk / new wave band Polyrock (1978 to the mid-1980s), as well as the recording of John Moran's The Manson Family (An Opera) in 1991, which featured punk legend Iggy Pop , and a second (unreleased) recording of Moran's work featuring poet Allen Ginsberg .

Glass counts many artists among his friends and collaborators, including visual artists ( Richard Serra , Chuck Close , Fredericka Foster ), [ 123 ] [ 124 ] writers ( Doris Lessing , David Henry Hwang , Allen Ginsberg ), film and theatre directors (including Errol Morris , Robert Wilson , JoAnne Akalaitis , Godfrey Reggio , Paul Schrader , Martin Scorsese , Christopher Hampton , Bernard Rose , and many others), choreographers ( Lucinda Childs , Jerome Robbins , Twyla Tharp ), and musicians and composers ( Ravi Shankar , David Byrne , the conductor Dennis Russell Davies , Foday Musa Suso , Laurie Anderson , Linda Ronstadt , Paul Simon , Pierce Turner , Joan La Barbara , Arthur Russell , David Bowie , Brian Eno , Roberto Carnevale , Patti Smith , Aphex Twin , Lisa Bielawa , Andrew Shapiro , John Moran , Bryce Dessner and Nico Muhly ). Among recent collaborators are Glass's fellow New Yorker Woody Allen and Stephen Colbert .

[ 125 ] Glass had begun [ clarification needed ] using the Farfisa portable organ out of convenience, [ 126 ] and he has used it in concert.

[ 127 ] It is featured on several recordings including North Star [ 128 ] and Dance Nos. 1–5 .

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Music for film [ edit ] Glass has composed many film scores, starting with the orchestral score for Koyaanisqatsi (1982), and continuing with two biopics, Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (1985, resulting in the String Quartet No. 3) and Kundun (1997) about the Dalai Lama , for which he received his first Academy Award nomination. In 1968, he composed and conducted the score for director Harrison Engle's minimalist comedy short, Railroaded, played by the Philip Glass Ensemble. This was one of his earliest film efforts.

The year after scoring Hamburger Hill (1987), Glass began a long collaboration with the filmmaker Errol Morris with his music for Morris's celebrated documentaries, including The Thin Blue Line (1988) and A Brief History of Time (1991).

[ 131 ] He continued composing for the Qatsi trilogy with the scores for Powaqqatsi (1988) and Naqoyqatsi (2002). In 1995, he composed the theme for Reggio 's short independent film Evidence . He made a cameo appearance—briefly visible performing at the piano—in Peter Weir 's The Truman Show (1998), which uses music from Powaqqatsi , Anima Mundi and Mishima , as well as three original tracks by Glass. In the 1990s, he also composed scores for Bent (1997) and the supernatural horror film Candyman (1992) and its sequel, Candyman: Farewell to the Flesh (1995), plus a film adaptation of Joseph Conrad 's The Secret Agent (1996).

In 1999, he finished a new soundtrack for the 1931 film Dracula .

The Hours (2002) earned him a second Academy Award nomination. The circular, recurring nature of Glass's music has been praised for providing stability and contrast to frequent jumps across time and geography in the film's narrative. In this way, the soundtrack has a distinctive personality, so much so that director Stephen Daldry believes Glass's music serves as "another stream of consciousness, another character" [ 132 ] in the film.

The Hours was followed by another Morris documentary, The Fog of War (2003). In the mid-2000s, Glass provided the scores to films such as Secret Window (2004), Neverwas (2005), The Illusionist and Notes on a Scandal , garnering his third Academy Award nomination for the latter. Glass's most recent film scores include No Reservations (Glass makes a brief cameo in the film sitting at an outdoor café), Cassandra's Dream (2007), Les Regrets (2009), Mr Nice (2010), the Brazilian film Nosso Lar (2010) and Fantastic Four (2015, in collaboration with Marco Beltrami ). In 2009, Glass composed original theme music for Transcendent Man , about the life and ideas of Ray Kurzweil by filmmaker Barry Ptolemy .

In the 2000s, Glass's work from the 1980s again became known to wider public through various media. In 2005, his Concerto for Violin and Orchestra (1987) was featured in the French film The Moustache , providing a tone intentionally incongruous to the banality of the movie's plot.

[ 133 ] Metamorphosis: Metamorphosis One from Solo Piano (1989) was featured in the reimagined Battlestar Galactica in the episode " Valley of Darkness " [ 134 ] and also in the final episode ("return 0") of Person of Interest . In 2008, Rockstar Games released Grand Theft Auto IV featuring Glass's "Pruit Igoe" (from Koyaanisqatsi ). "Pruit Igoe" and "Prophecies" (also from Koyaanisqatsi ) were used both in a trailer for Watchmen and in the film itself.

Watchmen also included two other Glass pieces in the score: "Something She Has To Do" from The Hours and "Protest" from Satyagraha , act 2, scene 3. In 2013, Glass contributed a piano piece "Duet" to the Park Chan-wook film Stoker which is performed diegetically in the film.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Glass contributed compositions to the feature documentary "The General & Me" by filmmaker Tiana Alexandra -Silliphant, which was showcased at Glass's "Days and Nights Festival" in 2017.

[ 137 ] In 2017, Glass scored the National Geographic Films documentary Jane (a documentary on the life of renowned British primatologist Jane Goodall ).

Glass's music was featured in two award-winning films by Russian director Andrey Zvyagintsev , Elena (2011) and Leviathan (2014).

For television, Glass composed the theme for Night Stalker (2005) and the soundtrack for Tales from the Loop (2020). Glass's "Confrontation and Rescue" (from Satyagraha ) was used in the ending of Season 3 Chapter 6 of Stranger Things (2019), whilst "Window of Appearances", "Akhnaten and Nefertiti" (from Akhnaten ) and "Prophecies" (from Koyaanisqatsi ) were used in the finale of Season 4 Volume 1 (2022).

Other business ventures [ edit ] Record labels [ edit ] The Orange Mountain Music logo In 1970, Glass and Klaus Kertess (owner of the Bykert Gallery ) formed a record label named Chatham Square Productions after the location of the studio of a Philip Glass Ensemble member Dick Landry.

[ 30 ] In 1993, Glass formed another record label, Point Music; in 1997, Point Music released Music for Airports , a live, instrumental version of Eno's composition of the same name, by Bang on a Can All-Stars. In 2002, Glass and his producer Kurt Munkacsi and artist Don Christensen founded the Orange Mountain Music company, dedicated to "establishing the recording legacy of Philip Glass" and, to date, have released sixty albums of Glass's music.

Looking Glass Studios [ edit ] In 1992, Glass built his own recording studio in New York City and named it Looking Glass Studios. In addition to Glass' own recording projects, the studio hosted recording projects of notable artists including Beck, Bjork, Sheryl Crow, The Cure, Grace Jones, Lou Reed, and Roger Waters before its closure in February 2009.

[ 138 ] Personal life [ edit ] Wordmark of Philip Glass Glass lives in New York City and in Cape Breton in Nova Scotia . He has described himself as "a Jewish- Taoist - Hindu - Toltec - Buddhist " [ 20 ] and is a supporter of the Tibetan independence movement . In 1987, he co-founded the Tibet House US with Columbia University professor Robert Thurman and the actor Richard Gere at the request of the 14th Dalai Lama .

[ 139 ] He is also chair of the magazine Tricycle: The Buddhist Review .

[ 140 ] Glass is a vegetarian.

[ 141 ] Glass has been married four times; he has four children and one granddaughter.

His first marriage was to theater director JoAnne Akalaitis (m. 1965, div. 1980), with whom he has two children: Juliet (b. 1968) and Zachary (b. 1971).

His second marriage was to Luba Burtyk (m. 1980), a physician.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] His third wife, the artist Candy Jernigan , died of liver cancer in 1991, aged 39.

Glass's fourth marriage was to restaurant manager, Holly Critchlow (m. in 2001), whom he later divorced.

[ 15 ] They had two sons, Cameron (b. 2002) and Marlowe (b. 2003).

He was romantically involved with cellist Wendy Sutter for approximately five years.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] As of December 2018 [update] , his partner was Japanese-born dancer Saori Tsukada .

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Glass is the first cousin once removed of Ira Glass , host of the radio show This American Life .

[ 148 ] Ira interviewed Glass onstage at Chicago's Field Museum ; this interview was broadcast on NPR 's Fresh Air . Ira interviewed Glass a second time at a fundraiser for St. Ann's Warehouse ; this interview was given away to public-radio listeners as a pledge-drive thank-you gift in 2010. Ira and Glass recorded a version of the composition Glass wrote to accompany his friend Allen Ginsberg 's poem " Wichita Vortex Sutra ".  In 2014, This American Life broadcast a live performance at the Brooklyn Academy of Music that included the world premier of the opera Help , a short monodrama that Philip Glass wrote for the occasion.

[ 149 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Glass playing at Palacio de Bellas Artes in Mexico City in 2018 Musical Opinion said, "Philip Glass must be one of the most influential living composers." [ 150 ] The National Endowment for the Arts , while noting that many of his operas have been produced by the world's leading opera houses said, "He is the first composer to win a wide, multigenerational audience in the opera house, the concert hall, the dance world, in film, and in popular music." [ 151 ] Classical Music Review called his opera Akhnaten "a musically sophisticated and imposing work".

[ 152 ] The New York Metropolitan Opera ' s production of Akhnaten won the Grammy Award for Best Opera Recording in 2022.

[ 153 ] Justin Davidson of New York magazine has criticized Glass, saying, "Glass never had a good idea he didn't flog to death: He repeats the haunting scale 30 mind-numbing times, until it's long past time to go home." [ 154 ] Richard Schickel of Time criticized Glass's score for The Hours , saying, "This ultimately proves insufficient to lend meaning to their lives or profundity to a grim and uninvolving film, for which Philip Glass unwittingly provides the perfect score—tuneless, oppressive, droning, painfully self-important." [ 155 ] Compositions [ edit ] Main article: List of compositions by Philip Glass Awards and nominations [ edit ] Organizations Year Category Work Result Ref.

Academy Awards 1997 Best Original Score Kundun Nominated [ 156 ] 2002 The Hours Nominated [ 157 ] 2006 Notes on a Scandal Nominated [ 158 ] BAFTA Awards 2002 Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music The Hours Won [ 151 ] Critics Choice Movie Awards 2002 Best Composer The Hours Nominated 2006 The Illusionist Won [ 159 ] Drama Desk Awards 2010 Outstanding Music in a Play The Bacchae Nominated [ 160 ] 2016 The Crucible Won [ 161 ] Golden Globe Awards 1997 Best Original Score Kundun Nominated [ 162 ] 1998 The Truman Show Won [ 162 ] 2002 The Hours Nominated [ 162 ] Grammy Awards 1987 Best Contemporary Composition Satyagraha Nominated [ 163 ] 1988 String Quartet No. 2 Nominated [ 164 ] 2004 Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media The Hours Nominated [ 165 ] 2008 Best Instrumental Composition Notes on a Sandal ("I Knew Her") Nominated [ 166 ] 2020 Trustees Award Honored [ 167 ] Primetime Emmy Awards 2004 Outstanding Music Composition for a Series Pandemic: Facing AIDS Nominated [ 168 ] Honorary awards [ edit ] Organizations Year Award Result Ref.

Musical America 1985 Musician of the Year Honored [ 169 ] Minister of Culture , France 1995 Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (France) Honored [ 170 ] American Academy of Arts and Letters 2003 Member of the Department of Music Honored [ 171 ] Palm Springs International Film Festival 2007 Frederick Loewe Award Honored [ 172 ] Fulbright Program 2009 Lifetime Achievement Award Laureate Honored [ 173 ] American Philosophical Society 2009 Honorary Member Honored [ 174 ] American Classical Music Hall of Fame 2010 Inductee Honored [ 175 ] National Endowment for the Arts 2010 Opera Honors Award Honored [ 176 ] Japan Art Association 2012 Praemium Imperiale Honored [ 177 ] Dance Magazine 2013 Award Honored [ 178 ] Juilliard School 2014 Honorary Doctor of Music Honored [ 179 ] Museum of the City of New York 2014 Louis Auchincloss Prize Honored [ 180 ] Glenn Gould Prize 2015 Laureate Award Honored [ 181 ] President of the United States 2015 National Medal of Arts Honored [ 182 ] Chicago Tribune 2016 Literary Award for memoir Words Without Music Honored [ 183 ] Carnegie Hall 2017 Richard and Barbara Debs Composer's Chair Honored [ 184 ] Society of Composers & Lyricists 2017 Lifetime Achievement Award Honored [ 185 ] John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts 2018 Kennedy Center Honors Honored [ 186 ] Recording Academy 2020 Grammy Trustees Award Honored [ 187 ] American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers 2021 Television Theme of the Year, Tales from the Loop Honored [ 188 ] BBVA Foundation 2022 Frontiers of Knowledge Award Honored [ 189 ] University of Chicago 2023 Alumni Award Honored [ 190 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Glass, Philip (1987).

Music by Philip Glass . Edited and with supplementary material by Robert T. Jones (1st ed.). New York: Harper & Row .

ISBN 0-06-015823-9 .

OCLC 15521553 .

Reprinted in 1995 by Da Capo Press ( ISBN 978-0-306-80636-0 ) with the addition of a new foreword by Glass and an updated music catalog and discography with 52 black & white photographs.

[ 191 ] —— (2015).

Words without music: a memoir . London: Faber & Faber .

ISBN 978-0-571-32373-9 .

OCLC 908632624 .

With Brumbach, Linda; Regas, Alisa E. (2023).

Philip Glass Piano Etudes: The Complete Folios 1-20 & Essays from 20 Fellow Artists . New York: Artisan Books .

ISBN 978-1648291883 .

Works about Glass [ edit ] Music with Roots in the Aether: Opera for Television (1976). Tape 2: Philip Glass. Produced and directed by Robert Ashley Philip Glass , from Four American Composers (1983); directed by Peter Greenaway A Composer's Notes: Philip Glass and the Making of an Opera (1985); directed by Michael Blackwood Einstein on the Beach: The Changing Image of Opera (1986); directed by Mark Obenhaus Philip Glass Buys a Loaf of Bread (1994); written by David Ives Looking Glass (2005); directed by Éric Darmon Glass: A Portrait of Philip in Twelve Parts (2007); directed by Scott Hicks See also [ edit ] List of ambient music artists References [ edit ] ^ "Naxos Classical Music Spotlight podcast: Philip Glass Heroes Symphony" . Archived from the original on April 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ "The Most Influential People in Classical and Dance" , New York , May 8, 2006 , retrieved November 10, 2008 ^ O'Mahony, John (November 24, 2001), "When less means more" , The Guardian , London , retrieved November 10, 2008 ^ Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia (2000), "Glass, Philip," Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., p. 659.  There, Glass is described as "today perhaps the world's most famous living composer." ^ SPIN Media LLC (May 1985).

SPIN . SPIN Media LLC. pp.

55 –.

ISSN 0886-3032 .

^ Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia (2000), "Glass, Philip," Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., p. 659. There, Glass is described as "today perhaps the world's most famous living composer." ^ Biography , PhilipGlass.com, archived from the original on August 4, 2013 , retrieved November 10, 2008 , The new musical style that Glass was evolving was eventually dubbed "minimalism". Glass himself never liked the term and preferred to speak of himself as a composer of "music with repetitive structures". Much of his early work was based on the extended reiteration of brief, elegant melodic fragments that wove in and out of an aural tapestry.

^ Smith, Ethan (January 18, 1999), "Is Glass Half Empty?" , New York , retrieved November 10, 2008 ^ Smith, Steve (September 23, 2007), "If Grant Had Been Singing at Appomattox" , The New York Times ^ Scott Hicks (2007).

Glass: A Portrait of Philip in Twelve Parts .  Event occurs at 33:20.

^ Contemporary Authors . New Revision Series. Vol. 131 (Farmington Hills, MI: Thomson Gale, 2005):169–180.

^ "Philip Glass Biography – Facts, Birthday, Life Story" . Biography.com . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Philip Glass Biography (1937–)" . Filmreference.com . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Glass, Philip (2015).

Words Without Music . W.W. Norton & Co. p. 16.

ISBN 978-0-87140-438-1 .

^ a b John O'Mahony (November 24, 2001).

"When less means more" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ Joe Staines (2010).

The Rough Guide to Classical Music . Penguin. p. 209.

ISBN 978-1-4053-8321-9 . Retrieved March 20, 2012 .

^ Maddocks, Fiona (April 26, 2015).

" Words Without Music review – Philip Glass's deft, quietly witty memoir" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 27, 2016 .

^ a b c d e f Glass, Philip.

Words Without Music: A Memoir , New York: W. W. Norton. (2016) ISBN 1-63149-143-1 ^ "Composer Philip Glass's Childhood Gig" .

The Wall Street Journal . May 12, 2015 . Retrieved June 26, 2021 .

^ a b Gordinier, Jeff (March 2008), "Wiseguy: Philip Glass Uncut" , Details , archived from the original on August 9, 2014 , retrieved November 10, 2008 ^ "Philip Glass on making music with no frills" , The Independent , London, June 29, 2007, archived from the original on August 25, 2011 , retrieved November 10, 2008 ^ Skipworth, Mark (January 31, 2011).

"Philip Glass shows no signs of easing up" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2022.

^ a b c "Philip Glass, winner of 2016 Tribune Literary Award, reflects on a life well composed" by John von Rhein, Chicago Tribune , October 26, 2016 ^ a b c d e f g h i j Schwarz 1996 , p.

[ page needed ] ^ a b Jonathan Cott, "Conversation Philip Glass on La Belle et la Bête , booklet notes to the recording, Nonesuch 1995 ^ Ev Grimes: "Interview: Education" in Kostelanetz 1999 , p. 25 ^ Potter 2000 , p. 253.

^ Kostelanetz 1999 , p. 109.

^ Wroe, Nicholas (October 13, 2007).

"Play it again ..." The Guardian . Retrieved April 19, 2016 .

^ a b c d Glass, Philip (1985), Music by Philip Glass , New York: DaCapo Press, p. 14, ISBN 0-06-015823-9 ^ a b Potter 2000 , pp. 266–269 ^ Potter 2000 , p. 255.

^ Potter 2000 , pp. 257–258.

^ Joan La Barbara: "Philip Glass and Steve Reich: Two from the Steady State School" in Kostelanetz 1999 , pp. 40–41 ^ Richard Serra, Writings Interviews , Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1994, p. 7 ^ Potter 2000 , p. 277.

^ "Philip Glass: Composer and...Taxi Driver?" .

Interlude.hk . September 26, 2015 . Retrieved November 7, 2019 .

^ Glass in conversation with Chuck Close and William Bartman, in, Joanne Kesten (ed.), The Portraits Speak: Chuck Close in conversation with 27 of his subjects, A.R.T. Press, New York, 1997, p. 170 ^ Potter 2000 , p. 252.

^ Potter 2000 , p. 340.

^ Tim Page, booklet notes to the album Einstein on the Beach , Nonesuch 1993 ^ Booklet notes to the recording Early Voice , Orange Mountain Music, 2002 ^ a b c Tim Page: "Music in 12 Parts" in Kostelanetz 1999 , p. 98 ^ a b Tim Page, liner notes to the recording of Einstein on the Beach , Nonesuch Records 1993 ^ Kostelanetz 1999 , p. 58.

^ Steffen Schleiermacher, booklet notes to his recording of Glass's "Early Keyboard Music", MDG Records, 2001 ^ Potter 2000 , p. 260.

^ Kostelanetz 1999 , p. 269.

^ David Wright, booklet notes to the first recording of the opera, released on Nonesuch Records, 1999 ^ Schwarz 1996 , p. 151.

^ Seabrook, John (March 20, 2006).

"Glass's Master Class" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved September 27, 2021 .

^ Stetson, Greta.

"Philip Glass wishes he had time to take a four-hour hike" . watchnewspapers.com. Archived from the original on February 9, 2013 . Retrieved September 9, 2009 .

^ Philip Glass, booklet notes to the Album Symphony No. 8 , Orange Mountain Music, 2006 ^ Johnson, Lawrence A. (February 9, 2008), "Singers Distinguish Themselves for Visitor" , Miami Herald , retrieved November 11, 2008 [ dead link ] ^ Booklet notes by Jody Dalton to the album Solo Piano , CBS, 1989 ^ Booklet notes by Philip Glass to the album "Music from the Screens", Point Music, 1993 ^ "But Is it Music?".

In Their Own Words; 20th-Century Composers . Episode 2. March 21, 2014. BBC.

^ Maycock 2002 , p. 71.

^ Booklet notes by Philip Glass to the album Low Symphony , Point Music, 1993 ^ Booklet notes by Philip Glass to the album Symphony No. 2 , Nonesuch, 1998 ^ Booklet notes by Philip Glass to the album Symphony No. 3 , Nonesuch, 2000 ^ Maycock 2002 , p. 90.

^ Booklet notes by Oliver Binder to "American Piano music", Initativkreis Ruhr/Orange Mountain Music 2009 ^ Paul Barnes in his booklet notes to the album "The Orphée Suite for Piano, Orange Mountain Music, 2003 ^ Clements, Andrew (June 2, 2005), "Orphée" , The Guardian , London , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Novak, Jelena (2011).

"Throwing the Voice, Catching the Body: Opera and ventriloquism in Philip Glass/ Jean Cocteau's 'La Belle et la Bête' " .

Music, Sound, and the Moving Image .

5 (2): 140.

doi : 10.3828/msmi.2011.7 .

ISSN 1753-0768 .

^ Zwiebach, Michael (October 7, 2006), "Arrested Development" , San Francisco Classical Voice , archived from the original on September 21, 2008 , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Philip Glass, booklet notes to the 1996/1997 recording of Les Enfants terribles , Orange Mountain Music, 2005 ^ "Concerto for Cello and Orchestra on ChesterNovello website" . Chesternovello.com. May 31, 2005 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Jillon Stoppels Dupree, Liner Notes to the album Concerto Project Vol.II, Orange Mountain, 2006 ^ Philip Glass, notes to the premiere recording of "Waiting for the Barbarians, Orange Mountain Music 2008 ^ "Entertainment | Philip Glass opera gets ovation" .

BBC News . September 12, 2005 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ a b Scheinin, Richard (October 7, 2007), "Philip Glass's Appomattox Unremitting, Unforgiving", San Jose Mercury News ^ Allan Kozinn , "A First Hearing for a Glass Symphony," The New York Times , November 4, 2005 ^ Ross, Alex (November 5, 2007), "The Endless Scroll" , The New Yorker , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Timothy Mangan, "A stellar premiere" , Orange County Register , September 18, 2006 ^ Mark Swed, "Taking a sounding of the Segerstrom" , Los Angeles Times , September 18, 2006 ^ Hirsch, Lisa (September 28, 2007), "Chambered Glass" , San Francisco Classical Voic , archived from the original on June 16, 2008 , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Midgette, Anne (March 9, 2008), "New CDs From Musicians Who Play the Field" , The Washington Post , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Nico Muhly , "There will be people who are horrified by these ideas" , The Guardian , May 22, 2009 ^ Brantley, Ben (December 19, 2007), " 'Beckett Shorts'; When a Universe Reels, A Baryshnikov May Fall" , The New York Times , retrieved November 11, 2008 ^ Corrina da Fonseca-Wollheim, "Where Music Meets Science" , The Wall Street Journal , November 24, 2009 ^ "Culture Monster" .

Los Angeles Times . November 19, 2009.

^ London Philharmonic Orchestra (April 17, 2010).

"London Philharmonic Orchestra April 17, 2010" . Shop.lpo.org.uk. Archived from the original on October 1, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Linda Matchan, "Glass's music keeps films moving" , Boston Globe , January 11, 2009 ^ "Maria Bachmann Schedule" . Mariabachmann.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ La Rocco, Claudia (May 5, 2011).

"Dance" .

The New York Times .

^ "Culture Monster" .

Los Angeles Times . February 25, 2011.

^ "American Composers Orchestra – Tuesday, January 31, 2012" . Carnegie Hall. Archived from the original on January 26, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Purvis, Bronwyn (January 21, 2011).

"Music is a place; Philip Glass in Hobart – ABC Hobart" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Kevin Smith, Glass's Players Warm Up for a Festival in August , The New York Times , June 13, 2011 ^ Ayala, Ted (April 9, 2012).

"LAPO and John Adams perform West coast premiere of Philip Glass' Symphony No. 9" . Bachtrack . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ "Philip Glass 'Symphony No. 9' at PhilipGlass.com" . PhilipGlass.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ "Philip Glass The Perfect American at Chester Novello Music" . ChesterNovello.com . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ a b "Philip Glass' The Perfect American to Open in Madrid" .

HuffPost . February 10, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ "Philip Glass Disney opera to get UK premiere at ENO" . BBC. April 24, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ "Repertoire & Gallery 2017 – The Perfect American" . Long Beach Opera. January 30, 2018. Archived from the original on January 31, 2018 . Retrieved January 30, 2018 .

^ Ng, David (October 12, 2013).

"Does L.A. Opera lack the guts to stage The Perfect American ?" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on December 31, 2013.

^ Woolfe, Zachary (February 1, 2013).

" The Perfect American , by Philip Glass, at Teatro Real" .

The New York Times .

^ Clements, Andrew (June 3, 2013).

" The Perfect American – review" .

The Guardian .

^ "Konzertprogramm" | Klavier-Festival Ruhr | Düsseldorf | Museum Kunstpalast | Robert-Schumann-Saal | 28. Juni 2013 | (printed program, German) ^ "Angélique Kidjo, l'Afrique et l'orchestre" .

Le Monde.fr .

Le Monde . January 17, 2014 . Retrieved February 28, 2021 .

^ Glass, Philip (2015).

Words Without Music . Liveright.

ISBN 978-0-87140-438-1 .

^ Bruckner Orchestra Linz – Celebrating Philip Glass's 80th Birthday , Carnegie Hall , January 31, 2017 ^ Symphony No. 11 , philipglass.com ^ "Dinnerstein brings a personal touch to Glass concerto premiere" . New York Classical Review. September 29, 2017 . Retrieved December 8, 2018 .

^ "Philip Glass's involvement with New Music Festival 'a huge deal' for Winnipeg symphony conductor" . CBC. January 27, 2018 . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ "Philip Glass and L.A. Phil's Fantastic Voyage Through the Music of David Bowie and Brian Eno" .

LA Weekly . January 14, 2019. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ Roy, Sanjoy (July 15, 2019).

"Tao of Glass review – golden odyssey through Philip Glass's music" .

The Guardian . Retrieved December 28, 2019 .

^ " Circus Days and Nights at Cirkus Cirkor" . CirkusCirkor.com . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ " Circus Days and Nights " . David Henry Hwang. April 7, 2022 . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ "VC Young Artists LGT Young Soloists to Premiere New Philip Glass Symphony" .

The Violin Channel . August 17, 2021 . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ "Truth in our Time - Toronto" .

National Arts Centre . Retrieved January 2, 2024 .

^ Ruel, Chris (July 11, 2023).

"Artisan Books to Release 'Philip Glass Piano Etudes: The Complete Folios 1–20 & Essays from Fellow Artists' in Fall 2023" .

OperaWire . Retrieved July 12, 2023 .

^ McKoen, Belinda (June 28, 2008), "The Sound of Glass" , The Irish Times , retrieved November 10, 2008 (subscription required) ^ Schwarz 1996 .

^ Tim Page, Liner Notes to the album "Music with Changing Parts, Nonesuch Music, 1994 ^ Simon, Paul (January 26, 2017).

" 'Swimming In A Trance-Like State': Paul Simon On Philip Glass" .

National Public Radio . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

^ "Music: Ignorant Sky" . Philip Glass. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ "Music: Film: Bent" . Philip Glass. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ "Music: Planctus" . Philip Glass. February 17, 1997. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ "S'Express on ecstasy, acid house and why drag is the new punk" .

The Guardian . May 19, 2016 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Glass, Phillip; Foster, Fredericka; Jacobs, Beth (June 4, 2018).

"The Smaller the Theater, the Faster the Music Composer, Philip Glass talks time with painter Fredericka Foster" .

nautil.us . Nautilus: Science Connected. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved August 19, 2021 .

^ Glass, Philip; Foster, Fredericka (Fall 2021).

"Music, Meditation, Painting—and Dreaming, A conversation with Philip Glass and Fredericka Foster" . Tricycle . Retrieved August 19, 2021 .

^ Episode 6006 (1/12/2010) , NoFactZone.net, January 13, 2010, archived from the original on July 5, 2011 , retrieved May 24, 2010 ^ Allan Kozinn (June 8, 2012).

"Electronic Woe: The Short Lives of Instruments" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Meet Phillip Glass" . Smithsonianmag.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2009 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Music: North Star" . Dunvagen Music Publishers. Archived from the original on March 10, 2013 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Philip Glass: Music: Dance Nos. 1–5" . Dunvagen Music Publishers. October 19, 1979. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ Philip Glass (January 31, 1937).

"Philip Glass – Credits" .

AllMusic . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ Butler, Isaac (March 16, 2018).

"Errol Morris on His Movie—and Long Friendship—With Stephen Hawking," Slate , retrieved July 30, 2018.

^ Deborah Crisp; Roger Hillman (2010).

"Chiming the Hours: A Philip Glass Soundtrack" .

Music and the Moving Image .

3 (2): 30.

doi : 10.5406/musimoviimag.3.2.0030 .

hdl : 1885/56832 .

ISSN 2167-8464 .

^ "The Moustache: Movie Review" . Archived from the original on November 5, 2012 . Retrieved September 20, 2011 .

^ Storm, Jo (2007).

Frak you! : the ultimate unauthorized guide to Battlestar Galactica . Toronto: ECW Press. p. 109.

ISBN 978-1-55022-789-5 . Retrieved January 2, 2016 .

^ "Scores on Screen. Piano Lessons: Death and Desire in Park Chan-wook's "Stoker" on Notebook" .

MUBI . September 4, 2018 . Retrieved May 21, 2019 .

^ "Hear Philip Glass' 'Duet' From Park Chan-wook's Psycho-Sexual Thriller 'Stoker' " . spinmedia.com. February 12, 2013 . Retrieved August 17, 2015 .

^ "History" .

^ Weiss, David (March 2, 2009).

"Looking Glass Studios Closes" .

MIX . Retrieved April 9, 2024 .

^ Walters, John (February 18, 2016).

"Philip Glass Menagerie: The Composer on 26 Years of the Tibet House Benefit Concert" .

Newsweek . Retrieved October 2, 2018 .

^ "About The Tricycle Foundation | Tricycle" .

tricycle.org . December 16, 2015 . Retrieved August 30, 2024 .

^ Glass, Philip (December 1994).

"Meat: To Eat It or Not" .

tricycle.org/ . Tricycle Foundation . Retrieved October 2, 2018 .

^ The International Who's Who, 1997–98 (61st ed.). Europa Publications. 1997.

ISBN 978-1-85743-022-6 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ Coe, Robert (October 25, 1981).

"Philip Glass Breaks Through" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved October 27, 2022 .

^ Star, Cathalena E. Burch Arizona Daily (November 14, 2013).

"The musical romance of Wendy Sutter and Philip Glass" .

Arizona Daily Star . Retrieved March 13, 2020 .

^ "Q&A With Composer Philip Glass and His Girlfriend, Wendy Sutter – Heart of Glass" by Rebecca Milzoff, New York , January 31, 2008. Retrieved December 18, 2019.

^ Sheridan, Wade (December 3, 2018).

"Reba McEntire, Cher lauded at Kennedy Center Honors" .

UPI . See caption for photo 8/57 . Retrieved April 3, 2020 .

^ "Photo: Composer Philip Glass arrives for Kennedy Center Honors Gala in Washington DC – WAP20181202508" .

UPI . Retrieved October 27, 2022 .

^ Solomon, Deborah (March 4, 2007).

"This American TV Show" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 10, 2008 .

^ Ira Glass (June 20, 2014).

"The Radio Drama Episode" .

This American Life (Podcast) . Retrieved September 27, 2022 .

^ Wise Music Classical: Philip Glass, Musical Opinion by Christopher Monk ^ a b Philip Glass Composer Archived May 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine The National Endowment for the Arts: 2010 Opera Honors ^ Philip Glass: Akhnaten Classical Music Review: New Releases ^ "2022 GRAMMYs Awards Show: Complete Winners & Nominations List" .

^ "Had I Never Listened Closely Enough?" .

NYMag.com . January 26, 2012 . Retrieved February 19, 2018 .

^ Schickel, Richard (December 23, 2002).

"Holiday Movie Preview: The Hours" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on November 23, 2008 . Retrieved February 19, 2018 .

^ "70th Academy Awards" .

Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . October 5, 2014 . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "75th Academy Awards" .

Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . October 5, 2014 . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "79th Academy Awards" .

Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . October 7, 2014 . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ Repstad, Laura (January 12, 2007).

"Critics choose 'Departed' " .

Variety . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Philip Glass" .

Playbill . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "Shuffle Along & She Loves Me Win Big at 2016 Drama Desk Awards" . Broadway. June 5, 2016 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ a b c "Philip Glass - Golden Globes" .

Golden Globe Awards . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "28th Annual Grammy Awards" .

Recording Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "29th Annual Grammy Awards" .

Recording Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "46th Annual Grammy Awards" .

Recording Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "50th Annual Grammy Awards" .

Recording Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "Trustees Award" .

Recording Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "Nominees / Winners 2004 Emmy Awards" .

Television Academy . Retrieved September 1, 2024 .

^ "About us: Musical America Award winners" . Musical America . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Berry, Heather (December 18, 1998).

" "Monsters of Grace 4.0" By Philip Glass and Robert Wilson Returns to UCLA March 30 In New, Fully Animated Format" . UCLA newsroom. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "About us: Musical America Award winners" . Arts And Letters . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Schreiber, Brad (January 18, 2007).

"Cinema blossoms in the desert" . Entertainment Today . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "The Fulbright Lifetime Achievement Award" .

Fulbright Association . 2018 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ "Browse Inductees" . American Classical Hall Of Fame . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "NEA Chairman Rocco Landesman Announces Recipients of the 2010 NEA Opera Honors" . June 24, 2010. Archived from the original on December 7, 2010 . Retrieved July 22, 2010 .

^ "ASCAP's Philip Glass to Receive 2012 Praemium Imperiale Arts Award for Music" . Ascap. October 4, 2012 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Dalzell, Jenny (November 1, 2013).

"Dance Magazine Award Spotlight: Philip Glass" .

Dance Magazine . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Honorary Degrees Conferred" . The Juilliard Journal. May 2014. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "The 2016 Louis Auchincloss Prize" . McNY . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Philip Glass Announced as Eleventh Glenn Gould Prize Laureate" . The Glenn Gould Foundation. April 14, 2015 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Smith, Drew (September 15, 2015).

"Philip Glass Notes" . philipglass . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Chicago, IL (2016 Chicago Tribune Literary Award / Philip Glass, Solo Piano and Discussion of Words Without Music )" . Philip Glass. Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Philip Glass The 2017–2018 Richard and Barbara Debs Composer's chair" . Carnegie Hall . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "The Society of Composers & Lyricists to Present Their Highest Honor on Prolific Composer Philip Glass" . 24–7 press release. December 10, 2017 . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Kreps, Daniel (July 25, 2018).

"Cher, Hamilton , Philip Glass to Receive Kennedy Center Honors" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ "Chicago, Roberta Flack, Isaac Hayes, Iggy Pop, John Prine, Public Enemy and Sister Rosetta Tharpe to Be Honored with Recording Academy Lifetime Achievement Award" .

GRAMMY.com . December 18, 2019.

^ "2021 ASCAP Screen Music Awards" .

ascap.com . May 17, 2021.

^ "The Frontiers of Knowledge Award goes to Philip Glass for forging a unique musical style" .

NEWS BBVA . March 23, 2022 . Retrieved May 27, 2022 .

^ "UChicago announces recipients of 2023 Alumni Awards" . February 1, 2023.

^ Philip Glass.

"Music By Philip Glass" .

philipglass.com . Retrieved March 6, 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Kostelanetz, Richard , ed. (1999).

Writings on Glass. Essays, Interviews, Criticism . Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-02-864657-6 .

(hardcover); ISBN 0-520-21491-9 (paperback).

Maycock, Robert (2002).

Glass: A Biography of Philip Glass . Sanctuary Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-86074-347-4 .

Potter, Keith (2000).

Four Musical Minimalists: La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass . Music in the Twentieth Century series. Cambridge, UK; New York City: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-48250-9 .

Schwarz, K. Robert (1996).

Minimalists . 20th-Century Composers Series. London: Phaidon Press.

ISBN 978-0-7148-3381-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bartman, William and Kesten, Joanne (eds).

The Portraits Speak: Chuck Close in Conversation with 27 of his subjects , New York: A.R.T. Press, 1997.

ISBN 978-0-923183-18-9 .

Duckworth, William (1995, 1999).

Talking Music: Conversations With John Cage, Philip Glass, Laurie Anderson, and Five Generations of American Experimental Composers . New York City: Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-306-80893-7 (1999 edition).

Gagne, Cole and Caras, Tracy (1982).

Soundpieces: Interviews with American Composers.

Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0-8108-1474-9 Knowlson, James (2004).

Damned to Fame: The Life of Samuel Beckett , New York: Grove Press.

ISBN 978-0-8021-4125-5 .

Lucier, Alvin, ed. (2018).

Eight Lectures on Experimental Music.

Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.

ISBN 9780819577634 Mertens, Wim (1988).

American minimal music : La Monte Young, Terry Riley, Steve Reich, Philip Glass (1st pbk. ed.). London: Kahn & Averill.

ISBN 978-0-912483-15-3 .

OCLC 18215156 .

Richardson, John (1999).

Singing Archaeology: Philip Glass's "Akhnaten" . Wesleyan University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8195-6317-0 .

Ross, Alex (February 13–20, 2012).

"Musical Events: Number Nine" .

The New Yorker . Vol. 88, no. 1. pp.

116– 117 . Retrieved November 13, 2014 .

Zimmerman, Walter, Desert Plants – Conversations with 23 American Musicians , Berlin: Beginner Press in cooperation with Mode Records, 2020 (originally published in 1976 by A.R.C., Vancouver). The 2020 edition includes a cd featuring the original interview recordings with Larry Austin , Robert Ashley , Jim Burton, John Cage , Philip Corner , Morton Feldman , Philip Glass, Joan La Barbara , Garrett List , Alvin Lucier , John McGuire, Charles Morrow, J.B. Floyd (on Conlon Nancarrow ), Pauline Oliveros , Charlemagne Palestine , Ben Johnston (on Harry Partch ), Steve Reich , David Rosenboom , Frederic Rzewski , Richard Teitelbaum , James Tenney , Christian Wolff , and La Monte Young .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philip Glass .

Official website Philip Glass on Bandcamp Philip Glass at AllMusic Philip Glass discography at Discogs Philip Glass at IMDb Two interviews with Glass by Bruce Duffie, February 19, 1982, and July 29, 1987 v t e Philip Glass List of compositions Compositions Music in Twelve Parts Glassworks String Quartet No. 2 ( Company ) String Quartet No. 4 ( Buczak ) The Light Passages Itaipu Songs from Liquid Days Aguas da Amazonia Operas Einstein on the Beach Satyagraha The Photographer Akhnaten The Civil Wars The Juniper Tree The Fall of the House of Usher The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 1000 Airplanes on the Roof Hydrogen Jukebox The Voyage Orphée Les Enfants terribles La Belle et la Bête Monsters of Grace White Raven In the Penal Colony Galileo Galilei The Sound of a Voice Waiting for the Barbarians Appomattox Kepler The Perfect American The Trial Symphonies No. 1 ( Low ) No. 2 No. 3 No. 4 ( "Heroes" ) No. 5 ( Choral ) No. 6 ( Plutonian Ode ) No. 7 ( Toltec ) No. 8 No. 9 No. 10 No. 11 No. 12 ( Lodger ) No. 13 Concertos Piano Concerto No. 1 ( Tirol ) Piano Concerto No. 2 ( After Lewis and Clark ) Harpsichord Concerto Violin Concerto (withdrawn) Violin Concerto No. 1 Violin Concerto No. 2 ( American Four Seasons ) Cello Concerto No. 1 Concerto Fantasy for Two Timpanists and Orchestra Film scores Koyaanisqatsi (1982) Dracula (1999) The Hours (2002) Going Upriver (2004) Roving Mars (2006) Notes on a Scandal (2007) Cassandra's Dream (2007) Fantastic Four (2015) Related articles Philip Glass Ensemble Glass: A Portrait of Philip in Twelve Parts Minimal music Robert Wilson Dennis Russell Davies David Henry Hwang Godfrey Reggio Errol Morris La Monte Young Steve Reich Terry Riley Kronos Quartet Philip Glass Buys a Loaf of Bread Category Awards for Philip Glass v t e BAFTA Award for Best Original Music 1968–2000 John Barry (1968) Mikis Theodorakis (1969) Burt Bacharach (1970) Michel Legrand (1971) Nino Rota (1972) Alan Price (1973) Richard Rodney Bennett (1974) John Williams (1975) Bernard Herrmann (1976) John Addison (1977) John Williams (1978) Ennio Morricone (1979) John Williams (1980) Carl Davis (1981) John Williams (1982) Ryuichi Sakamoto (1983) Ennio Morricone (1984) Maurice Jarre (1985) Ennio Morricone (1986) Ennio Morricone (1987) John Williams (1988) Maurice Jarre (1989) Andrea and Ennio Morricone (1990) Jean-Claude Petit (1991) David Hirschfelder (1992) John Williams (1993) Don Was (1994) Luis Bacalov (1995) Gabriel Yared (1996) Nellee Hooper , Craig Armstrong , and Marius de Vries (1997) David Hirschfelder (1998) Thomas Newman (1999) Tan Dun (2000) 2001–present Craig Armstrong and Marius de Vries (2001) Philip Glass (2002) T Bone Burnett and Gabriel Yared (2003) Gustavo Santaolalla (2004) John Williams (2005) Gustavo Santaolalla (2006) Christopher Gunning (2007) A. R. Rahman (2008) Michael Giacchino (2009) Alexandre Desplat (2010) Ludovic Bource (2011) Thomas Newman (2012) Steven Price (2013) Alexandre Desplat (2014) Ennio Morricone (2015) Justin Hurwitz (2016) Alexandre Desplat (2017) Bradley Cooper , Lady Gaga , and Lukas Nelson (2018) Hildur Guðnadóttir (2019) Jon Batiste , Trent Reznor , and Atticus Ross (2020) Hans Zimmer (2021) Volker Bertelmann (2022) Ludwig Göransson (2023) Daniel Blumberg (2024) v t e Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Score John Williams (1998) Gabriel Yared (1999) Lisa Gerrard and Hans Zimmer (2000) Howard Shore (2001) John Williams (2002) Howard Shore (2003) Howard Shore (2004) John Williams (2005) Philip Glass (2006) Jonny Greenwood (2007) A. R. Rahman (2008) Michael Giacchino (2009) Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2010) Ludovic Bource (2011) John Williams (2012) Steven Price (2013) Antonio Sánchez (2014) Ennio Morricone (2015) Justin Hurwitz (2016) Alexandre Desplat (2017) Justin Hurwitz (2018) Hildur Guðnadóttir (2019) Trent Reznor , Atticus Ross and Jon Batiste (2020) Hans Zimmer (2021) Hildur Guðnadóttir (2022) Ludwig Göransson (2023) Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2024) v t e Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music in a Play Norman L. Berman (1980) Jan A.P. Kaczmarek (1992) Ladysmith Black Mambazo (1993) Stephen Warbeck (1994) Jeanine Tesori (1999) Willy Schwarz (2002) Mark Bennett (2007) Dominic Kanza (2009) Branford Marsalis (2010) Wayne Barker (2011) Grant Olding (2012) Glen Kelly (2013) Nico Muhly (2014) Arthur Solari and Jane Shaw (2015) Philip Glass (2016) Bill Sims Jr.

(2017) Imogen Heap (2018) Jason Michael Webb and Fitz Patton (2019) Martha Redbone (2020) No Award (2021) Bill Sims Jr.

(2022) Suzan-Lori Parks (2023) Will Butler (2024) v t e Glenn Gould Prize laureates 1987 R. Murray Schafer 1990 Yehudi Menuhin 1993 Oscar Peterson 1996 Tōru Takemitsu 1999 Yo-Yo Ma 2002 Pierre Boulez 2005 André Previn 2008 José Antonio Abreu 2011 Leonard Cohen 2013 Robert Lepage 2015 Philip Glass 2018 Jessye Norman 2020 Alanis Obomsawin 2022 Gustavo Dudamel 2025 Elton John v t e Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score 1940s Life with Father – Max Steiner (1947) The Red Shoes – Brian Easdale (1948) The Inspector General – Johnny Green (1949) 1950s Sunset Boulevard – Franz Waxman (1950) September Affair – Victor Young (1951) High Noon – Dimitri Tiomkin (1952) On the Beach – Ernest Gold (1959) 1960s The Alamo – Dimitri Tiomkin (1960) The Guns of Navarone – Dimitri Tiomkin (1961) To Kill a Mockingbird – Elmer Bernstein (1962) (1963) The Fall of the Roman Empire – Dimitri Tiomkin (1964) Doctor Zhivago – Maurice Jarre (1965) Hawaii – Elmer Bernstein (1966) Camelot – Frederick Loewe (1967) The Shoes of the Fisherman – Alex North (1968) Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid – Burt Bacharach (1969) 1970s Love Story – Francis Lai (1970) Shaft – Isaac Hayes (1971) The Godfather – Nino Rota (1972) Jonathan Livingston Seagull – Neil Diamond (1973) The Little Prince – Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe (1974) Jaws – John Williams (1975) A Star is Born – Kenneth Ascher and Paul Williams (1976) Star Wars – John Williams (1977) Midnight Express – Giorgio Moroder (1978) Apocalypse Now – Carmine Coppola and Francis Ford Coppola (1979) 1980s The Stunt Man – Dominic Frontiere (1980) No Award (1981) E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial – John Williams (1982) Flashdance – Giorgio Moroder (1983) A Passage to India – Maurice Jarre (1984) Out of Africa – John Barry (1985) The Mission – Ennio Morricone (1986) The Last Emperor – David Byrne , Ryuichi Sakamoto and Cong Su (1987) Gorillas in the Mist – Maurice Jarre (1988) The Little Mermaid – Alan Menken (1989) 1990s The Sheltering Sky – Richard Horowitz and Ryuichi Sakamoto (1990) Beauty and the Beast – Alan Menken (1991) Aladdin – Alan Menken (1992) Heaven & Earth – Kitarō (1993) The Lion King – Hans Zimmer (1994) A Walk in the Clouds – Maurice Jarre (1995) The English Patient – Gabriel Yared (1996) Titanic – James Horner (1997) The Truman Show – Burkhard Dallwitz and Philip Glass (1998) The Legend of 1900 – Ennio Morricone (1999) 2000s Gladiator – Lisa Gerrard , Hans Zimmer (2000) Moulin Rouge!

– Craig Armstrong (2001) Frida – Elliot Goldenthal (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Howard Shore (2003) The Aviator – Howard Shore (2004) Memoirs of a Geisha – John Williams (2005) The Painted Veil – Alexandre Desplat (2006) Atonement – Dario Marianelli (2007) Slumdog Millionaire – A. R. Rahman (2008) Up – Michael Giacchino (2009) 2010s The Social Network – Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2010) The Artist – Ludovic Bource (2011) Life of Pi – Mychael Danna (2012) All Is Lost – Alex Ebert (2013) The Theory of Everything – Jóhann Jóhannsson (2014) The Hateful Eight – Ennio Morricone (2015) La La Land – Justin Hurwitz (2016) The Shape of Water – Alexandre Desplat (2017) First Man – Justin Hurwitz (2018) Joker – Hildur Guðnadóttir (2019) 2020s Soul – Trent Reznor , Atticus Ross , and Jon Batiste (2020) Dune – Hans Zimmer (2021) Babylon – Justin Hurwitz (2022) Oppenheimer – Ludwig Göransson (2023) Challengers – Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2024) v t e Hollywood Music in Media Award for Best Original Score in a Documentary Mark Adler (2014) Miriam Cutler (2015) Mark Adler (2016) Philip Glass (2017) Cyrille Aufort (2018) Jeff Beal (2019) Steven Price (2020) Rachel Portman (2021) Jessica Jones (2022) John Powell (2023) Ilan Eshkeri (2024) v t e Kennedy Center Honorees (2010s) 2010 Merle Haggard Jerry Herman Bill T. Jones Paul McCartney Oprah Winfrey 2011 Barbara Cook Neil Diamond Yo-Yo Ma Sonny Rollins Meryl Streep 2012 Buddy Guy Dustin Hoffman David Letterman Led Zeppelin Natalia Makarova 2013 Martina Arroyo Herbie Hancock Billy Joel Shirley MacLaine Carlos Santana 2014 Al Green Tom Hanks Patricia McBride Sting Lily Tomlin 2015 Carole King George Lucas Rita Moreno Seiji Ozawa Cicely Tyson 2016 Martha Argerich Eagles Al Pacino Mavis Staples James Taylor 2017 Carmen de Lavallade Gloria Estefan LL Cool J Norman Lear Lionel Richie 2018 Cher Philip Glass Reba McEntire Wayne Shorter Hamilton ( Lin-Manuel Miranda , Thomas Kail , Alex Lacamoire , and Andy Blankenbuehler ) 2019 Earth, Wind & Fire Sally Field Linda Ronstadt Sesame Street Michael Tilson Thomas Complete list 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s v t e Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Music 1990s Richard Horowitz and Ryuichi Sakamoto (1990) Zbigniew Preisner (1991) Zbigniew Preisner (1992) Zbigniew Preisner (1993) Howard Shore (1994) Patrick Doyle (1995) Hal Willner and The Hey Hey Club Musicians (1996) Philip Glass (1997) Elliot Goldenthal (1998) Trey Parker and Marc Shaiman (1999) 2000s Tan Dun (2000) Howard Shore (2001) Elmer Bernstein (2002) Benoît Charest (2003) Michael Giacchino (2004) Joe Hisaishi and Youmi Kimura (2005) Alexandre Desplat (2006) Glen Hansard and Marketa Irglova (2007) A. R. Rahman (2008) T Bone Burnett and Stephen Bruton (2009) 2010s Alexandre Desplat / Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2010) The Chemical Brothers (2011) Dan Romer and Benh Zeitlin (2012) T Bone Burnett (2013) Jonny Greenwood / Mica Levi (2014) Carter Burwell (2015) Justin Hurwitz , Benj Pasek and Justin Paul (2016) Jonny Greenwood (2017) Nicholas Britell (2018) Dan Levy (2019) 2020s Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2020) Alberto Iglesias (2021) M. M. Keeravani (2022) Mica Levi (2023) Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross (2024) v t e National Medal of Arts recipients 2010s & 2020s 2010 Robert Brustein Van Cliburn Mark di Suvero Donald Hall Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival Quincy Jones Harper Lee Sonny Rollins Meryl Streep James Taylor 2011 Will Barnet Rita Dove Al Pacino Emily Rauh Pulitzer Martin Puryear Mel Tillis United Service Organization (USO) André Watts 2012 Herb Alpert Lin Arison Joan Myers Brown Renée Fleming Ernest Gaines Ellsworth Kelly Tony Kushner George Lucas Elaine May Laurie Olin Allen Toussaint Washington Performing Arts Society 2013 Julia Alvarez Brooklyn Academy of Music Joan Harris Bill T. Jones John Kander Jeffrey Katzenberg Maxine Hong Kingston Albert Maysles Linda Ronstadt Billie Tsien & Tod Williams James Turrell 2014 John Baldessari Ping Chong Míriam Colón The Doris Duke Charitable Foundation Sally Field Ann Hamilton Stephen King Meredith Monk George Shirley University Musical Society Tobias Wolff 2015 Mel Brooks Sandra Cisneros Eugene O'Neill Theater Center Morgan Freeman Philip Glass Berry Gordy Santiago Jiménez Jr.

Moisés Kaufman Ralph Lemon Audra McDonald Luis Valdez Jack Whitten 2019 Alison Krauss Sharon Percy Rockefeller The Musicians of the United States Military Jon Voight 2020 Toby Keith Ricky Skaggs Mary Costa Nick Ut Earl A. Powell III 2021 Bruce Springsteen Gladys Knight Mindy Kaling Julia Louis-Dreyfus José Feliciano Vera Wang Joan Shigekawa Judith Francisca Baca Fred Eychaner Antonio Martorell The Billie Holiday Theatre The International Association of Blacks in Dance 2022 Ruth Asawa Randy Batitsa Clyde Butcher Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum Missy Elliott Flaco Jiménez Eva Longoria Idina Menzel Herbert Ohta Bruce Sagan Carrie Mae Weems 2023 Mark Bradford Ken Burns Bruce Cohen Jo Carole Lauder Spike Lee Queen Latifah Selena Quintanilla Steven Spielberg Complete list 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s v t e Minimal music Composers John Adams Louis Andriessen Gavin Bryars Philip Glass Simeon ten Holt Tom Johnson Michael Nyman Steve Reich Terry Riley La Monte Young Holy minimalism Henryk Górecki Giya Kancheli Arvo Pärt Sofia Gubaidulina John Tavener Techniques Drone Phasing Process music Repetition Compositions Clapping Music Different Trains Doctor Atomic Eight Lines Einstein on the Beach Four Organs In C It's Gonna Rain Koyaanisqatsi Phrygian Gates Piano Phase A Rainbow in Curved Air Nixon in China The Well-Tuned Piano Related articles Maximalism Postminimalism Repetitive music Totalism v t e Postmodernism Literary arts Literature Atwood Auster Ballard Calvino Chabon Coupland Delillo Dick Eco Eggers Ellis Murakami Pekar Pynchon Rushdie Spiegelman Thompson Updike Vonnegut Wallace Wolfe Works On the Road (1957) Naked Lunch (1959) Catch-22 (1961) White Noise (1985) Watchmen (1986-87) American Psycho (1991) Infinite Jest (1996) Visual arts Film and television Allen Almodóvar Anderson (PT) Anderson (Wes) Bogdanovich Burton Carax Chazelle Coen Coppola Cox Craven Cronenberg Daniels Dante De Palma Ferrara Fincher Gondry Greenaway Haynes Hertzfeldt Jarmusch Jonze Kar-Wai Kaufman Kiarostami Leone Linklater Lynch Mann Maddin McQueen Nolan Peele Ramsay Refn Romero Scorsese Scott Smith Soderbergh Tarantino Verhoeven Wachowski Waters Weerasethakul Wright Works Blade Runner (1982) Blue Velvet (1986) Seinfeld (1989-1998) The Simpsons (1989-present) Twin Peaks (1990-91) Barton Fink (1991) Pulp Fiction (1994) The Matrix (1999) Mulholland Drive (2001) Performing arts Music Adams Berio Corigliano Daugherty Eno Feldman Glass Pärt Reich Xenakis Zorn Related Ambient music Beat Generation Extreme cinema Generation X Minimal music New Hollywood New wave music New Journalism Peak TV list of shows Pictures Generation Plunderphonics Pop art Postmodern horror Post-rock Punk rock Quality television Remix culture Social thriller Vulgar auteurism Portals : Classical music Opera Biography Music Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists Museum of Modern Art BRAHMS Grammy Awards FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐j599m
Cached time: 20250818135329
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.911 seconds
Real time usage: 2.136 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15734/1000000
Revision size: 132417/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 540212/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 90164/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 635947/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.083/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12514961/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1676.037      1 -total
 43.46%  728.420      1 Template:Reflist
 20.28%  339.961     78 Template:Cite_web
  9.06%  151.885      1 Template:Infobox_person
  7.72%  129.434     14 Template:Cite_book
  5.56%   93.240     14 Template:Sfn
  5.24%   87.901     18 Template:Citation
  5.22%   87.480     19 Template:Cite_news
  4.47%   74.887      1 Template:Philip_Glass
  4.38%   73.467      1 Template:Navbox_musical_artist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24540:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818135329 and revision id 1306570851. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philip_Glass&oldid=1306570851 " Categories : Philip Glass 1937 births Living people 20th-century American classical composers 21st-century American classical composers American ambient musicians Tibetan Buddhists from the United States American contemporary classical composers American film score composers American male film score composers American musical theatre composers American opera composers American people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent Aspen Music Festival and School alumni Baltimore City College alumni Best Original Music BAFTA Award winners Classical musicians from Maryland Classical musicians from Pennsylvania Composers for carillon Composers for piano American contemporary classical music performers Converts to Buddhism EMI Classics and Virgin Classics artists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Glenn Gould Prize winners Golden Globe Award–winning musicians Jewish American artists Jewish American classical composers Jewish American film score composers Juilliard School alumni Kennedy Center honorees American male musical theatre composers American male opera composers Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters Minimalist composers Musicians from Baltimore Musicians from Pittsburgh Nonesuch Records artists Peabody Institute alumni Postmodern composers Pupils of Darius Milhaud Pupils of William Bergsma Pupils of Vincent Persichetti Recipients of the Praemium Imperiale Tibet freedom activists United States National Medal of Arts recipients University of Chicago alumni Virgin Records artists American choral composers American taxi drivers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2020 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2010 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2024 Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philip Glass 59 languages Add topic

