Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Examples 3 Questionnaire construction Toggle Questionnaire construction subsection 3.1 Question type 3.2 Question sequence 3.3 Basic rules for questionnaire item construction 3.4 Multi-item scales 4 Questionnaire administration modes 5 Questionnaire translation 6 Concerns with questionnaires 7 See also 8 Further reading 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Questionnaire 39 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gĩkũyũ 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Українська اردو 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Series of questions for gathering information For the racehorse, see Questionnaire (horse) .

A basic questionnaire in Thai A questionnaire is a research instrument that consists of a set of questions (or other types of prompts) for the purpose of gathering information from respondents through survey or statistical study. A research questionnaire is typically a mix of close-ended questions and open-ended questions. Open-ended, long-term questions offer the respondent the ability to elaborate on their thoughts. The Research questionnaire was developed by the Statistical Society of London in 1838.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although questionnaires are often designed for statistical analysis of the responses, this is not always the case.

Questionnaires have advantages over some other types of survey tools in that they are cheap, do not require as much effort from the questioner as verbal or telephone surveys, and often have standardized answers that make it simple to compile data.

[ 3 ] However, such standardized answers may frustrate users as the possible answers may not accurately represent their desired responses.

[ 4 ] Questionnaires are also sharply limited by the fact that respondents must be able to read the questions and respond to them. Thus, for some demographic groups conducting a survey by questionnaire may not be concretely feasible.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] One of the earliest questionnaires was Dean Milles' Questionnaire of 1753.

[ 6 ] Types [ edit ] A distinction can be made between questionnaires with questions that measure separate variables, and questionnaires with questions that are aggregated into either a scale or index.
Questionnaires with questions that measure separate variables, could, for instance, include questions on: preferences (e.g. political party) behaviors (e.g. food consumption) facts (e.g. gender) Questionnaires with questions that are aggregated into either a scale or index include for instance questions that measure: latent traits attitudes (e.g. towards immigration) an index (e.g. Social Economic Status) Examples [ edit ] A food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) is a questionnaire the type of diet consumed in people, and may be used as a research instrument. Examples of usages include assessment of intake of vitamins or toxins such as acrylamide .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Questionnaire construction [ edit ] Main article: Questionnaire construction Question type [ edit ] Usually, a questionnaire consists of a number of questions ( test items ) that the respondent has to answer in a set format. A distinction is made between open-ended and closed-ended questions. An open-ended question asks the respondent to formulate his own answer, whereas a closed-ended question asks the respondent to pick an answer from a given number of options. The response options for a closed-ended question should be exhaustive and mutually exclusive. Four types of response scales for closed-ended questions are distinguished: Dichotomous, where the respondent has two options. The dichotomous question is generally a "yes/no" close-ended question. This question is usually used in case of the need for necessary validation. It is the most natural form of a questionnaire.

Nominal-polytomous, where the respondent has more than two unordered options. The nominal scale, also called the categorical variable scale, is defined as a scale used for labeling variables into distinct classifications and does not involve a quantitative value or order.

Ordinal-polytomous, where the respondent has more than two ordered options (Bounded)Continuous, where the respondent is presented with a continuous scale A respondent's answer to an open-ended question is coded into a response scale afterward. An example of an open-ended question is a question where the testee has to complete a sentence (sentence completion item).

[ 9 ] Question sequence [ edit ] In general, questions should flow logically from one to the next. To achieve the best response rates , questions should flow from the least sensitive to the most sensitive, from the factual and behavioural to the attitudinal, and from the more general to the more specific.

[ citation needed ] There typically is a flow that should be followed when constructing a questionnaire in regards to the order that the questions are asked. The order is as follows: Screens Warm-ups Transitions Skips Difficult Classification Screens are used as a screening method to find out early whether or not someone should complete the questionnaire.

Warm-ups are simple to answer, help capture interest in the survey, and may not even pertain to research objectives.

Transition questions are used to make different areas flow well together.

Skips include questions similar to "If yes, then answer question 3. If no, then continue to question 5." Difficult questions are towards the end because the respondent is in "response mode." Also, when completing an online questionnaire, the progress bars lets the respondent know that they are almost done so they are more willing to answer more difficult questions.

Classification , or demographic question should be at the end because typically they can feel like personal questions which will make respondents uncomfortable and not willing to finish survey.

[ 10 ] Basic rules for questionnaire item construction [ edit ] Use statements that are interpreted in the same way by members of different subpopulations of the population of interest.

Use statements where persons that have different opinions or traits will give different answers.

Think of having an "open" answer category after a list of possible answers.

Use only one aspect of the construct you are interested in per item.

Use positive statements and avoid negatives or double negatives.

Do not make assumptions about the respondent.

Use clear and comprehensible wording, easily understandable for all educational levels Use correct spelling, grammar and punctuation.

Avoid items that contain more than one question per item (e.g. Do you like strawberries and potatoes?).

Question should not be biased or even leading the participant towards an answer.

Incorporate research questions like MaxDiff and Conjoint to help collect actionable data.

[ 11 ] Multi-item scales [ edit ] Labelled example of a multi-item psychometric scale as used in questionnaires [ 12 ] Within social science research and practice, questionnaires are most frequently used to collect quantitative data using multi-item scales with the following characteristics: [ 12 ] Multiple statements or questions (minimum ≥3; usually ≥5) are presented for each variable being examined.

Each statement or question has an accompanying set of equidistant response-points (usually 5–7).

Each response point has an accompanying verbal anchor (e.g., "strongly agree") ascending from left to right.

Verbal anchors should be balanced to reflect equal intervals between response-points.

Collectively, a set of response-points and accompanying verbal anchors are referred to as a rating scale . One very frequently-used rating scale is a Likert scale .

Usually, for clarity and efficiency, a single set of anchors is presented for multiple rating scales in a questionnaire.

Collectively, a statement or question with an accompanying rating scale is referred to as an item.

When multiple items measure the same variable in a reliable and valid way, they are collectively referred to as a multi-item scale, or a psychometric scale.

The following types of reliability and validity should be established for a multi-item scale: internal reliability , test-retest reliability (if the variable is expected to be stable over time), content validity , construct validity , and criterion validity .

Factor analysis is used in the scale development process.

Questionnaires used to collect quantitative data usually comprise several multi-item scales, together with an introductory and concluding section.

Questionnaire administration modes [ edit ] Main modes of questionnaire administration include: [ 9 ] Face-to-face questionnaire administration, where an interviewer presents the items orally.

Paper-and-pencil questionnaire administration, where the items are presented on paper.

Computerized questionnaire administration, where the items are presented on the computer.

Adaptive computerized questionnaire administration, where a selection of items is presented on the computer, and based on the answers on those items, the computer selects the following items optimized for the testee's estimated ability or trait.

Questionnaire translation [ edit ] Questionnaires are translated from a source language into one or more target languages, such as translating from English into Spanish and German. The process is not a mechanical word placement process. Best practice includes parallel translation, team discussions, and pretesting with real-life people, [ 13 ] [ 14 ] and is integrated in the model TRAPD (Translation, Review, Adjudication, Pretest, and Documentation).

[ 15 ] A theoretical framework is also provided by sociolinguistics , which states that to achieve the equivalent communicative effect as the source language, the translation must be linguistically appropriate while incorporating the social practices and cultural norms of the target language.

[ 16 ] Besides translators, a team approach is recommended in the questionnaire translation process to include subject-matter experts and persons helpful to the process.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] For example, even when project managers and researchers do not speak the language of the translation, they know the study objectives well and the intent behind the questions, and therefore have a key role in improving questionnaire translation.

[ 18 ] Concerns with questionnaires [ edit ] While questionnaires are inexpensive, quick, and easy to analyze, often the questionnaire can have more problems than benefits. For example, unlike interviews, the people conducting the research may never know if the respondent understood the question that was being asked. Also, because the questions are so specific to what the researchers are asking, the information gained can be minimal.

[ 19 ] Often, questionnaires such as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator , give too few options to answer; respondents can answer either option but must choose only one response. Questionnaires also produce very low return rates, whether they are mail or online questionnaires. The other problem associated with return rates is that often the people who do return the questionnaire are those who have a very positive or a very negative viewpoint and want their opinion heard. The people who are most likely unbiased either way typically do not respond because it is not worth their time.

One key concern with questionnaires is that they may contain quite large measurement errors.

[ 20 ] These errors can be random or systematic. Random errors are caused by unintended mistakes by respondents, interviewers, and/or coders. Systematic error can occur if there is a systematic reaction of the respondents to the scale used to formulate the survey question. Thus, the exact formulation of a survey question and its scale is crucial, since they affect the level of measurement error.

[ 21 ] Further, if the questionnaires are not collected using sound sampling techniques, often the results can be non-representative of the population—as such a good sample is critical to getting representative results based on questionnaires.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Survey methodology Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System Computer-assisted personal interviewing Enterprise Feedback Management Quantitative marketing research Questionnaire construction Structured interviewing Web-based experiments Position analysis questionnaire Further reading [ edit ] Foddy, W. H. (1994).

Constructing questions for interviews and questionnaires: Theory and practice in social research (New ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Gillham, B. (2008).

Developing a questionnaire (2nd ed.). London, UK: Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd.

Leung, W. C. (2001). "How to conduct a survey".

Student BMJ .

9 : 143– 5.

Mellenbergh, G. J.

(2008). Chapter 10: Tests and questionnaires: Construction and administration. In H. J. Adèr & G. J. Mellenbergh (Eds.) (with contributions by D. J. Hand), Advising on research methods: A consultant's companion (pp. 211–234). Huizen, The Netherlands: Johannes van Kessel Publishing.

Mellenbergh, G. J.

(2008). Chapter 11: Tests and questionnaires: Analysis. In H. J. Adèr & G. J. Mellenbergh (Eds.) (with contributions by D. J. Hand), Advising on research methods: A consultant's companion (pp. 235–268). Huizen, The Netherlands: Johannes van Kessel Publishing.

Munn, P., & Drever, E. (2004).

Using questionnaires in small-scale research: A beginner's guide . Glasgow, Scotland: Scottish Council for Research in Education.

Oppenheim, A. N. (2000).

Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude measurement (New ed.). London, UK: Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd.

Robinson, M. A. (2018). Using multi-item psychometric scales for research and practice in human resource management.

Human Resource Management , 57(3), 739–750.

https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hrm.21852 (open-access) Questionnaire are of different types as per Paul: 
1)Structured Questionnaire.
2)Unstructured Questionnaire.
3)Open ended Questionnaire.
4)Close ended Questionnaire.
5)Mixed Questionnaire.
6)Pictorial Questionnaire.

References [ edit ] ^ Gault, RH (1907).

"A history of the questionnaire method of research in psychology" .

Research in Psychology .

14 (3): 366– 383.

doi : 10.1080/08919402.1907.10532551 .

^ A copy of the instrument was published in the Journal of the Statistical Society , Volume 1, Issue 1, 1838, pages 5–13.

Fourth Annual Report of the Council of the Statistical Society of London , JSTOR i315562 ^ "The Roma have a much younger population".

OECD Economic Surveys: Slovak Republic . 2019-02-05.

doi : 10.1787/d8c7c39a-en .

ISBN 9789264311350 .

ISSN 1999-0588 .

S2CID 242796295 .

^ "questions-answers-the-international-criminal-court-may-2010".

doi : 10.1163/2210-7975_hrd-0162-0046 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Rajaee Rizi, Farid; Asgarian, Fatemeh Sadat (2022-08-24).

"Reliability, validity, and psychometric properties of the Persian version of the Tayside children's sleep questionnaire" (PDF) .

Sleep and Biological Rhythms .

21 : 97– 103.

doi : 10.1007/s41105-022-00420-6 .

ISSN 1479-8425 .

S2CID 245863909 .

^ Fox, Adam, Parochial Queries: Printed Questionnaires and the Pursuit of Natural:Knowledge in the British Isles, 1650–1800 [ permanent dead link ] , Edinburgh University ^ Smedts HP, de Vries JH, Rakhshandehroo M, et al. (February 2009). "High maternal vitamin E intake by diet or supplements is associated with congenital heart defects in the offspring".

BJOG .

116 (3): 416– 23.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0528.2008.01957.x .

PMID 19187374 .

S2CID 22276050 .

^ Hogervorst, J. G.; Schouten, L. J.; Konings, E. J.; Goldbohm, R. A.; Van Den Brandt, P. A. (2007).

"A Prospective Study of Dietary Acrylamide Intake and the Risk of Endometrial, Ovarian, and Breast Cancer" (PDF) .

Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention .

16 (11): 2304– 2313.

doi : 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-07-0581 .

PMID 18006919 . Retrieved 2013-02-18 .

^ a b Mellenbergh, G.J.

(2008). Chapter 10: Tests and Questionnaires: Construction and administration. In H.J. Adèr & G.J. Mellenbergh (Eds.) (with contributions by D.J. Hand), Advising on Research Methods: A consultant's companion (pp. 211–236). Huizen, The Netherlands: Johannes van Kessel Publishing.

^ Burns, A. C., & Bush, R. F. (2010). Marketing Research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.

^ "How to Make Questionnaire" .

SurveyKing . Retrieved 9 April 2022 .

^ a b Robinson, M. A. (2018). Using multi-item psychometric scales for research and practice in human resource management.

Human Resource Management , 57(3), 739–750.

https://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hrm.21852 (open-access) ^ "Special Issue on Questionnaire Translation" .

World Association for Public Opinion Research . 2018-08-21 . Retrieved 2023-10-21 .

^ Behr, Dorothée; Sha, Mandy (2018-07-25).

"Introduction: Translation of questionnaires in cross-national and cross-cultural research" .

Translation & Interpreting .

10 (2): 1– 4.

doi : 10.12807/ti.110202.2018.a01 .

ISSN 1836-9324 .

^ a b Harkness, Janet (2003).

Cross-cultural survey methods .

Wiley .

ISBN 0-471-38526-3 .

^ Pan, Yuling; Sha, Mandy (2019-07-09).

The Sociolinguistics of Survey Translation . London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780429294914 .

ISBN 978-0-429-29491-4 .

S2CID 198632812 .

^ Behr, Dorothe; Shishido, Kuniaki (2016).

The Translation of Measurement Instruments for Cross-Cultural Surveys (Chapter 19) in The SAGE Handbook of Survey Methodology . SAGE Publications Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-4739-5789-3 .

^ Sha, Mandy; Immerwahr, Stephen (2018-02-19).

"Survey Translation: Why and How Should Researchers and Managers be Engaged?" .

Survey Practice .

11 (2): 1– 10.

doi : 10.29115/SP-2018-0016 .

S2CID 155857898 .

^ Kaplan, R. M., & Saccuzzo, D. P. (2009). Psychological testing: Principles, applications, and issues. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth ^ Alwin, D. F. (2007). Margins of error: A study of reliability in survey measurement. Hoboken, Wiley ^ Saris, W. E. and Gallhofer, I. N. (2014). Design, evaluation, and analysis of questionnaires for survey research. Second Edition. Hoboken, Wiley.

^ Moser, Claus Adolf, and Graham Kalton. "Survey methods in social investigation." Survey methods in social investigation. 2nd Edition (1971).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Questionnaires .

Look up questionnaire in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Harmonised questions from the UK Office for National Statistics Hints for designing effective questionnaires - from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and Evaluation v t e Social survey research Data collection Collection methods Questionnaire Interview Structured Semi-structured Unstructured Couple Methodology Census Sampling frame Statistical sample Sampling for surveys Random sampling Simple random sampling Quota sampling Stratified sampling Nonprobability sampling Sample size determination Research design Panel study Cohort study Cross-sectional study Cross-sequential study Survey errors Sampling error Standard error Sampling bias Systematic errors Non-sampling error Specification error Frame error Measurement error Response errors Non-response bias Coverage error Pseudo-opinion Processing errors Data analysis Categorical data Contingency table Level of measurement Descriptive statistics Exploratory data analysis Multivariate statistics Psychometrics Statistical inference Statistical models Graphical Log-linear Structural Applications Audience measurement Demography Market research Opinion poll Public opinion Major surveys List of comparative social surveys Afrobarometer American National Election Studies Asian Barometer Survey Comparative Study of Electoral Systems Emerson College Polling Eurobarometer European Social Survey Gallup Poll General Social Survey Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey International Social Survey Latinobarómetro List of household surveys in the United States National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey New Zealand Attitudes and Values Study Suffolk University Political Research Center The Phillips Academy Poll Quinnipiac University Polling Institute World Values Survey Associations American Association for Public Opinion Research European Society for Opinion and Marketing Research International Statistical Institute Pew Research Center World Association for Public Opinion Research Category Projects Business Politics Psychology Sociology Statistics v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA 2 Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐bz2pk
Cached time: 20250812000559
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.581 seconds
Real time usage: 0.740 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3020/1000000
Revision size: 20948/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 208005/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3880/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87938/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.348/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6921052/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  591.775      1 -total
 23.22%  137.388      9 Template:Cite_journal
 22.48%  133.059      1 Template:Reflist
 21.24%  125.675     12 Template:Navbox
 12.74%   75.389      1 Template:Statistics
 12.49%   73.911      1 Template:Social_surveys
 12.20%   72.181      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 11.56%   68.417      1 Template:Short_description
  6.96%   41.167      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.36%   37.644      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:956483:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000559 and revision id 1301613963. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Questionnaire&oldid=1301613963 " Categories : Questionnaire construction Types of polling Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Questionnaire 39 languages Add topic

