Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distinguishing from other biological disciplines 2 Microbial Population Biology Gordon conference 3 See also 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Microbial population biology 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Microbial population biology is the application of the principles of population biology to microorganisms .

Distinguishing from other biological disciplines [ edit ] Microbial population biology, in practice, is the application of population ecology and population genetics toward understanding the ecology and evolution of bacteria , archaebacteria , microscopic fungi (such as yeasts ), additional microscopic eukaryotes (e.g., " protozoa " and algae ), and viruses .

Microbial population biology also encompasses the evolution and ecology of community interactions ( community ecology ) between microorganisms, including microbial coevolution and predator-prey interactions . In addition, microbial population biology considers microbial interactions with more macroscopic organisms (e.g., host - parasite interactions), though strictly this should be more from the perspective of the microscopic rather than the macroscopic organism. A good deal of microbial population biology may be described also as microbial evolutionary ecology . On the other hand, typically microbial population biologists (unlike microbial ecologists ) are less concerned with questions of the role of microorganisms in ecosystem ecology , which is the study of nutrient cycling and energy movement between biotic as well as abiotic components of ecosystems.

Microbial population biology can include aspects of molecular evolution or phylogenetics . Strictly, however, these emphases should be employed toward understanding issues of microbial evolution and ecology rather than as a means of understanding more universal truths applicable to both microscopic and macroscopic organisms. The microorganisms in such endeavors consequently should be recognized as organisms rather than simply as molecular or evolutionary reductionist model systems. Thus, the study of RNA in vitro evolution is not microbial population biology and nor is the in silico generation of phylogenies of otherwise non-microbial sequences, even if aspects of either may in some (especially unintentional) manner be analogous to evolution in actual microbial populations.

Microbial population biology can (and often does) involve the testing of more-general ecological and evolutionary hypotheses. Again, it is important to retain some emphasis on the microbe since at some point this "question-driven" microbial population biology becomes instead population biology using microorganisms. Because the point of departure of these potentially disparate emphases can be somewhat arbitrary, there exist vague and not universally accepted delimits around what the discipline of microbial population biology does and does not constitute.

Microbial Population Biology Gordon conference [ edit ] A Microbial Population Biology Gordon Research Conference is held every odd year, to date in New England (and usually in New Hampshire). The 2007 conference web page introduces the meetings as: Microbial Population Biology covers a diverse range of cutting edge issues in the microbial sciences and beyond. Firmly founded in evolutionary biology and with a strongly integrative approach, past meetings have covered topics ranging from the dynamics and genetics of adaptation to the evolution of mutation rate, community ecology, evolutionary genomics, altruism, and epidemiology.

This meeting is never dull: some of the most significant and contentious issues in biology have been thrashed out here.

A history of the meeting can be found here .

The next Microbial Population Biology Gordon conference is scheduled for 2025. Information on past (and future) meetings is summarized as follows: Past and Future GRC Microbial Population Biology Meetings year chair vice chair(s) additional information 2023 (2021 cancelled) Vaughn Cooper, Rosie Redfield Rees Kassen, Christina Burch GRC page 2019 Benjamin B Kerr Vaughn Cooper, Rosie Redfield GRC page 2017 Eva Top & Larry Forney Benjamin B Kerr GRC page 2015 Michael Travisano Eva Top & Larry Forney GRC page 2013 Paul E. Turner Michael Travisano GRC page 2011 James J. Bull Paul E. Turner GRC page 2009 Anthony M. Dean James J. Bull GRC page 2007 Paul B. Rainey Anthony M. Dean GRC page 2005 Margaret A. Riley Paul B. Rainey GRC page 2003 Siv G. E. Andersson Margaret A. Riley GRC page 2001 Lin Chao Siv G. E. Andersson GRC page 1999 Howard Ochman Richard Moxon GRC page 1997 Julian P. Adams Susan M. Rosenberg GRC page 1995 Daniel E. Dykhuizen Richard E. Lenski GRC page 1993 John Roth Rosie Redfield GRC page 1991 Allan M. Campbell Daniel E. Dykhuizen GRC page 1989 Monica Riley Conrad A. Istock GRC page 1987 Barry G. Hall Daniel E. Dykhuizen GRC page 1985 Bruce R. Levin Daniel L. Hartl Barry G. Hall GRC page See also [ edit ] Microbial cooperation Microbial consortium Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop External links [ edit ] Microbial Population Biology Phage meetings Human microbiome project Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microbial_population_biology&oldid=1304930534 " Categories : Microbial population biology Environmental microbiology Population ecology Evolutionary biology This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 01:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Microbial population biology 1 language Add topic

