Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts and range 2 Use 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Lincos language 20 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Чӑвашла Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano עברית Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Nederlands 日本語 Polski Română Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Constructed language This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lincos language" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lincos Created by Hans Freudenthal Date 1960 Setting and usage search for extraterrestrial intelligence Purpose Constructed language engineered language Lincos Sources a priori Language codes ISO 639-3 None ( mis ) Glottolog None IETF art-x-lincos Lincos (an abbreviation of the Latin phrase lingua cosmica ) is a constructed language first described in 1960 by Dr.

Hans Freudenthal in his book Lincos: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse, Part 1 . It is a language designed to be understandable by any possible intelligent extraterrestrial life form, for use in interstellar radio transmissions.

[ 1 ] Freudenthal considered that such a language should be easily understood by beings not acquainted with any Earthling syntax or language. Lincos was designed to be capable of encapsulating "the whole bulk of our knowledge".

[ 2 ] Concepts and range [ edit ] The Lincos " dictionary " is intended to be transmitted first before any additional messages. It teaches natural numbers by a series of repeated pulses, separated by pauses. It then teaches >, <, =, +, -, by examples such as . . . . . > . . .

(an extended pause is shown around > in this example so as to suggest to an alien that > is a new separate symbol; otherwise, an alien might think that the whole pattern is a new symbol of unknown meaning). In introducing =, unary notation is shown for numbers: .

= 1, . .

= 2, and so on. This progresses to multiplication, division, variables, and constants, then propositional logic , set theory , and first-order logic . The dictionary tries to introduce questions by leaving mathematical expressions unsolved (e.g., ? x x + 101 = 11).

[ citation needed ] The next section of the Lincos dictionary introduces a word for second , "Sec", by playing pulses of various lengths, followed by Sec, and the number of seconds, "until the receiver may be expected to remark that the numbers... are proportional to the durations", [ 3 ] thus teaching both that Sec is a unit of time, and exactly how long it is. It then introduces means for measuring durations, referring to moments in time, and talking about past and future events.

[ citation needed ] Freudenthal's third section is perhaps the most complex, and attempts to convey the concepts and language necessary to describe behavior and conversation between individuals. It uses examples to introduce actors speaking to each other, asking questions, disapproving, quoting other people, knowing and wanting things, promising, and playing. The first steps (having already introduced sets of numbers and questions) are to introduce some new symbols (distinctive patterns of pulses), say that they are NOT numbers, and transmit sequences showing two of these new symbols separated by the word "Inq" (inquiry), followed by a question about an equation, then the symbols reversed, followed by the answer (example below). It is thus expected that, after many repetitions, the recipient will determine that these new symbols are entities asking and answering the questions, rather than some other context for the questions.

[ citation needed ] Finally, the fourth section describes the concepts and language relating to mass , space , and motion . This last section goes so far as to describe physical features of human beings and of the Solar System .

[ 1 ] A second book by Freudenthal, planned but never written, would have added four more sections to the dictionary: "Matter", "Earth", "Life", and "Behavior 2". Other researchers have since extended the language somewhat on their own. One example is CosmicOS . Another is a second-generation Lingua Cosmica [ 4 ] developed by the Dutch-Swedish astronomer and mathematician Alexander Ollongren [ 5 ] of Leiden University , using constructive logic .

[ 1 ] Freudenthal's book on Lincos discusses it with many technical words from linguistic and logical theory, usually without defining them, which may have reduced its general interest, though the main chapters can be understood without these technical terms: appellatives, binding, formalization, function, lexicology, logistical, ostensive, quasi-general, semantics, syntax, variables, etc.

[ citation needed ] Use [ edit ] For decades, no actual transmissions were made using Lincos; it remained largely a theoretical exercise, until Canadian astrophysicists Yvan Dutil and Stéphane Dumas , working at the Canadian Defense Research Establishment , created a noise-resistant coding system for messages aimed at communicating with extraterrestrial civilizations .

[ citation needed ] In 1999, the astrophysicists encoded a message in Lincos and used the Yevpatoria RT-70 radio telescope in Ukraine to beam it towards close stars. This is known as Cosmic Call . The experiment was repeated (using other close stars as target) in 2003. The message was a series of pages describing some basic mathematics, physics and astronomy.

[ 6 ] The Dutil–Dumas experiment was promoted by an organization called Encounter 2001 .

[ 7 ] Some researchers have explored the similar issues in communicating with intelligent animals such as cetaceans .

[ citation needed ] Lincos messages (even if sent by pulses of sound rather than radio) are complex and need to reach the most patient, logically oriented members of the target species. A far simpler approach aimed at average members of a species can cover numbers, >, <, =, +, -, and time.

[ citation needed ] Examples [ edit ] An example of Lincos from section 3 of Freudenthal's book, showing one individual asking another individual questions: [ citation needed ] Lincos text Meaning Ha Inq Hb ?

x 2 x =5 Ha says to Hb: What is the x such that 2x=5?

Hb Inq Ha 5/2 Hb says to Ha: 5/2.

Ha Inq Hb Ben Ha says to Hb: Good.

Ha Inq Hb ?

x 4 x =10 Ha says to Hb: What is the x such that 4x=10?

Hb Inq Ha 10/4 Hb says to Ha: 10/4.

Ha Inq Hb Mal Ha says to Hb: Bad.

Hb Inq Ha 1/4 Hb says to Ha: 1/4.

Ha Inq Hb Mal Ha says to Hb: Bad.

Hb Inq Ha 5/2 Hb says to Ha: 5/2.

Ha Inq Hb Ben Ha says to Hb: Good.

Note the difference between "good" and "bad" as compared to "true" and "false"; 10/4 is a true answer to the question, so Ver ("true") would be a valid response, but since it wasn't reduced to lowest terms, it wasn't what Ha wanted and so he responded Mal ("bad") instead. The book separately teaches Ver and Fal for true and false.

[ citation needed ] Another example, showing meta-conversation: [ citation needed ] Lincos text Meaning Ha Inq Hb ?

x 4 x =10 Ha says to Hb: What is the x such that 4x=10?

Hb Inq Hc ?

y y Inq Hb ?

x 4 x =10 Hb says to Hc: Who asked me for the x such that 4x=10?

Hc Inq Hb Ha Hc says to Hb: Ha.

See also [ edit ] Constructed languages portal Active SETI Alien language METI (Messaging Extraterrestrial Intelligence) SETI References [ edit ] ^ a b c Oberhaus, Daniel (2019-09-27).

Extraterrestrial Languages .

MIT Press .

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/11229.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-262-35527-8 .

OCLC 1142708941 .

^ Nidditch, P. (1962).

"Lincos. Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse. Part 1. By H. Freudenthal. Pp. 224. 45s. 1960. (North Holland Publishing Co.) (Review)" .

The Mathematical Gazette .

46 (356): 164.

doi : 10.2307/3611676 .

JSTOR 3611676 .

S2CID 60625617 . Retrieved 20 June 2022 .

^ Freudenthal, Hans (1960).

Lincos, Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse . Amsterdam: North-Holland .

^ "This is the index page of Dr. Alexander Ollongren's home page" .

alexanderollongren.nl .

^ Prof. Allen Tough.

"Invitation to ETI: Alexander Ollongren" .

ieti.org .

^ Webb, Stephen Where Is Everybody?

, Praxis Publishing Ltd, 2002, p. 260 ^ "Encounter 2001, promoters of the experiment by Dutil and Dumas which encoded a message in Lincos and beamed it towards close stars" . Archived from the original on 2015-09-18.

Bibliography [ edit ] Freudenthal, Hans (1960).

Lincos: Design of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse . Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Ollongren, Alexander (2013).

Astrolinguistics . New York: Springer.

Bibcode : 2013adls.book.....O .

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Lincos language Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Were it Perfect, Would it Work Better? Survey of a Language for Cosmic Intercourse (Bruno Bassi) v t e Constructed languages Classification Artistic Fictional Language game International auxiliary Zonal Engineered Experimental Musical Philosophical Specific languages by group International auxiliary Babm Blissymbols Bolak Communicationssprache Esperanto Adjuvilo Arcaicam Esperanto II Ido Mundolinco Reformed Romániço Universal other esperantidos Glosa Interglossa Idiom Neutral Intal Interlingua Interlingue International Sign Kotava Langue nouvelle Latino sine flexione Lingua Franca Nova Lingwa de planeta Mondial Neo Nal Bino Novial Pasilingua Sambahsa Solresol Sona Unish Universalglot Uropi Volapük Zonal Afrihili Budinos Efatese Eurolengo Guosa Ortatürk Pan-Germanic language Tutonish Pan-Romance language Neolatino Romance Romanid Pan-Slavic language Interslavic Iazychie Runyakitara Wede Weltdeutsch Engineered aUI Basic English Dutton Speedwords Ithkuil Kalaba-X Astrolinguistics Lincos Lingua generalis Loglan Logopandecteision Lojban Real Character Ro Toki Pona Viossa Fictional and other artistic Atlantean Belter Creole Brithenig Chakobsa Dritok Dothraki Elvish languages Enchanta Kēlen Kiliki Klingon Kobaïan Láadan Lapine Loxian Lydnevi Mänti Middle-earth languages Adûnaic Quenya Sindarin Black Speech Khuzdul Valarin Westron Naʼvi Nadsat Newspeak Simlish Spocanian Star Wars languages Syldavian Talossan Teonaht Tsolyáni Utopian Valyrian Venedic Verdurian Wenja Ritual and other Balaibalan Damin Enochian Eskayan Kukurá Lingua ignota Medefaidrin Myska Palawa kani Yerkish Zaum Neography Constructed script Esperanto orthography Sitelen Pona Tolkien's scripts Cirth Sarati Tengwar Study Esperantology A Secret Vice Bridge of Words Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues In the Land of Invented Languages La Ricerca della Lingua Perfetta nella Cultura Europea Comparisons Esperanto/Ido Esperanto/Interlingua Esperanto/Novial Ido/Interlingua Ido/Novial Interlingue/Interlingua Lojban/Loglan List of constructed languages List of language creators Portal v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e Interstellar communications Programs Active SETI Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Messages List of interstellar radio messages A Message from Earth Across the Universe Arecibo message Bracewell probe Cosmic Call CosmicOS Hello from Earth Pioneer plaque Teen Age Message Voyager Golden Record People Frank Drake Ann Druyan Hans Freudenthal Sebastian von Hoerner Nikolai Kardashev Jon Lomberg Carl Sagan Linda Salzman Sagan Iosif Shklovsky Aleksandr Zaitsev Other Alien language Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication Astrobiology Astrolinguistics Drake equation Extraterrestrial life Lincos Fermi paradox Prix Guzman San Marino Scale Category Space Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lincos_language&oldid=1292040614 " Categories : Constructed languages Engineered languages Interstellar messages Knowledge representation languages Search for extraterrestrial intelligence 1960 introductions Constructed languages introduced in the 1960s Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Languages without Glottolog code Language articles with IETF language tag Conlangs without ISO 639-3 code Languages with neither ISO nor Glottolog code All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 21:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lincos language 20 languages Add topic

