Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy 2 History and discovery 3 Genome Toggle Genome subsection 3.1 Viral polymerase 3.2 Envelope proteins 4 Replication 5 Structure 6 Evolution Toggle Evolution subsection 6.1 Nackednaviridae 7 Cell tropism 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Hepadnaviridae 22 languages العربية Беларуская Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano Қазақша Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hepadnavirus ) Family of viruses Hepadnaviridae TEM micrograph showing Hepatitis B virus virions Virus classification (unranked): Virus Realm: Riboviria Kingdom: Pararnavirae Phylum: Artverviricota Class: Revtraviricetes Order: Blubervirales Family: Hepadnaviridae Hepadnaviridae [ a ] is a family of viruses .

[ 1 ] Humans, apes, and birds serve as natural hosts. The family contains five genera.

[ 2 ] Its best-known member is hepatitis B virus . Diseases associated with this family include: liver infections, such as hepatitis, hepatocellular carcinomas (chronic infections), and cirrhosis.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is the sole accepted family in the order Blubervirales .

Taxonomy [ edit ] The following genera are recognized: [ 4 ] Avihepadnavirus Orthohepadnavirus Herpetohepadnavirus Metahepadnavirus Parahepadnavirus History and discovery [ edit ] Although liver diseases transmissible among human populations were identified early in the history of medicine, the first known hepatitis with a viral etiological agent was Hepatitis A, in the picornaviridae family.

Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) was identified as an infection distinct from Hepatitis A through its contamination of yellow fever vaccine . The vaccine contained human serum as a stabilizing agent which was HBV-infected.

[ 5 ] HBV was identified as a new DNA virus in the 1960s, followed a couple of decades later by the discovery of the flavivirus hepatitis C.

HBV was first identified in the lab as the "Australia agent" by Blumberg and colleagues in the blood of an Aboriginal transfusion patient. This work earned Blumberg the 1976 Nobel Prize in Medicine.

[ citation needed ] Genome [ edit ] The genome organisation of HBV; the genes overlap Hepadnaviruses have very small genomes of partially double-stranded, partially single stranded circular DNA (pdsDNA). The genome consists of two strands, a longer negative-sense strand and a shorter and positive-sense strand of variable length.  In the virion these strands are arranged such that the two ends of the long strand meet but are not covalently bonded together.  The shorter strand overlaps this divide and is connected to the longer strand on either side of the split through a direct repeat (DR) segment that pairs the two strands together.  In replication, the viral pdsDNA is converted in the host cell nucleus to covalently-closed-circular DNA (cccDNA) by the viral polymerase.

[ citation needed ] Replication involves an RNA intermediate, as in viruses belonging to group VII of Baltimore classification . Four main open reading frames are encoded (ORFs) and the virus has four known genes which encode seven proteins:  the core capsid protein, the viral polymerase , surface antigens —preS1, preS2, and S, the X protein and HBeAg.  The X protein is thought to be non-structural. Its function and significance are poorly understood but it is suspected to be associated with host gene expression modulation.

[ citation needed ] Viral polymerase [ edit ] Members of the family Hepadnaviridae encode their own polymerase, rather than co-opting host machinery as some other viruses do.  This enzyme is unique among viral polymerases in that it has reverse transcriptase activity to convert RNA into DNA to replicate the genome (the only other human-pathogenic virus family encoding a polymerase with this capability is Retroviridae ), RNAse activity (used when the DNA genome is synthesized from pgRNA that was packaged in virions for replication to destroy the RNA template and produce the pdsDNA genome), and DNA-dependent-DNA-polymerase activity (used to create cccDNA from pdsDNA in the first step of the replication cycle).

[ citation needed ] Envelope proteins [ edit ] The hepatitis envelope proteins are composed of subunits made from the viral preS1, preS2, and S genes.  The L (for "large") envelope protein contains all three subunits.  The M (for "medium") protein contains only preS2 and S. The S (for "small") protein contains only S.  The genome portions encoding these envelope protein subunits share both the same frame and the same stop codon, generating nested transcripts on a single open reading frame.  The pre-S1 is encoded first (closest to the 5' end), followed directly by the pre-S2 and the S.  When a transcript is made from the beginning of the pre-S1 region, all three genes are included in the transcript and the L protein is produced. When the transcript starts after the pro-S1 at the beginning of the pre-S2 the final protein contains the pre-S2 and S subunits only and therefore is an M protein. The smallest envelope protein containing just the S subunit is made most because it is encoded closest to the 3' end and comes from the shortest transcript.   These envelope proteins can assemble independently of the viral capsid and genome into non-infectious virus-like particles that give the virus a pleomorphic appearance and promote a strong immune response in hosts.

[ citation needed ] Replication [ edit ] Hepadnaviruses replicate through an RNA intermediate (which they transcribe back into cDNA using reverse transcriptase ). The reverse transcriptase becomes covalently linked to a short 3- or 4-nucleotide primer.

[ 6 ] Most hepadnaviruses will only replicate in specific hosts, and this makes experiments using in vitro methods very difficult.

The virus binds to specific receptors on cells and the core particle enters the cell cytoplasm . This is then translocated to the nucleus, where the partially double stranded DNA is 'repaired' by the viral polymerase to form a complete circular dsDNA genome (called covalently-closed-circular DNA or cccDNA). The genome then undergoes transcription by the host cell RNA polymerase and the pregenomicRNA (pgRNA) is sent out of the nucleus.  The pgRNA is inserted into an assembled viral capsid containing the viral polymerase.  Inside this capsid the genome is converted from RNA to pdsDNA through activity of the polymerase as an RNA-dependent-DNA-polymerase and subsequently as an RNAse to eliminate the pgRNA transcript.  These new virions either leave the cell to infect others or are immediately dismantled so the new viral genomes can enter the nucleus and magnify the infection.  The virions that leave the cell egress through budding.

[ citation needed ] Genus Host details Tissue tropism Entry details Release details Replication site Assembly site Transmission Avihepadnavirus Birds Hepatocytes Cell receptor endocytosis Budding Nucleus Cytoplasm Vertical: parental; sex; blood Orthohepadnavirus Humans; mammals Hepatocytes Cell receptor endocytosis Budding Nucleus Cytoplasm Vertical: parental; sex; blood Structure [ edit ] Viruses in Hepadnaviridae are enveloped, with spherical geometries, and T=4 symmetry. The diameter is around 42 nm. Genomes are circular, around 3.2kb in length. The genome codes for 7 proteins.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Genus Structure Symmetry Capsid Genomic arrangement Genomic segmentation Avihepadnavirus Icosahedral T=4 Enveloped Circular Monopartite Orthohepadnavirus Icosahedral T=4 Enveloped Circular Monopartite Evolution [ edit ] Based on the presence of viral genomes in bird DNA it appears that the hepadnaviruses evolved > 82 million years ago .

[ 7 ] Birds may be the original hosts of the Hepadnaviridae with mammals becoming infected after a bird (see host switch ).

Endogenous hepatitis B virus genomes have been described in crocodilian , snake and turtle genomes.

[ 8 ] This suggests that these viruses have infected vertebrates for over 200 million years ago .

[ citation needed ] Hepadnaviruses have been described in fish and amphibians also.

[ 9 ] This suggests that this family has co-evolved with the vertebrates.

[ citation needed ] Phylogenetic trees suggest that the bird viruses originated from those infecting reptiles. Those affecting mammals appear to be more closely related to those found in fish.

[ 10 ] Nackednaviridae [ edit ] A proposed family of viruses – the Nackednaviridae – has been isolated from fish. This family has a similar genomic organisation to that of members of the family Hepadnaviridae . These two families separated over 400 million years ago , suggesting an ancient origin for the family Hepadnaviridae .

[ 10 ] Viruses in the family have non-enveloped, isosahedral structure with T=3 symmetry, smaller than typical Hepadnaviridae virions (about 5% of the latter show a T=3 symmetry). The circular, monopartite genome is about 3 kb much like Hepadnaviridae . The envelop protein S is accordingly not present, likely the ancestral state by sequence analysis. Unlike Hepadnaviridae viruses that usually diverge alongside their hosts, viruses in the family jump hosts more frequently.

[ 10 ] The "type" for this family is African cichlid nackednavirus'(ACNDV), formerly African cichlid hepadnavirus (ACHBV), a proposed and not-yet-accepted species.

[ 9 ] Cell tropism [ edit ] Hepadnaviruses, as their "hepa" name implies, infect liver cells and cause hepatitis.  This is true not only of the human pathogen Hepatitis B Virus but also the hepadnaviruses that infect other organisms.  The "adhesion" step of the dynamic phase—in which an exterior viral protein stably interacts with a host cell protein—determines cell tropism.  In the case of HBV the host receptor is human sodium taurocholate receptor ( NTCP ), a mediator of bile acid uptake, and the virus anti-receptor is the abundant HB-AgS envelope protein.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Transmission of hepadnaviruses Notes [ edit ] ^ Etymology – portmanteau of hepa (liver: reference to Hepatitis B the primary human member) DNA virus.

References [ edit ] ^ Magnius, L; Mason, WS; Taylor, J; Kann, M; Glebe, D; Dény, P; Sureau, C; Norder, H; ICTV Report Consortium (June 2020).

"ICTV Virus Taxonomy Profile: Hepadnaviridae " .

The Journal of General Virology .

101 (6): 571– 572.

doi : 10.1099/jgv.0.001415 .

PMC 7414443 .

PMID 32416744 .

^ a b c "ICTV Report Hepadnaviridae" .

^ a b "Viral Zone" . ExPASy . Retrieved 15 June 2015 .

^ "Virus Taxonomy: 2024 Release" . International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "World War II Hepatitis Outbreak Was Biggest in History" .

AP NEWS . Retrieved 21 June 2023 .

^ Shin MK, Lee J, Ryu WS (June 2004).

"A novel cis-acting element facilitates minus-strand DNA synthesis during reverse transcription of the hepatitis B virus genome" .

Journal of Virology .

78 (12): 6252– 62.

doi : 10.1128/JVI.78.12.6252-6262.2004 .

PMC 416504 .

PMID 15163718 .

^ Suh A, Brosius J, Schmitz J, Kriegs JO (2013).

"The genome of a Mesozoic paleovirus reveals the evolution of hepatitis B viruses" .

Nature Communications .

4 : 1791.

Bibcode : 2013NatCo...4.1791S .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms2798 .

PMID 23653203 .

^ Suh A, Weber CC, Kehlmaier C, Braun EL, Green RE, Fritz U, Ray DA, Ellegren H (December 2014).

"Early Mesozoic coexistence of amniotes and hepadnaviridae" .

PLOS Genetics .

10 (12): e1004559.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004559 .

PMC 4263362 .

PMID 25501991 .

^ a b Dill JA, Camus AC, Leary JH, Di Giallonardo F, Holmes EC, Ng TF (September 2016).

"Distinct Viral Lineages from Fish and Amphibians Reveal the Complex Evolutionary History of Hepadnaviruses" .

Journal of Virology .

90 (17): 7920– 33.

doi : 10.1128/JVI.00832-16 .

PMC 4988138 .

PMID 27334580 .

^ a b c Lauber C, Seitz S, Mattei S, Suh A, Beck J, Herstein J, Börold J, Salzburger W, Kaderali L, Briggs JA, Bartenschlager R (September 2017).

"Deciphering the Origin and Evolution of Hepatitis B Viruses by Means of a Family of Non-enveloped Fish Viruses" .

Cell Host & Microbe .

22 (3): 387–399.e6.

doi : 10.1016/j.chom.2017.07.019 .

PMC 5604429 .

PMID 28867387 .

^ Yan H, Zhong G, Xu G, He W, Jing Z, Gao Z, Huang Y, Qi Y, Peng B, Wang H, Fu L, Song M, Chen P, Gao W, Ren B, Sun Y, Cai T, Feng X, Sui J, Li W (November 2012).

"Sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide is a functional receptor for human hepatitis B and D virus" .

eLife .

1 : e00049.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.00049 .

PMC 3485615 .

PMID 23150796 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hepadnaviridae .

Wikispecies has information related to Hepadnaviridae .

ICTV Report: Hepadnaviridae Viralzone : Hepadnaviridae " Hepadnaviridae " .

NCBI Taxonomy Browser . 10404.

v t e Microbiology : Virus History Introduction Social history of viruses Virology Components Capsid Viral envelope Viral protein Viral life cycle Viral entry Viral replication Viral shedding Viroplasm Virus latency Lytic cycle Lysogenic cycle Genetics Antigenic drift Antigenic shift Phenotype mixing Reassortment Viral evolution By host Animal virus Bacteriophage Virophage Human virome Mycovirus Plant virus Other Antiviral drug Giant virus Helper virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus Laboratory diagnosis of viral infections Marine viruses Neurotropic virus Oncovirus Satellites Viral disease Viral load Virus-like particle Virus classification Virus quantification Virome Virosphere Portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Baltimore ( virus classification ) DNA I: dsDNA viruses Adnaviria Zilligvirae Taleaviricota Tokiviricetes Ligamenvirales Lipothrixviridae Rudiviridae Primavirales Tristromaviridae Duplodnaviria Heunggongvirae Peploviricota Herviviricetes Herpesvirales Alloherpesviridae Herpesviridae Malacoherpesviridae Uroviricota Caudoviricetes Caudovirales Ackermannviridae Autographiviridae Chaseviridae Demerecviridae Drexlerviridae Guelinviridae Herelleviridae Myoviridae Podoviridae Rountreeviridae Salasmaviridae Schitoviridae Siphoviridae Zobellviridae Monodnaviria Shotokuvirae Cossaviricota Papovaviricetes Sepolyvirales Polyomaviridae Zurhausenvirales Papillomaviridae Varidnaviria Bamfordvirae Nucleocytoviricota Pokkesviricetes Asfuvirales Asfarviridae Chitovirales Poxviridae Megaviricetes Algavirales Phycodnaviridae Imitervirales Mimiviridae Pimascovirales Ascoviridae Iridoviridae Marseilleviridae Preplasmiviricota Maveriviricetes Priklausovirales Lavidaviridae Polintoviricetes Orthopolintovirales Adintoviridae Tectiliviricetes Belfryvirales Turriviridae Kalamavirales Tectiviridae Rowavirales Adenoviridae Vinavirales Corticoviridae Helvetiavirae Dividoviricota Laserviricetes Halopanivirales Matshushitaviridae Simuloviridae Sphaerolipoviridae Unassigned Naldaviricetes Lefavirales Baculoviridae Hytrosaviridae Nudiviridae Unassigned Nimaviridae Unassigned Families : Ampullaviridae Bicaudaviridae Clavaviridae Fuselloviridae Globuloviridae Guttaviridae Halspiviridae Ovaliviridae Plasmaviridae Polydnaviridae Portogloboviridae Thaspiviridae Genera : Dinodnavirus Rhizidiovirus II: ssDNA viruses Monodnaviria Loebvirae Hofneiviricota Faserviricetes Tubulavirales Inoviridae Paulinoviridae Plectroviridae Sangervirae Phixviricota Malgrandaviricetes Petitvirales Microviridae Shotokuvirae Commensaviricota Cardeaviricetes Sanitavirales Anelloviridae Cossaviricota Mouviricetes Polivirales Bidnaviridae Quintoviricetes Piccovirales Parvoviridae Cressdnaviricota Arfiviricetes Baphyvirales Bacilladnaviridae Cirlivirales Circoviridae Cremevirales Smacoviridae Mulpavirales Metaxyviridae Nanoviridae Recrevirales Redondoviridae Repensiviricetes Geplafuvirales Geminiviridae Genomoviridae Trapavirae Saleviricota Huolimaviricetes Haloruvirales Pleolipoviridae Varidnaviria Abedenavirae Produgelaviricota Ainoaviricetes Lautamovirales Finnlakeviridae Unassigned Families : Spiraviridae RNA III: dsRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Duplornaviricota Chrymotiviricetes Ghabrivirales Chrysoviridae Megabirnaviridae Quadriviridae Totiviridae Resentoviricetes Reovirales Reoviridae Vidaverviricetes Mindivirales Cystoviridae Pisuviricota Duplopiviricetes Durnavirales Amalgaviridae Curvulaviridae Hypoviridae Picobirnaviridae Partitiviridae Unassigned Families : Birnaviridae Polymycoviridae Genera : Botybirnavirus IV: (+)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Kitrinoviricota Alsuviricetes Hepelivirales Alphatetraviridae Benyviridae Hepeviridae Matonaviridae Martellivirales Bromoviridae Closteroviridae Endornaviridae Kitaviridae Mayoviridae Togaviridae Virgaviridae Tymovirales Alphaflexiviridae Betaflexiviridae Deltaflexiviridae Gammaflexiviridae Tymoviridae Flasuviricetes Amarillovirales Flaviviridae Magsaviricetes Nodamuvirales Nodaviridae Sinhaliviridae Tolucaviricetes Tolivirales Carmotetraviridae Luteoviridae Tombusviridae Lenarviricota Leviviricetes Norzivirales Atkinsviridae Duinviridae Fiersviridae Solspiviridae Timlovirales Blumeviridae Steitzviridae Amabiliviricetes Wolframvirales Narnaviridae Howeltoviricetes Cryppavirales Mitoviridae Miaviricetes Ourlivirales Botourmiaviridae Pisuviricota Pisoniviricetes Nidovirales Abyssoviridae Arteriviridae Cremegaviridae Coronaviridae Euroniviridae Gresnaviridae Medioniviridae Mesoniviridae Mononiviridae Nanghoshaviridae Nanhypoviridae Olifoviridae Roniviridae Tobaniviridae Picornavirales Picornaviridae Marnaviridae Solinviviridae Caliciviridae Iflaviridae Secoviridae Dicistroviridae Polycipiviridae Sobelivirales Alvernaviridae Barnaviridae Solemoviridae Stelpaviricetes Patatavirales Potyviridae Stellavirales Astroviridae Unassigned Families : Permutotetraviridae Sarthroviridae V: (–)ssRNA viruses Riboviria Orthornavirae Negarnaviricota Chunqiuviricetes Muvirales Qinviridae Ellioviricetes Bunyavirales Cruliviridae Arenaviridae Fimoviridae Hantaviridae Leishbuviridae Mypoviridae Nairoviridae Peribunyaviridae Phasmaviridae Phenuiviridae Tospoviridae Wupedeviridae Insthoviricetes Articulavirales Amnoonviridae Orthomyxoviridae Milneviricetes Serpentovirales Aspiviridae Monjiviricetes Jingchuvirales Aliusviridae Chuviridae Crepuscuviridae Myriaviridae Natareviridae Mononegavirales Artoviridae Bornaviridae Filoviridae Lispiviridae Mymonaviridae Nyamiviridae Paramyxoviridae Pneumoviridae Rhabdoviridae Sunviridae Xinmoviridae Yunchangviricetes Goujianvirales Yueviridae Ambiviricota Suforviricetes Crytulvirales Dumbiviridae Quambiviridae Trimbiviridae Unambiviridae RT VI: ssRNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Ortervirales Belpaoviridae Metaviridae Pseudoviridae Retroviridae VII: dsDNA-RT viruses Riboviria Pararnavirae Artverviricota Revtraviricetes Blubervirales Hepadnaviridae Ortervirales Caulimoviridae Taxon identifiers Hepadnaviridae Wikidata : Q1356878 Wikispecies : Hepadnaviridae CoL : 624SR EoL : 5017 GBIF : 1918 IRMNG : 106870 NCBI : 10404 WoRMS : 600047 Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wbpml
Cached time: 20250817063603
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.924 seconds
Real time usage: 1.111 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6717/1000000
Revision size: 14575/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 770087/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7732/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 79392/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.592/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9252715/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 7/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  900.075      1 -total
 91.44%  823.025    102 Template:Navbox
 21.62%  194.587      1 Template:Baltimore_classification
 19.13%  172.228      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.87%  160.848      2 Template:Reflist
 13.52%  121.731      7 Template:Cite_journal
 10.71%   96.424      1 Template:Virusbox
  9.78%   88.053      1 Template:Viruses
  9.09%   81.802      1 Template:Taxonbar
  8.53%   76.820      8 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:449429:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817063603 and revision id 1281874579. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hepadnaviridae&oldid=1281874579 " Categories : Hepadnaviridae Virus families Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 March 2025, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hepadnaviridae 22 languages Add topic

