Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academia 2 Debate about local government management 3 Campaign 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents John Seddon Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British occupational psychologist This article is about the British occupational psychologist. For other uses, see John Seddon (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for academics .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "John Seddon" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) John Seddon is a British occupational psychologist and author specializing in organizational change within the service industry . He is the founder and managing director of Vanguard, a consultancy firm established in 1985. He is also a visiting professor at Buckingham University Business School .

Seddon's prominence grew following attacks on current British management thinking. These included the belief in economies of scale , quality standards such as ISO9000 [ 1 ] and much of public sector reform including " deliverology ", the use of targets, inspection and centralized control of local services. The Daily Telegraph described him as a "reluctant management guru", with a background in occupational psychology .

[ 2 ] He is critical of target-based management, and of basing decisions on economies of scale , rather than "economies of flow".

[ 3 ] Seddon has published seven books. In his 2008 book, Systems Thinking in the Public Sector , he criticized the UK Government reform programme. He advocated its replacement by systems thinking .

[ 4 ] His book, The Whitehall Effect , was published on 5 November 2014. In it he articulates a more productive role for government in public-sector reform.

[ 5 ] His latest book, Beyond Command and Control , was published on 30 September 2019 and promises to expose the inherent fallacies contained within command and control management.

[ 6 ] Seddon won the first Management Innovation Prize for 'Reinventing Leadership' in October 2010.

[ 7 ] Academia [ edit ] John Seddon earned a BSc (Hons) in Psychology with the University of Wales in 1974 and graduated with a MSc in occupational psychology from the University of London in 1977.

Debate about local government management [ edit ] An opinion piece on the detrimental effects of inspection regimes prompted discussion on the Local Government Chronicle (LGC) website with David Walker, Managing Director, Communications & Reporting, at the Audit Commission.

[ 8 ] The debate was also covered in newspapers including The Times , which featured it on 31 July 2009.

[ 9 ] Campaign [ edit ] Seddon wrote an open letter dated 31 January 2011 [ 10 ] calling for the Rt. Hon Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Freud , the ministers responsible for Welfare Reform, to "halt the current programme of reorganization associated with the Single Universal Credit and embark on a better course". In the letter, he wrote: "This campaign is not about the concept of the Single Universal Credit as such. It is about the design and implementation of its delivery". He says the weakness in the proposals for online and call center delivery of the new Single Universal Credit is the "continuing unquestioning faith in economies of scale". In August 2011, a petition was started on the Government e-petitions site [ 11 ] as part of the campaign. The petition calls for Iain Duncan Smith to rethink the centralized IT-dominated service design of Universal Credit .

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Teaming Up With Local Teens , 18 June 2005, The Guardian .  Accessed 3 August 2007.

^ " Bootcamp tactics won’t win the battle ", Stefan Stern, Daily Telegraph , 16 February 2006.

^ Freedom from Command and Control: a better way to make the work work , John Seddon (2003), Vanguard Press. ( ISBN 0-9546183-0-0 ) ^ Systems Thinking in the Public Sector: Case Studies 'Delivering Public Services that Work (Volume 1)' Edited by Peter Middleton Foreword by John Seddon . Triarchypress.com (2010-03-09). Retrieved on 2013-07-26.

^ "The Whitehall Effect" .

^ Beyond Command and Control, John Seddon et al (2019), Mayfield Press.

( ISBN 152723956X ) ^ "Announcing the M-Prize Winners: Audacity, Imagination, Experimentation" , Polly LeBare, 22 November 2010 Management Innovation eXchange (MIX) ^ Blackman, David (22 July 2009).

"Walker v Seddon - the debate goes on" .

Local Government Chronicle .

^ Ford, Emily (31 July 2009).

" 'New way' thinker John Seddon aims at council targets" .

The Times .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2013 . Retrieved 15 April 2011 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Rethink the centralised, IT- dominated service design for Universal Credit - e-petitions . Epetitions.direct.gov.uk (2012-08-18). Retrieved on 2013-07-26.

External links [ edit ] Memorandum by Professor John Seddon , submitted to HM Parliament Public Administration Committee January 2003 Written evidence submitted by Vanguard Consulting on Universal Credit Implementation to the House of Commons Work and Pensions Select Committee September 2012 v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Norway Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Seddon&oldid=1283549652 " Categories : Living people British psychologists British systems scientists Alumni of the University of London Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with topics of unclear notability from February 2020 All articles with topics of unclear notability Academics articles with topics of unclear notability Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from February 2020 Articles lacking reliable references from February 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from February 2018 Use British English from February 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 05:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Seddon Add languages Add topic

