Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methodology 2 Features 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents SVSlope Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geotechnical engineering software This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for products and services .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "SVSlope" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) SVSLOPE Developer(s) SoilVision Systems Ltd.

Operating system Microsoft Windows Available in English Type slope stability software License Proprietary SVSLOPE is a slope stability analysis program developed by SoilVision Systems Ltd.. The software is designed to analyze slopes using both the classic "method of slices" as well as newer stress-based methods. The program is used in the field of civil engineering to analyze levees , earth dams , natural slopes, tailings dams, heap leach piles, waste rock piles, and anywhere there is concern for mass wasting . SVSLOPE finds the factor of safety or the probability of failure for the slope. The software makes use of advanced searching methods to determine the critical failure surface.

Methodology [ edit ] Slope stability problems in geotechnical and geo-environmental engineering involve the solution of equilibrium equations of force and moment. This is traditionally accomplished through traditional method of slices techniques or more progressive stress-based methods. SVSLOPE implements a wide variety of both limit equilibrium methods as well as newer stress-based methods. The classic Bishops, Sarma , Ordinary, Spencers, Morgenstern-Price, GLE, and US Army Corps of Engineers methods are implemented.

The method of slices involves calculating the forces at the base of each slice by the weight of the slice and its height. The newer stress-based techniques use the finite element method in order to calculate more detailed information related to the stresses in the slope. With the finite element-based approach it is possible to represent more complex stress conditions in the slope. The SVSOLID software may be used in order to calculate the finite element stresses in a particular slope.

The user enters geometry, material properties, and analysis constraints (such as searching methodologies) through a CAD-type graphical user interface (GUI). The results may also be viewed in the context of a graphical user interface. The geometry is simply entered as regions which may be drawn, pasted in from Excel, or imported from AutoCAD DXF files. The factor of safety for a specific failure surface is computed as the forces driving failure along the surface divided by the shear resistance of the soils along the surface.

[ 1 ] SVSLOPE implements a number of different searching algorithms to identify the critical slip surface. Algorithms for determining both circular and non-circular critical slip surfaces are implemented. Specified slip surfaces can also be employed.

A library of slope stability benchmark models are distributed with the software.

[ 2 ] Features [ edit ] The developers of SVSLOPE have implemented all of the classic features traditionally found in slope stability software as well as an interesting list of new features.

The following is a list of some of the more distinct features of SVSLOPE: Probabilistic analysis One-way or two-way sensitivity analysis Spatial variability using random fields Comprehensive searching algorithms for circular and non-circular slip surfaces Unsaturated analysis (coupling with SVFLUX and unsaturated shear strength material properties) New finite element based slope stability methods Distributed with over 100 example models Classic features also supported by the software include: Distributed loads Point loads Soil reinforcement A variety of ways to represent pore-water pressures Non-circular slip surfaces Help system and tutorial manual Representation of tension cracks 17 different soil strength models References [ edit ] ^ SoilVision Systems Ltd. (2009), SVSLOPE Tutorial Manual (PDF) , SoilVision Systems Ltd.

^ SoilVision Systems Ltd. (2009), SVSLOPE Verification Manual (PDF) External links [ edit ] SoilVision Systems Ltd.

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SVSlope&oldid=1133953948 " Category : Geotechnical engineering software Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with topics of unclear notability from October 2019 All articles with topics of unclear notability Products articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from October 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 16 January 2023, at 08:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SVSlope Add languages Add topic

