Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Primary sources 2 Theories 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór 10 languages Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Four stags of Yggdrasil ) Four stags in the Poetic Edda This drawing made by a 17th-century Icelander shows the four stags on the World Tree. Neither deer nor ash trees are native to Iceland.

In Norse mythology , four stags or harts (male red deer ) eat among the branches of the world tree Yggdrasill . According to the Poetic Edda , the stags crane their necks upward to chomp at the branches. The morning dew gathers in their horns and forms the rivers of the world. Their names are given as Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór . An amount of speculation exists regarding the deer and their potential symbolic value.

Primary sources [ edit ] The poem Grímnismál , a part of the Poetic Edda , is the only extant piece of Old Norse poetry to mention the stags.

1967 W. H. Auden & P. B. Taylor in The Elder Edda : Grímnismál 33 Hirtir ero ok fiórir, þeirs af hæfingar á gaghálsir gnaga: Dáinn ok Dvalinn, Dúneyrr ok Duraþrór.

[ 1 ] Thorpe 's translation Harts there are also four, which from its summits, arch-necked, gnaw.

Dâin and Dvalin, Duneyr and Durathrôr.

[ 2 ] Hollander 's translation Four harts also the highest shoots ay gnaw from beneath: Dáin and Dvalin, Duneyr and Dýrathrór.

[ 3 ] The second line is enigmatic. The word á is hard to explain in context and is sometimes omitted from editions. The word hæfingar is of uncertain meaning.

Finnur Jónsson conjecturally translated it as "shoots".

[ 4 ] English translators have translated it as "the highest shoots" (Hollander), [ 5 ] "summits" (Thorpe), "the highest twigs" (Bellows), [ 6 ] "the high boughs" (Taylor and Auden ) [ 7 ] and "the highest boughs" (Larrington).

[ 8 ] This verse of Grímnismál is preserved in two medieval manuscripts, Codex Regius (R) and AM 748 I 4to (A). The text and translations above mostly follow R, the older manuscript. Where R has the word hæfingar , A has the equally enigmatic hæfingiar . Where R has gnaga ("gnaw"), A has ganga ("walk"), usually regarded as an error. A third difference is that R has "ágaghálsir" in one word where A clearly has "á gaghálsir" in two words. In this case the A reading is usually accepted.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] In the Gylfaginning part of Snorri Sturluson 's Prose Edda the stanza from Grímnismál is summarized.

Gylfaginning 16 En fjórir hirtir renna í limum asksins ok bíta barr, þeir heita svá: Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr, Duraþrór.

[ 12 ] Brodeur's translation [A]nd four harts run in the limbs of the Ash and bite the leaves. They are called thus: Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr, Durathrór.

[ 13 ] Byock's translation Four stags called Dain, Dvalin, Duneyr and Durathror move about in the branches of the ash, devouring the tree's foliage.

[ 14 ] The word barr has been the cause of some confusion since it is most often applied to the needles of fir or pine trees.

Richard Cleasby and Guðbrandur Vigfússon surmised that Snorri had used the word wrongly due to Icelandic unfamiliarity with trees.

[ 15 ] Others have drawn the conclusion that the World Tree was in fact a conifer . More recent opinion is that barr means foliage in general and that the conifer assumption is not warranted.

[ 16 ] Theories [ edit ] Sky as branches of Yggdrasill: compare how patterns of cirrus clouds may resemble branches of an ash tree European ash tree Early suggestions for interpretations of the stags included connecting them with the four elements , the four seasons , or the phases of the moon .

In his influential 1824 work, Finnur Magnússon suggested that the stags represented winds. Based on an interpretation of their names, he took Dáinn ("The Dead One") and Dvalinn ("The Unconscious One") to be calm winds, and Duneyrr ("Thundering in the Ear") and Duraþrór ("Thriving Slumber", perhaps referencing snoring ) to be heavy winds. He interpreted the stags biting the leaves of the tree as winds tearing at clouds. He noted that dwarves control the winds (cf.

Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri , the dwarves of the cardinal points ), and that two of the stag names, Dáinn and Dvalinn, are also dwarf names as well.

[ 17 ] Many scholars, following Sophus Bugge , believe that stanzas 33 and 34 of Grímnismál are of a later origin than those surrounding them.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Finnur Jónsson surmised that there was originally only one stag which had later been turned into four, probably one on each side.

[ 20 ] This is consistent with stanza 35 of Grímnismál, which mentions only one hart: Grímnismál 35 Askr Yggdrasils drýgir erfiði meira enn menn viti: hiörtr bitr ofan, en á hliðo fúnar, skerðer Níðhöggr neðan.

Thorpe's translation Yggdrasil's ash hardship suffers greater than men know of; a hart bites it above, and in its side it rots, Nidhögg beneath tears it.

It has been suggested that this original stag is identical with Eikþyrnir , mentioned earlier in Grímnismál.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Anemoi Deer in mythology Four Heavenly Kings Four sons of Horus Guardians of the directions Lokapala Four Dwarves (Norse mythology) Titan (mythology) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Norse text, Ed. Helgason" .

^ "Grimnismál: The Lay of Grimnir" ( Thorpe 1866 , p. 24) ^ Hollander 1962 , p. 60.

^ "hœfingar: brumknappar (merkíng óviss)", Jónsson 1905 , p. 492 ^ "Conjecturally", Hollander 1962 , p. 60 ^ " Highest twigs : a guess; the Mss. words are baffling. Something has apparently been lost from lines 3-4, but there is no clue as to its nature", Bellows 1923 , p. 98 ^ Taylor & Auden 1969 , Lay of Grimnir, strophe 33 given at http://www.germanicmythology.com/PoeticEdda/GRM33.html ^ Larrington 1996 , p. 56.

^ "þeirs af hæfingar / gaghalsir gnaga", Jónsson 1905 , p. 81.

^ Lüning 1859 , p. 176.

^ Munch 1847 , pp. 30 & 192.

^ "Ed. Björnsson" .

^ "Trans. Brodeur" . Archived from the original on 2004-01-16 . Retrieved 2006-02-04 .

^ Byock 2005 , p. 27.

^ Cleasby, Richard; Vigfusson, Gudbrand.

"BAENGOÐR -- BAUGR. 53" .

An Icelandic-English Dictionary . p. 53.

^ "Together, bíta barr means to eat the foliage off a tree, words suitable for both an ash tree and a pine", Byock 2005 , p. 140.

^ "Efter Hjortenes Navne at dömme betegne Dáin og Dvalin (de sövndyssende, rolige) den milde og blide Vind; Dyneyrr (den dönelskende, dundrende) og Dyrathror (den dörstærke; som opsprænger Döre) derimod de heftige og stormende. Da Dvergene og raade for Vindene, have de to förste Hjorte fælles Navne med tvende af dem. Nogle forklare disse Hjorte for de 4 Elementer, eller og de 4 Aarstider, Maanens Phaser m. m.", Magnusen 1824 , p. 144.

^ "Stanzas 33-34 may well be interpolated, and are certainly in bad shape in the Mss. Bugge points out that they are probably of later origin than those surrounding them", Bellows 1923 , p. 98.

^ "The following two stanzas are very likely interpolations", Hollander 1962 , p. 60.

^ "Síðari hugmyndir eru það, að hjörturinn verður að 4 hjörtum, líklega einn við hverja hlið", Jónsson 1913 , p. 22.

^ "[N]othing further is known of the four harts. It may be guessed, however, that they are a late multiplication of the single hart mentioned in stanza 26", Bellows 1923 , p. 98.

References [ edit ] Bellows, Henry Adams (1923).

The poetic Edda, translated from the Icelandic with an introduction and notes . New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation .

(Reprint: Princeton University Press, 1936 Sacred-texts ) Brodeur, Arthur Gilchrist, trans.

(1916).

The Prose Edda by Snorri Sturluson . New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation .

Byock, Jesse, trans. (2005).

Snorri Sturluson: The Prose Edda . Penguin.

ISBN 0-14-044755-5 .

Björnsson, Eysteinn, ed. (2005).

"Snorra-Edda: Formáli & Gylfaginning : Textar fjögurra meginhandrita" . Archived from the original on 2008-06-11 . Retrieved 2005-08-11 .

Magnusen, Finn (1824).

Eddalæren og dens Oprindelse . Copenhagen: Gyldendal – via Internet Archive .

Jónsson, Finnur , ed. (1905).

Sæmundar-Edda : Eddukvæði . Reykjavík.

Jónsson, Finnur (1913).

Goðafræði Norðmanna og Íslendinga : Eftir heimildum . Reykjavík: Hið íslenska bókmentafjelag.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Hollander, Lee M.

(1962).

The Poetic Edda . Austin: University of Texas.

ISBN 0-292-76499-5 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Helgason, Jón , ed. (1955).

Eddadigte . (3 vols). København: Munksgaard.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Text of Grímnismál available online at http://www.snerpa.is/net/kvaedi/grimnir.htm Larrington, Carolyne, trans. (1996).

The Poetic Edda .

Oxford World's Classics .

ISBN 0-19-283946-2 .

Lüning, Hermann (1859).

Die Edda : eine Sammlung altnordischer Götter- und Heldenlieder . Zürich: Meyer & Zeller.

Munch, P. A.

, ed. (1847).

Den ældre Edda . Christiania.

Taylor, Paul Beekman; Auden, W. H.

(1969).

The Elder Edda: a selection . London: Faber.

Thorpe, Benjamin, trans.

(1866).

Edda Sæmundar Hinns Frôða: The Edda of Sæmund the Learned . Vol. 1. London: Trübner & Co. pp.

19– 27.

v t e Old Norse religion and mythology Mythological Norse people, items and places Deities , dwarfs , jötnar , and other figures Æsir Almáttki áss Baldr Bragi Dellingr Forseti Heimdall Hermóðr Höðr Hœnir Ítreksjóð Lóðurr Loki Máni Meili Mímir Móði and Magni Odin Óðr Thor Týr Ullr Váli (son of Odin) Víðarr Vili and Vé Ásynjur Bil Eir Frigg Fulla Gefjon Gerðr Gná Hlín Iðunn Ilmr Irpa Lofn Nanna Njörun Rán Rindr Sága Sif Sigyn Sjöfn Skaði Snotra Sól Syn Þorgerðr Hölgabrúðr Þrúðr Vár Vör Vanir Freyja Freyr Ingunar-Freyr Yngvi Gersemi Gullveig Hnoss Kvasir Njörðr Sister-wife of Njörðr Jötnar Ægir Alvaldi Angrboða Aurboða Baugi Beli Bergelmir Bestla Bölþorn Býleistr Eggþér Fárbauti Fjölvar Fornjót Gangr Geirröðr Gillingr Gjálp and Greip Gríðr Gunnlöð Gymir Harðgreipr Helblindi Helreginn Hljod Hræsvelgr Hrímgerðr Hrímgrímnir Hrímnir Hroðr Hrungnir Hrymr Hymir Hyrrokkin Iði Ím Járnsaxa Laufey Leikn Litr Logi Mögþrasir Narfi (father of Nott) Sökkmímir Surtr Suttungr Þjazi Þökk Þrívaldi Þrúðgelmir Þrymr Útgarða-Loki Vafþrúðnir Víðblindi Vosud Vörnir Ymir Dwarfs Alvíss Andvari Austri, Vestri, Norðri and Suðri Billingr Dáinn Durinn Dúrnir Dvalinn Fáfnir Fjalar and Galar Gandalf Hreiðmarr Litr Mótsognir Ótr Regin Sons of Ivaldi Brokkr Eitri Heroes List of figures in Germanic heroic legend A B–C D–E F–G H–He Hi–Hy I–O P–S T–Y people, clan, and place names in Germanic heroic legend named animals and plants named weapons, armour and treasures Others Ask and Embla Auðr Auðumbla Aurvandill Beyla Borr Búri Byggvir Dísir Landdísir Dragons Draugs Einherjar Eldir Elves Dark elves (Dökkálfar) Light elves (Ljósálfar) Black elves (Svartálfar) Fimafeng Fjalar (rooster) Fenrir Fjörgyn and Fjörgynn Fylgja Garmr Gullinbursti Hati Hróðvitnisson Hel Hildisvíni Hjúki Horses of the Æsir Árvakr and Alsviðr Blóðughófi Falhófnir Gísl Glaðr Glær Glenr Grani Gullfaxi Gulltoppr Gyllir Hamskerpir and Garðrofa Hófvarpnir Skinfaxi and Hrímfaxi Sleipnir Svaðilfari Jörð Jörmungandr Líf and Lífthrasir Loddfáfnir Móðguðr Nine Daughters of Ægir and Rán Nine Mothers of Heimdallr Narfi (son of Loki) Níðhöggr Norns Personifications Dagr Elli Nótt Sumarr and Vetr Sæhrímnir Skírnir Sköll Shield-maiden Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr Troll Þjálfi and Röskva Vættir Landvættir Váli (son of Loki) Valkyries Völundr Vörðr Places ( Cosmology ) Underworld Hel Éljúðnir Gjallarbrú Náströnd Niflhel Niðafjöll Rivers Élivágar Gjöll Ífingr Kerlaugar Körmt and Örmt Slidr River Vadgelmir Vimur River Other locations Asgard Amsvartnir Andlang Barri Bifröst Bilskirnir Brávellir Brimir Fensalir Fólkvangr Fornsigtuna Fyrisvellir Gálgviðr Gandvik Gastropnir Gimlé Ginnungagap Glaðsheimr Glæsisvellir Glitnir Gnipahellir Grove of fetters Heiðr Himinbjörg Hindarfjall Hlidskjalf Hnitbjorg Hoddmímis holt Iðavöllr Járnviðr Jötunheimr Mímameiðr Myrkviðr Munarvágr Nóatún Okolnir Sessrúmnir Sindri Singasteinn Þrúðheimr Þrúðvangr Þrymheimr Uppsala Útgarðar Valaskjálf Valhalla Vanaheimr Víðbláinn Vígríðr Vingólf Wells Hvergelmir Mímisbrunnr Urðarbrunnr Ýdalir Yggdrasil Events Æsir–Vanir War Fimbulvetr Fróði's Peace Hjaðningavíg Ragnarök Sources Gesta Danorum Edda Poetic Edda Prose Edda Runestones Sagas Jómsvíkinga Legendary Tyrfing Cycle Völsung Cycle Old Norse language Orthography Later influence Society Religious practice Anthropomorphic wooden cult figurines of Central and Northern Europe Blót Hof Heitstrenging Horses Hörgr Worship Öndvegissúlur Reginnaglar Sacred trees and groves Sonargöltr Temple at Uppsala Til árs ok friðar Vé Wetlands and islands Festivals and holy periods Álfablót Dísablót Germanic calendar Þorrablót Vetrnætr Yule Other Death Ergi Félag Galdr Goði Hamingja Heiti Kenning Mead hall Nīþ Numbers Philosophy Rings Runes Seiðr Skald Viking Age Völva See also Family tree of the Norse gods Germanic paganism Heathenry (new religious movement) Nordic Bronze Age v t e The cosmological tree Yggdrasil and its inhabitants in Norse mythology Inhabitants Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór (highest boughs) Ratatoskr (travels up and down) Veðrfölnir and eagle (top) Roots reaching to Asgard and mankind Urðarbrunnr Norns Hel and/or Niflheim Hvergelmir Níðhöggr and numerous serpents Frost Jötnar Mímisbrunnr Mímir See also Sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism and mythology Nine Worlds Norse cosmology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dáinn,_Dvalinn,_Duneyrr_and_Duraþrór&oldid=1276414674 " Categories : Animals in Norse mythology Mythological deer Norse dwarves Elves Religious quartets Yggdrasil Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 18:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór 10 languages Add topic

