Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definitions 3 Philosophical Toggle Philosophical subsection 3.1 Philosophical roots 3.2 Modern cosmopolitan thinkers 3.3 Contemporary cosmopolitan thinkers 4 Political and sociological 5 Non-Western Perspectives Toggle Non-Western Perspectives subsection 5.1 Vazha-Pshavela 6 References 7 Criticism 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cosmopolitanism 58 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idea that all human beings are members of a single community For other uses, see Cosmopolitan .

Cosmopolitanism is the idea that all human beings are members of a single community . Its adherents are known as cosmopolitan or cosmopolite . Cosmopolitanism is both prescriptive and aspirational, believing humans can and should be " world citizens " in a "universal community".

[ 1 ] The idea encompasses different dimensions and avenues of community, such as promoting universal moral standards , establishing global political structures, or developing a platform for mutual cultural expression and tolerance.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] For example, Kwame Anthony Appiah articulates a cosmopolitan community where individuals from varying locations (physical, economic, etc.) enter relationships of mutual respect despite their differing beliefs (religious, political, etc.).

[ 3 ] In a looser but related sense, "cosmopolitan" is also used to describe places where people of various ethnic, cultural and/or religious backgrounds live together and interact with each other.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word derives from the Ancient Greek : κοσμοπολίτης , or kosmopolitês , formed from " κόσμος ", kosmos , i.e. "world", "universe", or "cosmos", and πολίτης , " politês ", i.e. "citizen" or "[one] of a city". Contemporary usage defines the term as "citizen of the world".

[ 5 ] Definitions [ edit ] Definitions of cosmopolitanism usually begin with the Greek etymology of "citizen of the world".

[ 6 ] However, as Appiah points out, "world" in the original sense meant "cosmos" or "universe", not earth or globe as current use assumes.

[ 7 ] Kleingeld and Brown distinguish between moral, political, cultural and economic forms of cosmopolitanism.

[ 1 ] : Section 2 In the United States , two forms of cosmopolitanism have been established. For one, there is a political cosmopolitan nationalism that has defined and constructed other races .

[ clarification needed ] On the other hand, ethno-cultural cosmopolitanism that celebrates multiculturalism has benefited from an upswing in the United States after World War II .

[ 8 ] A definition of cosmopolitanism that handles this issue is given in a recent (2014) book on political globalization: Cosmopolitanism can be defined as a global politics that, firstly, projects a sociality of common political engagement among all human beings across the globe, and, secondly, suggests that this sociality should be either ethically or organizationally privileged over other forms of sociality.

[ 9 ] Philosophical [ edit ] Further information: Global justice and Moral universalism Philosophical roots [ edit ] Diogenes Cosmopolitanism can be traced back to Diogenes of Sinope ( c.

412 B.C.

), the founder of the Cynic movement in Ancient Greece . It was said that when Diogenes was "Asked where he came from, he answered: 'I am a citizen of the world ( kosmopolitês )'".

[ 10 ] At the time, the broadest basis of social identity among Greeks was either the individual city-state or the culturally and linguistically homogeneous Hellenic group.

Stoicism , another Greek school of thought that was founded roughly a century later, built upon Diogenes' idea, with many of its thinkers and adherents stressing that each human being "dwells [...] in two communities – the local community of our birth, and the community of human argument and aspiration".

[ 11 ] A common way to understand Stoic cosmopolitanism is through Hierocles ' circle model of identity, which states that individuals should regard themselves as concentric circles: the first one around the self, followed by immediate family, extended family, local group, citizens, countrymen, humanity. Within these circles human beings feel a sense of "affinity" or "endearment" towards others, which the Stoics termed Oikeiôsis . The task of world citizens becomes then to "draw the circles somehow towards the centre, making all human beings more like our fellow city dwellers, and so forth".

[ 11 ] : 9 The ancient Chinese philosopher Mozi in preserved scripts said that "universal love and mutual benefit" could be attained "to regard other people's countries as one's own".

[ 12 ] The Chinese term tianxia (all under Heaven), a metonym for empire, has also been re-interpreted in the modern age as a conception of cosmopolitanism, and was used by 1930s modernists as the title of a Shanghai -based, English-language journal of world arts and letters T'ien Hsia Monthly .

[ 13 ] Stoicism, Tianxia and other cosmopolitan philosophies especially thrived under universal monarchies where they also were translated into policy and created most cosmopolitan in history societies.

Modern cosmopolitan thinkers [ edit ] In his 1795 essay "Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch", Immanuel Kant stages a ius cosmopoliticum (cosmopolitan law/right) as a guiding principle to help global society achieve permanent, enduring peace. Kant's cosmopolitan right stems from an understanding of all human beings as equal members of a universal community. Cosmopolitan right thus works in tandem with international political rights, and the shared, universal right of humanity.

[ 14 ] Kant's cosmopolitan right is fundamentally bound to the conditions of universal hospitality and the right of resort. Universal hospitality is defined as the right to be welcomed upon arrival in foreign territory, but is contingent on a guest arriving in a peaceful manner. Kant makes the additional claim that all human beings have the basic right of resort: the right to present oneself in a foreign land. The right of resort is derived from Kant's understanding of the Earth's surface as essentially communal, and further emphasizing his claims on equally shared universal rights among all human beings.

[ 15 ] The philosophical concepts of Emmanuel Levinas , on ethics, and Jacques Derrida , on hospitality, provide a theoretical framework for the relationships between people in their everyday lives and apart from any form of written laws or codes. For Levinas, the foundation of ethics consists in the obligation to respond to the Other. In Being for the Other, he writes that there is no "universal moral law," only the sense of responsibility (goodness, mercy, charity) that the Other, in a state of vulnerability, calls forth [ citation needed ] .  The proximity of the Other is an important part of Levinas's concept: the face of the Other is what compels the response.

[ citation needed ] For Derrida, the foundation of ethics is hospitality, the readiness and the inclination to welcome the Other into one's home. Ethics, he claims, is hospitality. Pure, unconditional hospitality is a desire that underscores the conditional hospitality necessary in our relationships with others. Levinas's and Derrida's theories of ethics and hospitality hold out the possibility of an acceptance of the Other as different but of equal standing. Isolation is not a feasible alternative in the world, therefore, it is important to consider how best to approach these interactions, and to determine what is at stake for ourselves and the others: what conditions of hospitality to impose, and whether or not we have responded to the call of the Other. Further, both theories reveal the importance of considering how best to interact with the Other and others, and what is at stake.

[ citation needed ] Derrida in an interview with Bennington (1997) summarized "cosmopolitanism", [ 16 ] There is a tradition of cosmopolitanism, and if we had time we could study this tradition, which comes to us from, on the one hand, Greek thought with the Stoics, who have a concept of the 'citizen of the world'. You also have St. Paul in the Christian tradition, also a certain call for a citizen of the world as, precisely, a brother. St. Paul says that we are all brothers, that is sons of God, so we are not foreigners, we belong to the world as citizens of the world; and it is this tradition that we could follow up until Kant for instance, in whose concept of cosmopolitanism we find the conditions for hospitality. But in the concept of the cosmopolitical in Kant there are a number of conditions: first of all you should, of course, welcome the stranger, the foreigner, to the extent that he is a citizen of another country, that you grant him the right to visit and not to stay, and there are a number of other conditions that I can't summarise here quickly, but this concept of the cosmopolitical which is very novel, very worthy of respect (and I think cosmopolitanism is a very good thing), is a very limited concept. (Derrida cited in Bennington 1997).

— Bennington.

Politics and Friendship: A Discussion with Jacques Derrida . 1997.

A further state of cosmopolitanism occurred after the Second World War . As a reaction to the Holocaust and other atrocities, the concept of crimes against humanity became a generally accepted category in international law. This clearly shows the appearance and acceptance of a notion of individual responsibility that is considered to exist toward all of humankind.

[ 17 ] Philosophical cosmopolitans are moral universalists : they believe that all humans, and not merely compatriots or fellow-citizens, come under the same moral standards. The boundaries between nations, states, cultures or societies are therefore morally irrelevant. A widely cited example of a contemporary cosmopolitan is Kwame Anthony Appiah.

[ 18 ] Some philosophers and scholars argue that the objective and subjective conditions arising in today's unique historical moment, an emerging planetary phase of civilization , creates a latent potential for the emergence of a cosmopolitan identity as global citizens and possible formation of a global citizens movement .

[ 19 ] These emerging objective and subjective conditions in the planetary phase include improved and affordable telecommunications; space travel and the first images of our fragile planet floating in the vastness of space; the emergence of global warming and other ecological threats to our collective existence; new global institutions such as the United Nations , World Trade Organization , or International Criminal Court ; the rise of transnational corporations and integration of markets often termed economic globalization ; the emergence of global NGOs and transnational social movements, such as the World Social Forum ; and so on.

Globalization , a more common term, typically refers more narrowly to the economic and trade relations and misses the broader cultural, social, political, environmental, demographic, values and knowledge transitions taking place.

[ citation needed ] Contemporary cosmopolitan thinkers [ edit ] Thich Nhat Hanh discusses what he calls "Interbeing" as a way of living one's life in relation to others; "Interbeing" might easily be compared to cosmopolitanism. Nhat Hanh's philosophical beliefs are grounded in the precepts of Buddhist teachings, which involve compassion and understanding to protect and live in harmony with all people, animals, plants, and minerals.

[ 20 ] He further describes what he calls "Mindfulness Training of the Order of Interbeing" as being aware of sufferings created by, but not limited to, the following causes: fanaticism and intolerances that disrupt compassion and living in harmony with others; indoctrination of narrow-minded beliefs; imposition of views; anger; and miscommunication.

[ 20 ] Understanding and compassion for others seems to be achieved by the understanding of others' suffering and the root causes of suffering. Therefore, to be responsible is to recognize and understand suffering, which then leads to compassion. It is through this process that others can be recognized as people.

Other theorists, philosophers, and activists contend that recognizing suffering is necessary to end violence. In Scared Sacred , Velcrow Ripper takes a journey to different sites of great suffering that ultimately leads him toward developing compassion.

[ 21 ] In "The Planet", Paul Gilroy explores how the construction and naturalization of race and the hierarchies produced by difference shape the hatred of others. It is the deconstruction of these ideologies that can lead to the compassion and humanization of others. Thus individual responsibility is being aware of what Judith Butler calls the precariousness of life in self and other; being a cosmopolitan seems to be, above all, a social, ethical enterprise.

In Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers , Kwame Anthony Appiah notes how social ethics seem to operate: Whatever obligation one might have to another, especially a foreign other, that obligation does not supersede the obligations one has to those people most familiar to them. However, as Judith Butler questions, "at what cost do I establish the familiar as the criterion" for valuing others?

[ 22 ] If one values the familiar more than the foreign, what are the consequences? Paul Gilroy offers a possible alternative to this emphasis on familiarity arguing that "methodical cultivation of a degree of estrangement from one's own culture and history ... might qualify as essential to a cosmopolitan commitment." [ 23 ] This estrangement entails a "process of exposure to otherness" in order to foster "the irreducible value of diversity within sameness." [ 23 ] For Gilroy, being cosmopolitan seems to involve both a social, ethical enterprise and a cultural enterprise. In "The Planet", Gilroy describes the cases of Tom Hurndall and Rachel Corrie ; [ 23 ] each seems to exemplify what might be considered Gilroy's figure of the cosmopolitan. Both Hurndall and Corrie removed themselves (geographically) from their home cultures, presumably both physically and mentally estranging themselves from their own cultures and histories. Hurndall and Corrie were both killed in 2003 (in separate incidents). Gilroy's model of estrangement might actually undermine itself through its examples; this might be construed as a failure of Gilroy's theory to address the practical difficulties of estranging oneself from the familiar.

[ 23 ] The Venus Project , an international, multidisciplinary educational organization created by Jacque Fresco , works to spread cosmopolitan ideas by transcending artificial boundaries currently separating people and emphasizing an understanding of our interdependence with nature and each other.

[ citation needed ] Some forms of cosmopolitanism also fail to address the potential for economic colonization by powerful countries over less powerful ones.

[ citation needed ] Frantz Fanon , in The Wretched of the Earth , observes that when nations achieved independence from European colonizers, frequently there was no system in place to secure their economic future, and they became "manager[s] for Western enterprise...in practise set[ting] up its country as the brothel of Europe." [ 24 ] When "third world" nations are drawn into economic partnerships with global capital, ostensibly to improve their national quality of life, often the only ones benefitting from this partnership are well-placed individuals and not the nation itself. Others highlighted the importance of moving beyond Western liberal values. Drawing on classical realism, they consider liberalism insufficient to promote equality between nations, breaking the iron laws of competition between states; instead, they look at Byzantine and other pre-modern cultures.

[ 25 ] Likewise, Mahmood Mamdani in Good Muslim, Bad Muslim suggests that the imposition of Western cultural norms, democracy and Christianity to name only two, has historically resulted in nationalist violence; [ 26 ] however, Appiah has implied that democracy is a pre-requisite for cosmopolitan intervention in developing nations.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Much of the political thinking of the last two centuries has taken nationalism and the framework of the sovereign nation-state for granted. With the advance of globalization and the increased facility of travel and communication, some thinkers consider that the political system based on the nation-state has become obsolete and that it  is time to design a better and more efficient alternative.

Jesús Mosterín analyzes how the world political system should be organized in order to maximize individual freedom and individual opportunity. Rejecting as muddled the metaphysical notion of free will, he focuses on political freedom, the absence of coercion or interference by others in personal decisions. Because of the tendencies to violence and aggression that lurk in human nature, some constraint on freedom is necessary for peaceful and fruitful social interaction.

[ 29 ] Especially, there is no rational ground for curtailing the cultural freedoms (of language, religion and customs) in the name of the nation, the church, or the party. From this point of view, the Internet provides a much more attractive model than the nation-state. Neither is there any just reason for restraining the free circulation of people, ideas, or goods.  Mosterín thinks that the nation-state is incompatible with the full development of freedom, whose blossoming requires the reorganization of the world political system along cosmopolitan lines. He proposes a world without sovereign nation-states, territorially organized in small autonomous but not-sovereign cantonal polities, complemented by strong world organizations.

[ 30 ] Criticizing the abstract nature of most versions of cosmopolitanism, Charles Blattberg has argued that any viable cosmopolitanism must be "rooted," by which he means based upon a "global patriotism." [ 31 ] More general philosophical reviews of cosmopolitanism and multiculturalism are also available. Carol Nicholson compares John Searle 's opposition to multiculturalism with Charles Taylor 's celebration of it. She uses Richard Rorty as a triangulation point in that he remains neutral about multiculturalism, but his philosophical analysis of truth and practice can be deployed to argue against Searle and in favor of Taylor.

[ 32 ] At a conference on "Philosophy in a Multicultural Context", Rasmus Winther excavated the philosophical assumptions and practices connected with cosmopolitanism and multiculturalism.  He develops Bruno Latour 's conception of the philosopher as public diplomat.

[ 33 ] Political and sociological [ edit ] November 1917 issue of Cosmopolitan cover by Harrison Fisher Emile Durkheim (1858–1917) observed the development of what he called the 'cult of the individual', which is a new religion that replaced the Christianity that was dying out, and which is centered around the sacredness of human dignity. This new religion would provide the new foundations of Western society, and these foundations are closely related to human rights and individual nation's constitutions. A society's sacred object would be the individual's human dignity, and the moral code guiding the society is found in that country's way of interpreting human dignity and human rights. Thus, rather than finding solidarity through national culture, or a particular traditional religious doctrine, society would be unified by its adherence to political values, i.e. individual rights and a defence of human dignity.

[ 34 ] Durkheim's cult of the individual has many similarities to John Rawls ' political liberalism , which Rawls developed almost a century after Durkheim.

[ 35 ] In his posthumously published (1957) "Professional Ethics and Civic Morals" Durkheim wrote that: If each State had as its chief aim not to expand or to lengthen its borders, but to set its own house in order and to make the widest appeal to its members for a moral life on an ever-higher level, then all discrepancy between national and human morals would be excluded. … The more societies concentrate their energies inwards, on the interior life, the more they will be diverted from the disputes that bring a clash between cosmopolitanism – or world patriotism, and patriotism … Societies can have their pride, not in being the greatest or the wealthiest, but in being the most just, the best organised and in possessing the best moral constitution.

[ 36 ] Ulrich Beck (May 15, 1944 – January 1, 2015) was a sociologist who posed the new concept of cosmopolitan critical theory in direct opposition to traditional nation-state politics.  Nation-state theory sees power relations only among different state actors, and excludes a global economy, or subjugates it to the nation-state model.  Cosmopolitanism sees global capital as a possible threat to the nation state and places it within a meta-power game in which global capital, states and civil society are its players.

It is important to mark a distinction between Beck's cosmopolitanism and the idea of a world state. For Beck, imposing a single world order was considered hegemonic at best and ethnocentric at worst.  Rather, political and sociological cosmopolitanism rests upon these fundamental foundations: "Acknowledging the otherness of those who are culturally different" "Acknowledging the otherness of the future" "Acknowledging the otherness of nature" "Acknowledging the otherness of the object" "Acknowledging the otherness of other rationalities" A number of philosophers, including Emmanuel Levinas , have introduced the concept of the " Other ". For Levinas, the Other is given context in ethics and responsibility; we should think of the Other as anyone and everyone outside ourselves. According to Levinas, our initial interactions with the Other occur before we form a will—the ability to make choices. The Other addresses us and we respond: even the absence of response is a response. We are thus conditioned by the Other's address and begin to form culture and identity. After the formation of the will, we choose whether to identify with the addresses by others and, as a result, continue the process of forming identity.

[ 37 ] During this process, it is possible to recognize ourselves in our interactions with Others. Even in situations where we engage in the most minimal interaction, we ascribe identities to others and simultaneously to ourselves. Our dependence on the Other for the continuous formation of language, culture, and identity means that we are responsible to others and that they are responsible to us. Also once we've formed a will, it becomes possible to recognize this social interdependence. When we have gained the capacity for recognition, the imperative is to perform that recognition and thereby become ethically responsible to the Other in conscience .

[ 37 ] Cosmopolitanism shares some aspects of universalism – namely the globally acceptable notion of human dignity that must be protected and enshrined in international law. However, the theory deviates in recognising the differences between world cultures.

[ 38 ] In addition, cosmopolitanism calls for equal protection of the environment and against the negative side effects of technological development. Human dignity, however, is convoluted because it is necessary to first distinguish who has the right to be respected and second to consider what rights are protectable. Under cosmopolitanism, all humans have rights; however, history shows that recognition of these rights is not guaranteed.

[ citation needed ] As an example, Judith Butler discusses a Western discourse of "human" in Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence . Butler works through the idea of "human" and notes that "human" has been "naturalized in its 'Western' mold by the contemporary workings of humanism" (32). Thus, there is the idea that not all "human" lives will be supported in the same way, indeed, that some human lives are worth more protection than others. Others have extended this idea to examine how animals might be reconfigured as cosmopolitan, present the world-over with varying identities in different places.

[ 39 ] This idea is reiterated in Sunera Thobani 's "Exalted Subjects: Studies in the Making of Race and Nation in Canada," where she discusses a discourse in which Muslim people fall into a good/bad dichotomy: a "good Muslim" is one who has been Westernized and a "bad Muslim" is one who visibly rejects Western cultural influences. Thobani notes that it is through media representations that these ideas become naturalized. Individuals who embrace Western ideals are considered fully "human" and are more likely to be afforded dignity and protection than those who defend their non-Westernized cultural identities .

According to those who follow Beck's reasoning, a cosmopolitan world would consist of a plurality of states, which would use global and regional consensus to gain greater bargaining power against opponents. States would also utilize the power of civil society actors such as Non-governmental organizations ( NGOs ) and consumers to strengthen their legitimacy and enlist the help of investors to pursue a cosmopolitan agenda.

[ citation needed ] Other authors imagine a cosmopolitan world moving beyond today's conception of nation-states. These scholars argue that a truly cosmopolitan identity within global citizenship will take hold, diminishing the importance of national identities. The formation of a global citizens movement would lead to the establishment of democratic global institutions, creating the space for global political discourse and decisions, would in turn reinforce the notion of citizenship at a global level. Nested structures of governance balancing the principles of irreducibility (i.e., the notion that certain problems can only be addressed at the global level, such as global warming ) and subsidiarity (i.e., the notion that decisions should be made at as local a level possible) would thus form the basis for a cosmopolitan political order.

[ 40 ] Daniele Archibugi proposes a renewed model for global citizenship : [ 41 ] institutional cosmopolitanism. It advocates some reforms in global governance to allow world citizens to take more directly a part into political life. A number of proposals have been made in order to make this possible.

Cosmopolitan democracy , for example, suggests strengthening the United Nations and other international organizations by creating a World Parliamentary Assembly.

[ 42 ] Non-Western Perspectives [ edit ] Vazha-Pshavela [ edit ] In his 1905 essay «კოსმოპოლიტიზმი და პატრიოტიზმი» (Kosmopolitizmi da Patriotizmi; “Cosmopolitanism and Patriotism”), first published in the literary periodical *Droeba* in Tbilisi , Georgian poet and public intellectual Vazha-Pshavela (Luka Razikashvili; 1861–1915) sought to reconcile national identity with universal human solidarity.

[ 43 ] He distinguished between emotional attachment to one’s homeland and rational commitment to humanity at large, arguing that the two are complementary rather than mutually exclusive.

He wrote that “cosmopolitanism is a matter of the brain, patriotism is a matter of the heart,” and insisted that “your neighbor’s misery is your own,” asserting that true patriotism must extend concern to all people.

[ 43 ] He criticized those who renounce their national roots under the guise of universalism: “He who negates his country while calling himself cosmopolitan is maimed by illusions.” Moreover, he argued that a nation’s cosmopolitan credentials are judged by its treatment of internal minorities, warning that “the man who scorns the stranger among his own people wears blinders against humanity.” [ 43 ] Turning to practical considerations, Vazha-Pshavela maintained that inventions and discoveries originating in one country “benefit all humanity” and that “an invention confined to its birthplace is an invention half-born,” thereby advocating the free circulation of technological and cultural advances across borders.

[ 43 ] He further celebrated cultural exchange, noting that no literary or artistic genius can flourish in isolation and that foreign influences “blossom new flowers in our own garden,” enriching national traditions rather than diluting them.

[ 43 ] He further concluded that “the separate development of nations is the condition for the development of all humanity,” emphasizing cultural diversity as a prerequisite for universal progress.

[ 43 ] His essay responded in part to intellectual currents in the late Russian Empire and among Georgian Marxists , who often prioritized international class solidarity over national particularism. Modern scholars interpret his work as an early articulation of rooted cosmopolitanism , an approach affirming global ethical responsibility while preserving local identity.

[ 44 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Kleingeld, Pauline; Brown, Eric (October 2019).

"Cosmopolitanism" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Center for the Study of Language and Information. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020.

^ Ruck, Damian J.; Bentley, R. Alexander; Lawson, Daniel J. (2020).

"Cultural prerequisites of socioeconomic development" .

Royal Society Open Science .

7 (2): 190725.

Bibcode : 2020RSOS....790725R .

doi : 10.1098/rsos.190725 .

PMC 7062048 .

PMID 32257300 .

^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony (1997). "Cosmopolitan Patriots".

Critical Inquiry .

23 (3): 617– 39.

doi : 10.1086/448846 .

S2CID 224798936 .

^ "Definition of COSMOPOLITAN" . www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2021-05-25 .

^ "cosmopolitan" . Online Etymology Dictionary.

^ Hooft, Stan; Vandekerckhove, Wim (2010).

Questioning Cosmopolitanism . Dordrecht: Springer.

ISBN 978-90-481-8703-4 .

^ Kwame Anthony Appiah, Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers , W.W. Norton, New York, 2006, p. xiv ^ Giselle Liza Anatol; José Carlos Lozano; Sarah Corona Berkin; Sebastian Thies; Wilfried Raussert (2020).

The Routledge Handbook to the Culture and Media of the Americas . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9781351064682 .

^ James, Paul (2014-05-16). "Political Philosophies of the Global: A Critical Overview".

Globalization and Politics Vol. 4: Political Philosophies of the Global . London: Sage Publications. p. x.

ISBN 9781412919555 .

^ Diogenes Laërtius , The Lives of Eminent Philosophers , Book VI, passage 63; online text in Greek and in English at the Perseus Project .

^ a b Nussbaum, Martha C. (1997). Kant and Stoic Cosmopolitanism, in The Journal of Political Philosophy Volume 5, Nr 1, pp. 1–25 ^ Barbara Elisabeth Müller (2021).

Cosmopolitanism as Nonrelationism: Who is Cosmopolitan Now?

. Springer International Publishing. p. 20.

ISBN 9783030834579 .

^ Shen, Shuang (8 April 2009).

Cosmopolitan Publics: Anglophone Print Culture in Semi-Colonial Shanghai . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9780813546995 .

^ Taylor, Robert S (2010).

"Kant's Political Religion: The Transparency of Perpetual Peace and the Highest Good" .

The Review of Politics .

72 (1): 1– 24.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670509990945 .

S2CID 145681255 .

^ Corradetti, Claudio (November 2017). "Constructivism in Cosmopolitan Law".

Global Constitutionalism .

6 (3): 412– 441.

doi : 10.1017/S2045381717000028 .

hdl : 2108/316903 .

S2CID 151523474 .

^ Bennington, Geoffrey (1 December 1997).

"Politics and Friendship: A Discussion with Jacques Derrida" . Sussex, UK: Centre for Modern French Thought, University of Sussex. Archived from the original on 14 June 2014 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 .

^ Beck, Ulrich (2006). The Cosmopolitan Vision, Cambridge: Polity Press, p. 45 ^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony (2006), Cosmopolitanism. Ethics in a World of Strangers, London: Penguin Books ^ GTI Paper Series Archived 2008-02-11 at the Wayback Machine see Dawn of the Cosmopolitan: The Hope of a Global Citizens Movement , paper #15, and Global Politics and Institutions , paper #3 ^ a b Nhất Hạnh, Thich (1996) [1987]. Kotler, Arnold (ed.).

Being Peace . Illustrations by Mayumi Oda. Berkeley: Parallax. pp.

89– 95.

ISBN 9780938077978 .

OCLC 36745774 .

^ Ripper, Velcrow (director) (2004).

Scared Sacred (Film). National Filmboard of Canada.

^ Butler, Judith (2004).

Precarious Life: The Powers of Mourning and Violence . New York: Verso. p. 38.

ISBN 9781844670055 .

OCLC 803802111 .

^ a b c d Gilroy, Paul (2004). "The Planet".

After Empire: Multiculture or Postcolonial Melancholia . London: Routledge. pp. 67, 80– 81.

ISBN 9780415343077 .

OCLC 56454095 .

^ Fanon, Frantz (1963). "The Pitfalls of National Consciousness".

The Wretched of the Earth . Translated by Farrington, Constance. New York: Grove Press. pp.

148– 205.

ISBN 9780802150837 .

OCLC 817260777 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Theodosiadis, Michael (2024-05-18).

"The Byzantine cosmopolis beyond western liberalism" .

Dia-noesis .

13 : 33– 62.

doi : 10.12681/dia.37782 .

ISSN 2732-7507 .

^ Mamdani, Mahmood (2004).

Good Muslim, Bad Muslim: America, the Cold War, and the Roots of Terror (1st ed.). New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 978-0-375-42285-0 .

OCLC 53315228 .

^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony (2006).

"Kindness to Strangers" .

Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers . Issues of our time (1st ed.). New York: W. W. Norton and Co. pp.

155– 174.

ISBN 9780393061550 .

OCLC 475363652 .

^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony (2006). "Moral Disagreement".

Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers . Issues of our time (1st ed.). New York: W. W. Norton and Co. pp.

45– 68.

ISBN 9780393061550 .

OCLC 475363652 .

^ Mosterín, Jesús (2008).

La cultura de la libertad (in Spanish). Madrid: Espasa-Calpe.

ISBN 9788467026979 .

OCLC 693823808 .

^ Mosterín, Jesús (2005). "A World without Nation States".

Acta Institutionis Philosophiae et Aestheticae .

23 : 55– 77.

^ Blattberg, Charles (5 April 2012). "We Are All Compatriots". In Kymlicka, Will; Walker, Kathryn (eds.).

Rooted Cosmopolitanism . Vancouver: UBC Press.

ISBN 9780774822626 .

OCLC 886376838 .

SSRN 2034932 – via Social Science Research Network.

^ Nicholson, Carol (1998).

Three Views of Philosophy and Multiculturalism: Searle, Rorty, and Taylor . Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy.

^ Winther, Rasmus Grønfeldt (2012).

Free to Universalize or Bound by Culture? Multicultural and Public Philosophy (PDF) (White Paper).

^ Durkheim, Emile. "Individualism and Individuals": Originally published as "L'individualisme et les intellectuels," Revue bleue, 4e serie, 10 (1898): 7-13. Translated by Mark Traugott. Article accessed: https://www.scribd.com/document/85771137/Durkheim-Individualism-and-the-Intellectuals ^ See Cladis, Mark. 'A Communitarian Defense of Liberalism: Emile Durkheim and Contemporary Social Theory' (Stanford University Press: Stanford, 1992).

^ Delanty, Gerard (2006-09-27).

Handbook of Contemporary European Social Theory . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-203-08647-6 .

^ a b Emmanuel Levinas. Totality and Infinity. An Essay on Exteriority. Lingis A (trans) Duquesne University Press, Pittsburgh, PA 1998. pp. 84, 100–01 ^ Stojadinović, Mladen (2014).

"UNIVERSALISM REVIVED: NEEDS-BASED COSMOPOLITANISM AS A FOUNDATION OF GLOBAL DEMOCRACY" .

Facta Universitatis, Series: Philosophy, Sociology, Psychology and History .

13 : 78– 80 . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

^ Barua, Maan (2013).

"Circulating Elephants: Unpacking the Geographies of a Cosmopolitan Animal" .

Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers .

39 (4): 559.

Bibcode : 2014TrIBG..39..559B .

doi : 10.1111/tran.12047 . Retrieved 21 December 2013 .

^ GTI Paper Series Archived 2008-02-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ Daniele Archibugi, The Global Commonwealth of Citizens: Toward a Cosmopolitan Democracy , Princeton University Press, 2009 ^ Daniele Archibugi, Debating Cosmopolitics , London: Verso, 2003 ^ a b c d e f Vazha-Pshavela, “Cosmopolitanism and Patriotism,” trans. Rebecca Gould, *Asymptote Journal*, 2016.

[1] ^ Gould, Rebecca. “Cosmopolitanism and Patriotism in the Caucasus: The Example of Vazha-Pshavela,” *Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History*, vol. 12, no. 2 (2011), pp. 275–305.

Criticism [ edit ] Further information: Rootless cosmopolitan "Cosmopolitanism" became a rhetorical weapon used by nationalists against "alien" ideas that went counter to orthodoxy. European Jews were frequently accused of being "rootless cosmopolitans." [ 1 ] Joseph Stalin in a 1946 Moscow speech attacked writings in which "the positive Soviet hero is derided and inferior before all things foreign and cosmopolitanism that we all fought against from the time of Lenin, characteristic of the political leftovers, is many times applauded." [ 2 ] In the German Democratic Republic , cosmopolitanism was characterized as a bourgeois - imperialist ideology that rejects the nations' right to independence and national sovereignty . Cosmopolitanism was said to promote the dismantling of national and patriotic traditions and national culture . It was said to be advocated by the Anglo-American imperialism with an aim to establish world hegemony ( World Government ) operating in the interests of monopoly capitalism . Its opposite was not chauvinist bourgeois nationalism , but patriotism ; love of one's native place, one's country. Love of the homeland was said to be one of the deepest feelings of the working people, expressed in the struggle against conquerors and oppressors.

[ 3 ] Television journalist Jeff Greenfield believes that in the 21st century cosmopolitanism was viewed by Vladimir Putin as a threat to Russian nationalism, and also by nationalists in Hungary and Poland.

[ 4 ] In modern times, Stephen Miller , a Trump administration senior policy advisor, publicly criticized CNN reporter Jim Acosta as exhibiting "cosmopolitan bias" during a discussion on the government's new immigration plan.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal World portal Anarchism Anationalism Anti-patriotism Anti-fascism Anti-capitalism Bleeding-heart libertarianism Communism Cosmopolitan (disambiguation) Cross-culturalism Cultural universal Democratic globalization Europeanism Eurasianism Evolutionary ethics Existential migration Global citizenship Global justice Human rights Humanism Interculturalism Internationalism (politics) Left-wing politics Liberalism Libertarianism Managerial state Multiculturalism New world order (Baháʼí) Oneness of humanity (Baháʼí) Open society Parochialism Patriotism Rootless cosmopolitan Socialism Transculturation Ubi panis ibi patria United Nations Parliamentary Assembly Universal brotherhood Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam World Federalism References [ edit ] ^ Miller, Michael L.; Ury, Scott (2010).

"Cosmopolitanism: The end of Jewishness?" .

European Review of History: Revue Européenne d'Histoire .

17 (3): 337– 359.

doi : 10.1080/13507486.2010.481923 .

hdl : 20.500.14018/10574 .

S2CID 144567082 .

^ Jeff Greenfield, "The Ugly History of Stephen Miller's ‘Cosmopolitan’ Epithet: Surprise, surprise—the insult has its roots in Soviet anti-Semitism." Politico 3 August, 2017 ^ Taschenkalender der Kasernierten Volkspolizei 1954.

Berlin : Verl. d. Minist. d. Innern, pp. 248-249.

^ Jeff Greenfield, The Ugly History of Stephen Miller's ‘Cosmopolitan’ Epithet ^ "What 'Cosmopolitan Bias' Really Means" .

Bloomberg.com . 2 August 2017 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

External links [ edit ] "Cosmopolitanism" entry  by Pauline Kleingeld, Eric Brown in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Global governance and identity Proposals United Nations Parliamentary Assembly World constitution World government World federalism World taxation system Flag Theories Cosmopolitanism Democratic globalization Democratic mundialization Global apartheid Global citizenship Global governance Globalism Internationalism Transnational governance World currency Organisations Global citizens movement World Federalist Movement/Institute for Global Policy World Service Authority Campaign for World Government World Constitution and Parliament Association Provisional government Provisional World Government World portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qwrvm
Cached time: 20250814215433
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.881 seconds
Real time usage: 1.069 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5900/1000000
Revision size: 46384/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 184836/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10048/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 167027/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.542/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14569494/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  886.005      1 -total
 12.38%  109.664      6 Template:Navbox
 11.96%  105.925      1 Template:Langx
 10.12%   89.678     15 Template:Cite_book
  9.87%   87.486      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  8.28%   73.375      1 Template:Supranationalism/World_government_topics
  7.53%   66.756      1 Template:Short_description
  6.89%   61.029      8 Template:Citation_needed
  6.59%   58.349      9 Template:Cite_journal
  5.51%   48.853      8 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:599178:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215433 and revision id 1297048328. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cosmopolitanism&oldid=1297048328 " Categories : Cosmopolitanism Cultural geography Global citizenship Cultural globalization Interculturalism Philosophical schools and traditions Political philosophy Political theories Social movements Social philosophy World government Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 21:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cosmopolitanism 58 languages Add topic

