Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History 3 Iranian Australian census 4 Notable people 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Iranian Australians 3 languages تۆرکجه فارسی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethnic group Iranian Australians ایرانیان استرالیا Total population 77,870 (by birth, 2021) [ 1 ] 36,168 (by ancestry, 2011) Regions with significant populations New South Wales , Victoria Queensland Languages Australian English , Persian ( Azeri , Armenian , Kurdish , Mandaic and other languages of Iran ).

Religion 37.3% No religion 30.1% Muslim 10.3% Bahai 2.7% Christianity [ 2 ] Iranian Australians or Persian Australians are Australian citizens who are of Iranian ancestry or who hold Iranian citizenship .

Terminology [ edit ] Iranian-Australian is used interchangeably with Persian-Australian , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] partly due to the fact [ 7 ] that, in the Western world , Iran was known as "Persia". On the Nowruz of 1935, Reza Shah Pahlavi asked foreign delegates to use the term Iran , the endonym of the country used since the Sasanian Empire , in formal correspondence. Since then the use of the word "Iran" has become more common in the Western countries. This also changed the usage of the terms for Iranian nationality, and the common adjective for citizens of Iran changed from "Persian" to "Iranian". In 1959, the government of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi , Reza Shah Pahlavi's son, announced that both "Persia" and "Iran" could officially be used interchangeably. However the issue is still debated today .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The first known Iranian immigrant to Australia was Hamed Mortis ( Persian : حامد مرتس ) who was naturalised in New South Wales (NSW) on 20 October 1883.

[ 10 ] The only other early Iranian immigrant to NSW was Mohamad Ameen Khan ( Persian : محمد امین خان ) who was naturalised on 29 June 1899.

[ 11 ] Few Iranians migrated to Victoria in the nineteenth century, with only seven recorded in the 1891 census. From 1950 to 1977, the first wave of immigration from Iran to Australia occurred, but it was relatively insignificant in terms of the number of immigrants. Annually, few thousand tourists entered Australia which only a few hundreds were immigrants during this period, mostly university students who decided to stay. The vast majority of Iran's emigrants left their homeland just after the 1979 Islamic revolution which was the end of 2500 years of monarchy. For the period 1978–1980, the average number of Iranians entering Australia as immigrants annually increased to more than 5,000. From the period 1980–1988, there was a strong trend of emigration to Australia. Since 2000, there has been a wave of Iranian migration to Australia, especially engineers and doctors, through skilled migration program.

Iranians speak Persian and also Azerbaijani Turkish , Kurdish , and some other Persian languages and dialects are spoken in different regions of Iran. They practice the Iranian culture, which includes Nowruz . Along religious lines, both Muslim and non-Muslim Iranians reside in Australia. Non-Muslim Iranians include Iranian Christians (mainly Armenian and Assyrian ), Iranian Baháʼís , Iranian Mandaeans , Iranian Jews and Iranian Zoroastrians . The Bureau of Statistics reports that at the 2011 census the major religious affiliations amongst Iran-born were Islam (12 686) and Baháʼí (6269). Of the Iran-born, 18.4 per cent stated 'No Religion', which was lower than that of the total Australian population (22.3 per cent), and 9.4 per cent did not state a religion.

Iranian Australian census [ edit ] In 1991, Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) figures revealed an Iranian population of 12,914. In 2004, 18,798 people in Australia claim to be of Iranian ancestry.

[ 12 ] Notable people [ edit ] Soheil Abedian , founder and CEO of Sunland Group Arman Abrahimzadeh , domestic violence campaigner Shervin Adeli , futsal player Hoda Afshar , artist Mojean Aria , actor Daniel Arzani , footballer Sam Bashiry , entrepreneur Salah Choheili , Mandaean priest Donya Dadrasan , singer Sam Dastyari , senator for NSW Michael Denkha , actor Nabil Elderkin (mother is Iranian), film and music video director Kamran Eshraghian , engineer Alireza Faghani , football referee Amir Farid , pianist Salme Geransar , actress Zarah Ghahramani , writer Anise K , songwriter Shokufeh Kavani , painter Beejan Land , actor Joey Mead King , model, VJ, and TV and events host (Iranian father) Ashkan Mokhtarian , MMA fighter Granaz Moussavi , poet, film maker Anoushiravan Nourian , boxer Rita Panahi , opinion columnist Phoenix Raei , actor Ali Pahlavan , pop singer Tina Rahimi , boxer Nabi Saleh , founder of Gloria Jean's Coffees Hassan Shahsavan , Greco-Roman wrestler Farzad Tarash , freestyle wrestler Hossein Valamanesh , artist See also [ edit ] Australia portal Iran portal Australia–Iran relations Iranian peoples Persian people 2,500 year celebration of the Persian Empire Shirazi wine Iranian diaspora Iraqi Australians Kurdish Australians Baloch Australians Turkish Australians Armenian Australians Assyrian Australians Iranian New Zealanders Mandaean Australians References [ edit ] ^ "Australia's Population by Country of Birth" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 26 April 2022 . Retrieved 26 May 2022 .

^ "2021 People in Australia who were born in Iran, Census Country of birth QuickStats | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au .

^ Daha, Maryam (September 2011). "Contextual Factors Contributing to Ethnic Identity Development of Second-Generation Iranian American Adolescents".

Journal of Adolescent Research .

26 (5): 543– 569.

doi : 10.1177/0743558411402335 .

S2CID 146592244 .

... the majority of the participants self-identified themselves as Persian instead of Iranian, due to the stereotypes and negative portrayals of Iranians in the media and politics. Adolescents from Jewish and Baháʼí Faiths asserted their religious identity more than their ethnic identity. The fact Iranians use Persian interchangeably is nothing to do with current Iranian government because the name Iran was used before this period as well. Linguistically modern Persian is a branch of Old Persian in the family of Indo-European languages and that includes all the minorities as well more inclusively.

^ Nakamura, Raymond M. (2003).

Health in America: A Multicultural Perspective . Kendall/Hunt Pub. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-7575-0637-6 .

Iranian/Persian Americans – The flow of Iranian citizens into the United States began in 1979, during and after the Islamic Revolution.

^ Zanger, Mark (2001).

The American Ethnic Cookbook for Students . ABC-CLIO. p. 213.

ISBN 978-1-57356-345-1 .

^ Racial and Ethnic Relations in America, Carl Leon Bankston,"Therefore, Turkish and Iranian (Persian) Americans, who are Muslims but not ethnically Arabs, are often mistakenly..", Salem Press, 2000 ^ Darya, Fereshteh Haeri (2007).

Second-generation Iranian-Americans: The Relationship Between Ethnic Identity, Acculturation, and Psychological Well-being . pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 978-0-542-97374-1 .

According to previous studies, the presence of heterogeneity is evident among Iranian immigrants (also known as Persians – Iran was known as Persia until 1935) who came from myriads of religious (Muslim, Christian, Jewish, Armenian, Assyrian, Baha'i and Zoroastrian), ethnic (Turk, Kurds, Baluchs, Lurs, Turkamans, Arabs, as well as tribes such as Ghasghaie, and Bakhtiari), linguistic/dialogic background (Persian, Azari, Gialki, Mazandarani, Kurdish, Arabic, and others). Cultural, religious and political, and various other differences among Iranians reflect their diverse social and interpersonal interactions. Some studies suggest that, despite the existence of subgroup within Iranian immigrants (e.g. various ethno-religious groups), their nationality as Iranians has been an important point of reference and identifiable source of their identification as a group across time and setting.

^ Majd, Hooman , The Ayatollah Begs to Differ: The Paradox of Modern Iran , by Hooman Majd, Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group , 23 September 2008, ISBN 0385528426 , 9780385528429. p.

161 ^ Frye, Richard Nelson (2005).

Greater Iran: A 20th-century Odyssey . Mazda.

ISBN 9781568591773 . Retrieved 21 December 2016 .

^ Mortis Hamed Museum of History NSW ^ "Khan Mohamad Ameen" .

Museum of History NSW . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ Khoo, Siew-Ean; Lucas, David (24 May 2004).

"Australian' Ancestries" (PDF) .

Australian Census Analytic Program . Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

v t e Iranian diaspora Asia East China Japan South Pakistan Southeast Malaysia Philippines Thailand West Azerbaijan Bahrain Iraq Israel Kuwait Lebanon Qatar Syria United Arab Emirates Europe Finland France Germany Netherlands Spain Denmark Sweden Norway United Kingdom Romania Russia North America Canada United States Oceania Australia New Zealand South America Brazil See also Iranian peoples Foreign relations of Iran Iran's brain drain Iranian nationality law Baloch diaspora ( Emirates , Oman , America , India , Khorasan , Turkmenistan ) v t e North African and Middle Eastern Australians Arab Algerian Egyptian Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Palestinian Saudi Arabian Syrian Emirati Jewish Israeli Peoples of the Sudan South Sudanese Sudanese Other Coptic Iranian Kurdish Turkish Assyrian Mandaean Topics Antisemitism Anti-Arabism Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Islamophobia Organized crime North African diaspora West Asian diaspora v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Iranian_Australians&oldid=1300375444 " Categories : Australian people of Iranian descent Ethnic groups in Australia Iranian diaspora in Australia Asian diaspora in Australia Australia–Iran relations Muslim communities of Australia Hidden categories: Use British English from November 2017 Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Persian-language text Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles needing additional references from July 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 23:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Iranian Australians 3 languages Add topic

