Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 The Viaticum 3 Books 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Jazzar 12 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Português کوردی اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ifriqiyan physician (895–979) Ibn al-Jazzar Born 895 Kairouan , now Kairouan Governorate , Tunisia Died 979  (aged 84) Kairouan , now Kairouan Governorate , Tunisia Occupation Physician Islamic medicine Notable works Zād al-Musāfir wa Quwwat al-Hādhir زاد المسافر وقوت الحاضر (Viaticum) Abū Jaʿfar Aḥmad ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Abī Khālid ibn al-Jazzār al-Qayrawani (895–979) ( Arabic : أبو جعفر أحمد بن أبي خالد بن الجزار القيرواني ), was a 10th-century Arab Muslim physician who became famous for his writings on Islamic medicine .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He was born in Qayrawan in Tunisia .

[ 3 ] He was known in Europe by the Latinized name Algizar .

Biography [ edit ] Aghlabid dinar dated to 905 CE Andalusi physician ibn Juljul only knew Ibn al-Jazzar's biography from his student ibn Bariq, who went to Qayrawan to learn medicine. The writers of tabaqat "classes of famous men" generally considered writing only for fuquhā , their benefactors, and wali . Information on ibn al-Jazzar is controversial and possibly incomplete second-hand information.

Al-Jazzar was born in Qayrawan around 895 and died around 979. He lived about 84 years. He was married and had no children. He had learned the Quran at kuttab in his youth, and Arabic grammar , theology , fiqh , and history at the Great Mosque of Kairouan . He had learned medicine from his father and uncle, both physicians, and from Ishaq Ibn Suleiman , a physician in Qayrawan.

The existence of a hospital in Kairouan has not been proven. Teaching is provided by the doctors themselves at home. This is the case of Ibn al-Jazzar. In the conclusion of his Zād al-musāfir wa-qūt al-ḥāḍir , he said himself that he would be available at home for his students at the end of their daily consultation.

Teaching was oral. Paper was not widely used in the ninth century, and scrolls were rare and expensive. Ibn al-Jazzar had a library of 25 quintals , but this figure seems exaggerated. According to some, the quintal amounted to 50 kg and 25 kg, respectively. These books were about medicine and other disciplines.

Ibn al-Jazzar was calm and quiet. He did not attend funerals or weddings or participate in festivities. He had great respect for himself. He avoided compromises and did not attend the court and regime members. This may explain why when he treated the son of al-Qadi al-Nu'man , he refused to receive a costume of 300 mithkals as a gift. The Qadi did not realize his desire to visit al-Andalus; the relationship between the two governments of the Fatimid Caliphate in the newly-founded city of Mahdia and the Umayyad state of Córdoba was tense. Out of respect for the Amir, he did not go on hajj ; al-Nu'man was Isma'ili , and for ceremonial purposes and policies, he created barriers to pilgrims and forced them to pass through Mahdia and pay a toll.

He went every Friday to Mahdia to visit the uncle of al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah , his friend. During the heat of the summer, he went to Monastir and lived in a ribat with border soldiers. Ibn al-Jazzar prepared medicines and had an assistant to serve them who stood in the vestibule of his house and collected the consultation fees. Upon his death, ibn al-Jazzar left 24,000 gold dinars. The Aghlabid dinar weighed 4.20 grams.

The Viaticum [ edit ] Ibn al-Jazzar wrote a number of books. They deal with grammar, history, jurisprudence, prosody, etc. Many of these books, quoted by different authors, are lost. The most important book of ibn al-Jazzar is Zād al-Musāfir ( The Viaticum ). Translated into Latin, Greek and Hebrew, it has been copied, recopied, and printed in France and Italy since the sixteenth century. It was adopted and popularized in Europe as a book for a classical education in medicine. This book is a compilation of the Canon of Avicenna , a mixture of medicine and philosophy.

It is a medicine handbook from head to toe, designed for clinical teaching. With neither anatomy nor philosophy. There are lessons written after the course, as noted by the author in the conclusion of his book. This can be seen by the repetitions found in them. The author names the disease, lists the known symptoms, gives the treatment and sometimes indicates the prognosis. He often cited in reference the names of foreign authors, as if to give importance to his subject or for intellectual integrity to justify the loans.

In his History of Arab medicine in Tunisia for ten centuries, Ahmed Ben Miled writes: As al-Razi Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi , precedes him by a few decades, Ibn Al Jazzar has adopted in the Viaticum the same style as “El Haoui”, (The Continent: who voluntarily abstain from carnal pleasures) of al-Razi but more elaborate and more concise. One can wonder if he had not had this book in his hands very early on. This is unlikely, because in The Viaticum he does not separate measles from smallpox, which was the innovation of al-Razi. And among the physicians whom he often refers such Galen, Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Refus, Tridon, Fergorius, Aristotle and Ibn Suleiman Isaac Israeli ben Solomon , he does not mention al-Razi.

Books by these authors must have existed in Tunisia at that time. Tunisia was in constant contact with Rome, Athens and Byzantium because of the sheer size of its economy and its position in the midst of the Mediterranean Sea .

Constantine the African was the translator of Ibn Al Jazzar's books.

Books [ edit ] Among his titles are, Zād al-musāfir wa-qūt al-ḥāḍir al-Iʿtimād fī l-adwiya al-mufrada al-Bughya fī l-adwiya al-murakkaba Ṭibb al-fuqarāʾ wa-l-masākīn Ṭibb al-mashāyikh Kitāb al-khawwāṣṣ His major work was Zād al-musāfir .

He had some books on geriatric medicine and health of elderly ( Kitāb Ṭibb al-Mashāyikh [ 4 ] or Ṭibb al-Mashāyikh wa-ḥifẓ ṣiḥḥatihim ), [ 5 ] a book on sleep disorders, one on 'forgetfulness and how to strengthen memory' ( Kitāb al-Nisyān wa-Ṭuruq Taqwiyat al-Dhākira ), [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and another on causes of mortality ( Risāla fī Asbāb al-Wafāh ).

[ 4 ] He had other books on pediatrics , fevers, sexual disorders, medicine of the poor, [ 8 ] therapeutics, viaticum, coryza, stomach disorders, leprosy, separate drugs, compound drugs, and in other areas of science (e.g., history, animals and literature).

See also [ edit ] List of Arab scientists and scholars References [ edit ] ^ Meisami, Julie Scott; Starkey, Paul (1998).

Encyclopedia of Arabic Literature . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780415185721 .

^ Mavroudi, Maria (2023), Stathakopoulos, Dionysios; Bouras-Vallianatos, Petros (eds.), "Arabic Terms in Byzantine Materia Medica: Oral and Textual Transmission" , Drugs in the Medieval Mediterranean: Transmission and Circulation of Pharmacological Knowledge , Cambridge University Press, pp.

130– 183, doi : 10.1017/9781009389792.005 , ISBN 978-1-009-38979-2 ^ MuslimHeritage.com – Muslim Scholars ^ a b Al Jazzar Archived 2008-07-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Vesalius Official journal of the International Society for the History of Medicine ^ Algizar a web page in french Archived 2016-04-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gerrit Bos, Ibn al-Jazzar , Risala fi l-isyan (Treatise on forgetfulness), London, 1995 ^ Islamic medical Manuscripts Bibliography [ edit ] Ahmed Ben Miled , Ibn Al Jazzar. Constantin l'Africain , éd. Salambô, Tunis, 1987 Ahmed Ben Miled , Histoire de la médecine arabe en Tunisie , éd. Dar al-Gharb al-Islami, Beyrouth, 1999 Ahmed Ben Miled , Ibn Al Jazzar. Médecin à Kairouan , éd. Al Maktaba Al Tounisia, Tunis, 1936 Vanzan, Anna (1 January 2012). "The Paediatric Treatise of a Fatimid Physician: Ibn al-Jazzar's Kitab Siyasat al-Sibyan ".

Journal of Shi'a Islamic Studies .

5 (2): 173– 186.

doi : 10.1353/isl.2012.0000 .

S2CID 143494930 .

External links [ edit ] Ibn al-Jazzār v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI 2 3 VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_al-Jazzar&oldid=1298835829 " Categories : People from Kairouan 890s births 970s deaths 10th-century physicians Physicians of the medieval Islamic world 10th-century people from Ifriqiya Scholars from the Fatimid Caliphate Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 01:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Jazzar 12 languages Add topic

