Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methodology 2 Features 3 Version history 4 Related software 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents UTEXAS Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Computer program For University of Texas at Austin, see University of Texas at Austin .

UTEXAS UTEXAS4 Screen Shot Original author(s) Stephen G. Wright Stable release 4.0 Operating system Microsoft Windows Available in English Type slope stability software License Proprietary UTEXAS is a slope stability analysis program written by Stephen G. Wright of the University of Texas at Austin . The program is used in the field of civil engineering to analyze levees , earth dams , natural slopes, and anywhere there is concern for mass wasting . UTEXAS finds the factor of safety for the slope and the critical failure surface. Recently the software was used to help determine the reasons behind the failure of I-walls during Hurricane Katrina .

[ 1 ] Methodology [ edit ] UTEXAS uses the limit equilibrium method . The user provides the geometry and shear strength parameters for the slope in question and UTEXAS computes a factor of safety against slope failure. The factor of safety for a candidate failure surface is computed as the forces driving failure along the surface divided by the shear resistance of the soils along the surface.

[ 2 ] UTEXAS employs a fast automatic search algorithm to find the failure surface with the lowest factor of safety with respect to shear strength . This is the critical failure surface. Alternatively an arbitrary surface can be entered by the user and UTEXAS can determine the factor of safety associated with it.

[ 3 ] The factor of safety for a shear surface is determined using a procedure of slices . Several different procedures exist and the user can choose among them.

[ 3 ] Input and output consist of text files. The geologic model is primarily defined using profile lines, which are lines defining the interface between different soil layers. Profile lines are associated with materials, and different materials with different properties can be defined.

Features [ edit ] The following is a list of some of the more distinct features of UTEXAS: Automatic Search Grid Multi-stage analysis Distributed loads Line loads Non-circular slip surfaces Interpolated pore pressures Internal soil reinforcement Version history [ edit ] UTEXAS5 - Currently under development UTEXAS4 - Released in 1999.

Translated into C++ from Fortran .

Microsoft Windows interface Accompanied by TexGraf4 program for displaying results.

New features: lateral unit weight variation, import of pore water pressure from GMS/SEEP2D, more shear strength options, ability to contour factors of safety, tension cracks [ 4 ] UTEXAS3 - Released in 1990.

First version with multi-stage analysis.

Accompanied by GRAPHICS3 program for displaying results.

New features: Multi-stage analysis.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] UTEXAS2 - Released in 1986.

First version written for PCs.

New features: Multiple limit equilibrium procedures, more ways to define shear strength, internal reinforcement, input data format improvements.

[ 7 ] UTEXAS - Released in 1984.

[ 8 ] Successor to various programs written by Wright between 1969 and 1984 Features: Multiple piezometric surfaces, nonlinear shear strength envelope, simulation of seismic loading, noncircular slip surface search algorithm [ citation needed ] Related software [ edit ] TexGraf4 screen shot TexGraf - Reads results from UTEXAS and displays them graphically. Also written by Wright UTEXASED4 - An educational version GMS – has a pre and post processor for UTEXAS [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Duncan, J.; Wright, S.; Vroman, N. (2008), "Stability of I-walls in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina" , Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering , J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng. 134, SPECIAL ISSUE: Performance of Geo-Systems during Hurricane Katrina (5), American Society of Civil Engineers: 681– 691, doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)1090-0241(2008)134:5(681) ^ Aquaveo (2007), GMS Tutorials, UTEXAS - Embankment on Soft Clay (PDF) , Aquaveo ^ a b Wright, S. (1999), UTEXAS4, A Computer Program For Slope Stability Calculations ^ UTEXAS4 Stability Analysis of Complex Slopes (PDF) . ENSOFT, INC. 2014.

^ Edris, Earl V. Jr.; Wright, Stephen G. (1992).

User's Guide: UTEXAS3 Slope stability Package . U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

^ "Shinoak Software: UTEXAS3" .

Shinoak Software .

^ Edris, Earl V. Jr.; Wright, Stephen G. (1987).

User's Guide: UTEXAS2 Slope-Stability Package . U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Wright, Stephen G.; Roecker, James D. (1984).

UTEXAS (University of Texas Analysis of Slopes): A Computer Program for Slope Stability Calculations . University of Texas at Austin. Center for Transportation Research . Retrieved 27 May 2020 .

^ Gms:Utexas – Xms Wiki External links [ edit ] Home page for STABL.

Home page for stabl windows version Shinoak Software (UTEXAS Distributor) v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=UTEXAS&oldid=1292737841 " Categories : Geotechnical engineering software Hydrogeology software Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents UTEXAS Add languages Add topic

