Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 In Victoria 2 Notable people 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Spanish Australians 2 languages Español Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spanish Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ethnic group Spanish Australians Hispano-australianos Total population 128,693 (by ancestry, 2021 ) [ 1 ] ( 0.5% of the Australian population ) 17,281 (by birth, 2021 ) Regions with significant populations Primarily capital cities Languages Australian English , Spanish . Minority speaks Catalan , Galician , and Basque .

Religion Roman Catholicism (majority) Protestantism (minority) Related ethnic groups Spaniards , Castilians , Asturians , Cantabrians , Aragonese , Galicians , Catalans , Basques , other Hispanic and Latin American Australians People with Spanish ancestry as a percentage of the population in Sydney divided geographically by postal area, as of the 2011 census Part of a series on the Spanish people Rojigualda (historical Spanish flag) Regional groups Andalusians Aragonese Asturians (including Vaqueiros de Alzada ) Balearics Basques Canary Islanders (incl.

Isleños ) Cantabrians Castilians Catalans Criollos Extremadurans Galicians Leonese Valencians Other groups Berbers Erromintxela Gitanos Mercheros Maghrebis Occitans Sephardim (including Iberian Jews and Xuetes ) Significant Spanish diaspora Andorra Argentina Belgium Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Cuba Dominican Republic France Germany Italy Mexico Netherlands Peru Philippines Puerto Rico Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Uruguay Venezuela Languages Spanish (AKA Castilian ) Basque Catalan Galician Other languages Aragonese Astur-Leonese Caló Catalan Sign Erromintxela Extremaduran Fala Judaeo-Spanish Occitan (AKA Aranese ) Portuguese Spanish Sign Valencian Sign Category • Spain portal v t e Spanish Australians refers to Australian citizens and residents of Spanish descent, or people who were born in Spain and immigrated to Australia . There are approximately 123,000 Australians who are of full or partial Spanish descent, most of whom reside within the major cities of Sydney and Melbourne , with lesser but rapidly growing numbers in Brisbane (which has over 15,000) and Perth .

[ 2 ] Of these, according to the 2011 Australian census, 13,057 were born in Spain.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] In Victoria [ edit ] Although Spanish seafarers began exploring the South Pacific in the sixteenth century, it was not until the Victorian gold rush of the 1850s that Spanish immigrants began to arrive in Victoria . The first Spanish restaurant was opened in Melbourne in 1860. By 1871, 135 Spaniards lived in Victoria, 80% of them men. Over the next two decades, the number of Spanish women arriving in Victoria tripled; a few more men also arrived.

Despite a military coup in Spain in 1923 and the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939, few Spanish refugees settled in Victoria. Immigration Acts passed in the 1920s restricted the entry of Spaniards and other southern Europeans. By 1947, the Spain-born population of Victoria was only 252.

The Spain-born population dramatically increased from the late 1950s, following the 1958 Spanish-Australian migration agreement. The agreement provided assisted passages to Spanish migrants, many escaping poverty and hunger. The community in Victoria increased from 374 in 1954 to 3,143 in 1966.

During the following decades economic improvements in Spain coincided with a slowing of Spanish immigration to Australia. The Spain-born community in Victoria today has declined from 4,067 in 1986 to 3,523, in 2016.

The Spain-born community in Victoria is also aging: 45% of its population are between the ages of 50 and 75. Living predominantly in the Geelong area, the majority are employed as professionals and tradespeople.

The community is supported by a number of groups and organizations including the Spanish Welfare Centre (CELAS), providing counseling, community development and educational programs. Spanish culture in Victoria is further maintained through SBS and community radio and television programs, and publications such as The Spanish Herald.

[ 4 ] Notable people [ edit ] Carlos Blanco , rugby union player Josh Cordoba , rugby league player Alex de Minaur , tennis player (Spanish mother) Al Grassby , politician Juan Manuel Fuentes Elsa Pataky , actress Ellen Perez , tennis player Nathalia Ramos , actress Rosendo Salvado , abbot of New Norcia Holly Valance , a singer (some Spanish ancestry on mother's side) Isaías Sánchez , football (soccer) player and captain of Adelaide United in the A-League from 2017 to 2019 Miguel Maestre , restaurateur and television presenter - co-host lifestyle television series The Living Room .

Alyssa Alano , actress and model (Spanish biological father) Jacob Elordi , actor (Basque descent) See also [ edit ] Australia portal Spain portal Australia–Spain relations Catholic Church in Australia European Australians Europeans in Oceania Hispanic and Latin American Australians Immigration to Australia Spanish New Zealanders References [ edit ] ^ "2021 Australia, Census All persons QuickStats" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 27 July 2022 .

^ "Community Information Summary - Spain-born" (PDF) .

^ "The People of Australia – Statistics from the 2011 Census" (PDF) . Australian Department of Immigration. 2014. p. 60. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2014.

^ " Immigration History from Spain to Victoria Archived 27 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine " v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Spanish diaspora By country Africa Equatorial Guinea South Africa Asia Philippines Europe France Germany Netherlands Sweden United Kingdom North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Puerto Rico Trinidad and Tobago United States Asturian Basque Canarian ( in Louisiana ) Catalan Galician Oceania Australia New Zealand US areas of Oceania Hawaii South America Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Peru Uruguay Venezuela See also Conquest of the Canary Islands Isleño Republican exiles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spanish_Australians&oldid=1306411581 " Categories : Australian people of Spanish descent European diaspora in Australia Spanish diaspora Spanish-Australian culture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from June 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spanish Australians 2 languages Add topic

