Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications of biocapacity 2 See also 3 References 4 Other resources Toggle the table of contents Biocapacity 11 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Македонски Português Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Estimate of an ecosystem's production of certain biological materials Not to be confused with Carrying capacity .

The biocapacity or biological capacity of an ecosystem is an estimate of its production of certain biological materials such as natural resources , and its absorption and filtering of other materials such as carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Biocapacity is used together with ecological footprint as a method of measuring human impact on the environment . Biocapacity and ecological footprint are tools created by the Global Footprint Network , used in sustainability studies around the world.

Biocapacity is expressed in terms of global hectares per person, thus is dependent on human population. A global hectare is an adjusted unit that represents the average biological productivity of all productive hectares on Earth in a given year (because not all hectares produce the same amount of ecosystem services ). Biocapacity is calculated from United Nations population and land use data, and may be reported at various regional levels, such as a city, a country, or the world as a whole.

For example, there were roughly 12.2 billion hectares of biologically productive land and water areas on this planet in 2016. Dividing by the number of people alive in that year, 7.4 billion, gives a biocapacity for the Earth of 1.6 global hectares per person.

These 1.6 global hectares includes the areas for wild species that compete with people for space.

[ 3 ] Applications of biocapacity [ edit ] An increase in global population can result in a decrease in biocapacity.  This is usually because the Earth's resources have to be shared; therefore, there becomes little to supply the increasing demand of the increasing population .

[ 4 ] Currently, this issue can be resolved by outsourcing . However, resources will run out due to the increasing demands and as a result a collapse of an ecosystem can be the consequence of such actions.

[ 4 ] When the ecological footprint becomes greater than the biocapacity of the population, a biocapacity deficit is suspected.

[ 5 ] 'Global biocapacity' is a term sometimes used to describe the total capacity of an ecosystem to support various continuous activity and changes.  When the ecological footprint of a population exceeds the biocapacity of the environment it lives in, this is called an 'biocapacity deficit'. Such a deficit comes from three sources: overusing one's own ecosystems ("overshoot"), net imports, or use of the global commons.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Latest data from Global Footprint Network suggests that humanity was using an equivalence of 1.7 Earths in 2016.

[ 7 ] The dominant factor of global ecological overshoot comes from carbon dioxide emissions stemming from fossil fuel burning.

[ 8 ] Additional stresses of greenhouse gases , climate change , and ocean acidification can also aggravate the problem.

[ 4 ] In reference to the definition of biocapacity: 1.7 Earths means the renewable resources are being liquidated because they are being consumed faster than the resources can regenerate.

[ 4 ] Therefore, it will take one year and eight months for the resources humanity uses in one year to be able to regenerate again, including absorbing all the waste we generate.

[ 4 ] So instead of taking one year's worth of resources per year, we are yearly consuming resources that should last us one year and eight months.

In addition, if this matter becomes severe, an ecological reserve will be set on areas to preserve their ecosystems. Awareness about our depleting resources include: agricultural land , forest resources and rangeland .

[ 9 ] Biocapacity used in correlation to ecological footprint can therefore suggest whether a specific population, region, country or part of a world is living in the means of their capital. Accordingly, the study of biocapacity and ecological footprint is known as the Ecological Footprint Analysis (EFA) .

[ 1 ] Biocapacity is also affected by the technology used during the year. With new technologies emerging, it is not clear whether the technology in that year is good or bad but the technology does impact resource supply and demand, which in turn affects biocapacity.

[ 1 ] Hence what is considered “useful” can change from year to year (e.g. use of corn (maize) stover for cellulosic ethanol production would result in corn stover becoming a useful material, and thus increase the biocapacity of maize cropland).

Moreover, environmentalists have created ecological footprint calculators for a single person(s) to determine whether they are encompassing more than what is available for them in their population.

[ 10 ] Consequently, biocapacity results will be applied to their ecological footprint to determine how much they may contribute or take away from sustainable development.

In general, biocapacity is the amount of resources available to people at a specific moment in time to a specific population ( supply ) and to differentiate between ecological footprint – which is the environmental demand of a regional ecosystem .

[ 10 ] Biocapacity is able to determine the human impacts on Earth. By determining productivity of land (i.e. the resources available for human consumption), biocapacity will be able to predict and perhaps examine the effects on the ecosystems closely based on collected results of human consumption.  The biocapacity of an area is calculated by multiplying the actual physical area by the yield factor with the appropriate equivalence factor. Biocapacity is usually expressed in global hectares (gha) .

[ 11 ] Since global hectares is able to convert human consumptions like food and water into a measurement, biocapacity can be applied to determine the carrying capacity of the Earth. Likewise, because an economy is tied to various production factors such as natural resources, biocapacity can also be applied to determine human capital .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] List of countries by ecological footprint Global Footprint Network Global Hectare Human population Carrying Capacity Ecological reserve Sustainable Development Ecological Footprint World Energy Consumption References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Frequently Asked Questions" .

Global Footprint Network : Advancing the Science of Sustainability . Retrieved 11 August 2014 .

^ Yue, Dongxia; Guo, Jianjun; Hui, Cang (2013). "Scale dependency of biocapacity and the fallacy of unsustainable development".

Journal of Environmental Management .

126 : 13– 19.

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2013.04.022 .

hdl : 10019.1/118295 .

PMID 23648317 .

^ "Ecological Wealth of Nations: Earth's Biocapacity as a new framework for International Cooperation" . Archived from the original on 2012-05-06 . Retrieved 2011-12-21 .

^ a b c d e "What does ecological overshoot mean?" .

World Wildlife Fund . WWF . Retrieved 11 August 2014 .

^ a b "Natures regenerative capacity" .

World Wildlife Fund . WWF . Retrieved 11 August 2014 .

^ Venetoulis, Jason; Talberth, John (5 January 2007). "Refining the ecological footprint".

Environment, Development and Sustainability .

10 (4): 441– 469.

doi : 10.1007/s10668-006-9074-z .

S2CID 153900117 .

^ "Open Data Platform" .

^ Blomqvist, Linus; Brook, Barry W.; Ellis, Erle C.; Kareiva, Peter M.; Nordhaus, Ted; Shellenberger, Michael (2013).

"Does the Shoe Fit? Real versus Imagined Ecological Footprints" .

PLOS Biology .

11 (11). PLOS biology journal: e1001700.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001700 .

PMC 3818165 .

PMID 24223517 .

^ Hayden, Anders (December 30, 2013).

"ecological footprint (EF)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica Inc . Retrieved 11 August 2014 .

^ a b Hopton, Matthew E.; White, Denis (2012). "A simplified ecological footprint at a regional scale".

Journal of Environmental Management .

111 : 279– 286.

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvman.2011.07.005 .

PMID 22033065 .

^ "Bioresources, Biocapacity of Ecosystems, and related terms" .

Michel Serres Institute: for resources and public goods . Retrieved 11 August 2014 .

^ Ünal, Huseyin; Aktuğ, Muhammet (11 February 2022).

"The impact of human capital and bio-capacity on the environmental quality: evidence from G20 countries" .

Environ Sci Pollut Res .

29 (30): 45635– 45645.

Bibcode : 2022ESPR...2945635U .

doi : 10.1007/s11356-022-19122-0 .

PMID 35149945 .

S2CID 246752753 . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

Other resources [ edit ] Videos Finding Australia’s biocapacity Dr Mathis Wackernagel explains biocapacity and how it’s calculated.

Ecological Balance Sheets for 180+ Countries Global Footprint Network Peer-reviewed Articles The importance of resource security for poverty eradication ; Defying the Footprint Oracle: Implications of Country Resource Trends Data Results from the National Footprint and Biocapacity Accounts v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category v t e Lists of countries by population statistics Global Current population United Nations Demographics of the world Continents/subregions Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Caribbean Oceania South America Intercontinental Americas Arab world Commonwealth of Nations Eurasia European Union Islands Latin America Middle East Cities/urban areas World cities National capitals Megacities Megalopolises Past and future Past and future population Estimates of historical world population Human population projections 1 1000 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 1939 1989 2000 2005 2010 2015 Population milestones Population density Current density Past and future population density Person-to-arable land ratio Growth indicators Population growth rate Natural increase Net reproduction rate Number of births Number of deaths Birth rate Mortality rate Fertility rate Past fertility rate Life expectancy World Africa Asia Europe North America Oceania South America world regions past life expectancy Other demographics Age at childbearing Age at first marriage Age structure Dependency ratio Divorce rate Ethnic and cultural diversity level Ethnic composition Immigrant population Linguistic diversity Median age Net migration rate Number of households Religion / Irreligion Sex ratio Urban population Urbanization Health Antidepressant consumption Antiviral medications for pandemic influenza HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate Infant and under-five mortality rates Maternal mortality rate Obesity rate Percentage suffering from undernourishment Health expenditure by country by type of financing Suicide rate Total health expenditure per capita Health spending as % of GDP Body mass index (BMI) Education and innovation Bloomberg Innovation Index Education Index Global Innovation Index International Innovation Index Literacy rate Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) Tertiary education attainment World Intellectual Property Indicators Economic Access to financial services Development aid donors Official Development Assistance received Employment rate Irrigated land area Human Development Index by country inequality-adjusted planetary pressures–adjusted HDI Human Poverty Index Imports Exports Income equality Labour force Share of income of top 1% Number of millionaires (US dollars) Number of billionaires (US dollars) Percentage living in poverty Public sector Unemployment rate Wealth inequality List of international rankings Lists by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biocapacity&oldid=1292098638 " Categories : Human overpopulation Sustainability Population ecology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biocapacity 11 languages Add topic

