Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organisation Toggle Organisation subsection 2.1 Prizes and other activities 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters 24 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska مصرى Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academy of sciences Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi Formation 1811 ; 214 years ago ( 1811 ) Headquarters Oslo, Norway Membership ~538 Norwegian Fellows ~417 Foreign Members Patron Haakon V President Annelin Eriksen Vice-presidents Kjetil Taskén and Terje Lohndal General secretary Marit Westergaard Staff ~16 Website https://dnva.no/ The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters building in Drammensveien The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters ( Norwegian : Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi , DNVA ) is a learned society based in Oslo , Norway. Its purpose is to support the advancement of science and scholarship in Norway.

History [ edit ] The Royal Frederick University in Christiania was established in 1811. The idea of a learned society in Christiania surfaced for the first time in 1841.

[ 1 ] The city of Trondhjem had no university, but had a learned society, the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters , established in 1760.

[ 2 ] The purpose of a learned society in Christiania was to support scientific studies and aid publication of academic papers. The idea of the Humboldt -inspired university, where independent research stood strong, had overtaken the instrumental view of a university as primarily a means to produce civil servants. The city already had societies for specific professions, for instance the Norwegian Medical Society , which was founded in 1833. However, these societies were open to both academics within medicine as well as physicians outside of academia. The learned society would be open to employed academics only, but from all academic branches.

[ 1 ] The idea did not come to immediate fruition in 1841. Money was a problem; also there were "doubts with regards to the adequacy of the scientific powers".

[ 1 ] However, cross-disciplinary cooperation was flourishing. The first scientific congress in Norway was held in 1844. Two hundred people within the natural sciences and medicine convened for the fourth Scandinavian meeting of natural researchers. Finally, in 1857 a source of finances was found: professor of medicine Frants C. Faye .

[ 3 ] The academy was founded, and inaugurated on 3 May 1857 under the name Videnskabsselskabet i Christiania .

[ 4 ] "Christiania" was later changed to "Kristiania". The name Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi i Kristiania was adopted in the early twentieth century, [ 5 ] and from 1924 "i Kristiania" was dropped, when Oslo voted to return the name to its original Norwegian name.

[ 4 ] The economic support from the state was minimal during the society’s first fifty years. As such the academy led a humble existence. In the early twentieth century, Waldemar Christofer Brøgger (later the university's first rector ) suggested a plan to strengthen the academy. He established the Nansen Foundation , specifically tied to the academy to strengthen its economy. Brøgger's goal was to employ researchers specifically within the academy to secure independence from the university; however, this proposal never happened.

[ 5 ] The purpose of the academy remained to advance science and scholarship in general through meetings, seminars and support of research and publications.

[ 4 ] Nonetheless, the Nansen Foundation and other economic sources were important. They helped in the establishment of other bodies, such as the Institute for Comparative Research in Human Culture .

[ 6 ] These foundations lost some of their importance after World War II . However, an entirely new source of funding was later found, as Otto Lous Mohr suggested to use surplus from a state-owned, national lottery.

[ 7 ] The establishment of Norsk Tipping was laid down in 1946, and founded in 1947.

[ 8 ] The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters wished to administer this income through a council of its own, but the Government of Norway refused and created the research council NAVF ( Norges allmennvitenskapelige forskningsråd , the Norwegian Council of General Research). The academy could merely suggest representatives for this council. Ever since then, the state-driven research councils have been more important than the academy, economically.

[ 7 ] NAVF and other bodies were merged in 1993 to become the Research Council of Norway .

[ 9 ] Organisation [ edit ] The General Meeting is the supreme body of the Academy. The board of the Academy consists of its President, Secretary General and Vice-President together with the chairman, 
vice-chairman and secretary of the two divisions, Mathematics and Natural Sciences and Humanities and Social Sciences.

As of 2025 the President of the Academy is professor of social anthropology, Annelin Eriksen ( UiB ). Vice presidents are Kjetil Taskén and Terje Lohndal .

King Harald V of Norway is honorary president.

[ 10 ] The Academy aims to fulfill its mission by initiating and supporting research, organizing meetings and international conferences, publishing scientific writings and appointing representatives to national and international bodies. Each year, the Academy organizes at least 12 open meetings with topics covering a wide range of academic disciplines.

[ 11 ] As of 1 April 2021, the Academy had 946 members, of which 535 were Norwegian and 411 foreign.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The members are divided into the mathematics and science class, and the humanities and social sciences class.

[ 14 ] Prizes and other activities [ edit ] The academy is responsible for awarding the Abel Prize in mathematics and the Kavli Prize in astrophysics , nanoscience and neuroscience .

[ 4 ] It also represents Norway in the International Council for Science (ICSU), the Union Académique Internationale (UAI), the European Science Foundation (ESF) and the All European Academies (ALLEA).

[ 10 ] The academy is also part of the European Science Academies Advisory Council (EASAC) and one representative from the academy is stationed at the headquarters in Brussels . Its aim is to promote science based governing.

[ citation needed ] The academy has approximately 900 members, both foreign and Norwegian. Prize winners are also added to the member lists upon being awarded.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] List of members of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters References [ edit ] ^ a b c Collett, John Peter (1999).

Historien om Universitetet i Oslo (in Norwegian). Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. p. 58.

ISBN 82-00-12937-3 .

^ Henriksen, Petter, ed. (2007).

"Det Kongelige Norske Videnskabers Selskab" .

Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian). Oslo: Kunnskapsforlaget . Retrieved 7 June 2009 .

^ Collett, 1999: p. 59 ^ a b c d Henriksen, Petter, ed. (2007).

"Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi" .

Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian). Oslo: Kunnskapsforlaget . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

^ a b Collett, 1999: p. 108 ^ Collett, 1999: p. 137 ^ a b Collett, 1999: p. 187 ^ Henriksen, Petter, ed. (2007).

"Norsk Tipping AS" .

Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian). Oslo: Kunnskapsforlaget . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

^ Henriksen, Petter, ed. (2007).

"forskningsråd" .

Store norske leksikon (in Norwegian). Oslo: Kunnskapsforlaget . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

^ a b "About the academy" . Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ "Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi" .

Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 2025-08-17 .

^ "Medlemmer" .

Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 2022-09-26 .

^ "Utenlandske medlemmer" .

Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 2022-09-26 .

^ "Medlemmer" .

Det Norske Videnskaps-Akademi (in Norwegian Bokmål) . Retrieved 2022-09-26 .

External links [ edit ] Official website (in English) v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Australia 2 Czech Republic 2 3 Portugal Norway 2 Latvia 2 Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii 2 People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Norwegian_Academy_of_Science_and_Letters&oldid=1306433789 " Categories : 1857 establishments in Norway National academies of sciences National academies of arts and humanities Organisations based in Oslo Scientific organizations established in 1857 Science and technology in Norway Members of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Members of the International Council for Science Learned societies of Norway Members of the International Science Council Hidden categories: CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Norwegian Bokmål-language sources (nb) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing Norwegian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 18:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters 24 languages Add topic

