Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Support of the invasion of Iraq 1.2 Libel case 2 Notable personnel Toggle Notable personnel subsection 2.1 Editorial staff 2.2 Contributing editors 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Weekly Standard 10 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano עברית Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US opinion magazine (1995–2018) This article is about the U.S. magazine. For the Zimbabwean weekly newspaper, see The Standard (Zimbabwe) . For the Canadian weekly newspaper, see Montreal Standard .

The Weekly Standard December 24, 2018 issue of The Weekly Standard Editor Stephen F. Hayes Frequency Weekly Publisher Terry Eastland Total circulation (December 2018) ~50,000 [ 1 ] First issue September 1995 ; 29 years ago ( 1995-09 ) Final issue December 2018 ; 6 years ago ( 2018-12 ) Company Clarity Media Group Country United States Based in Washington, D.C.

Language English Website Archived 31 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine ISSN 1083-3013 The Weekly Standard was an American neoconservative political magazine of news, analysis, and commentary that was published 48 times per year. Originally edited by founders Bill Kristol and Fred Barnes , the Standard was described as a "redoubt of neoconservatism" and as "the neocon bible." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its founding publisher, News Corporation , debuted the title on September 18, 1995.

[ 4 ] In 2009, News Corporation sold the magazine to a subsidiary of the Anschutz Corporation .

[ 5 ] On December 14, 2018, its owners announced that the magazine would cease publication, with the last issue to be published on December 17.

[ 6 ] Sources have attributed its demise to an increasing divergence between Kristol and other editors' shift towards anti-Trump positions on the one hand, and the magazine's audience's shift towards Trumpism on the other.

[ 7 ] Many of the magazine's articles were written by members of conservative think tanks located in Washington , including the American Enterprise Institute , the Ethics and Public Policy Center , the Foundation for Defense of Democracies , the Hudson Institute , and the Foreign Policy Initiative . Individuals who wrote for the magazine included Elliott Abrams , Peter Berkowitz , John Bolton , Ellen Bork, David Brooks , Gertrude Himmelfarb , Christopher Hitchens , Harvey Mansfield , Cynthia Ozick , Joe Queenan , and John Yoo . The magazine's website also produced regular online-only commentaries and news articles. The site's editorial stance was described as neoconservative.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Standard was viewed as heavily influential during the administration of President George W. Bush (2001–2009), being called the in-flight magazine of Air Force One .

[ 13 ] In 2003, although the magazine's circulation was only 55,000, Kristol said that "We have a funny relationship with the top tier of the administration. They very much keep us at arm's length, but Vice President Dick Cheney does send over someone to pick up 30 copies of the magazine every Monday." [ 14 ] In 2006, though the publication had never been profitable and reputedly lost more than a million dollars a year, News Corporation head Rupert Murdoch initially dismissed the idea of selling it.

[ 15 ] Subsequently, in June 2009, a report circulated that a sale of the publication to Philip Anschutz was imminent, with Murdoch's position being that, having since purchased The Wall Street Journal in 2007, his interest in the smaller publication had diminished.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The Washington Examiner reported that month that the Examiner ' s parent company, the Anschutz-owned Clarity Media Group , had purchased the Standard ; [ 18 ] [ 19 ] the price was about $1 million.

[ 20 ] The Standard increased its paid circulation by 39 percent between its June 2009 and June 2010 BPA statements.

[ 21 ] Its print circulation of about 100,000 in 2013 had decreased to 72,000 by 2017, according to the BPA, with circulation dropping about 10 percent between 2016 and 2017.

[ 13 ] In late 2016, Kristol ended his time as editor-in-chief.

[ 22 ] He was replaced by Stephen Hayes, the magazine's senior writer.

[ 23 ] Under Hayes' leadership, the Standard continued to be as critical of Donald Trump as it had been under Kristol; Trump's supporters in turn criticized the Standard , and the magazine's influence as Republican circles dwindled.

[ 24 ] In December 2017, The Weekly Standard became an official fact-checking partner for Facebook .

[ 25 ] On December 14, 2018, Clarity Media Group announced that it would cease publication of the magazine after 23 years. While some speculated that the closure of The Weekly Standard was so Clarity Media's other magazine, the Washington Examiner , could absorb the Standard ' s subscribers, a statement from Clarity Media Group chairman Ryan McKibben said that such speculation was incorrect.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Kristol attributed the magazine's demise to the hostility of supporters of the Donald Trump administration.

[ 28 ] Support of the invasion of Iraq [ edit ] The Standard promoted and supported the invasion of Iraq to remove Saddam Hussein . In November 1997 Bill Kristol and Robert Kagan wrote an editorial titled "Saddam Must Go", in which they stated "We know it seems unthinkable to propose another ground attack to take Baghdad. But it's time to start thinking the unthinkable." [ 29 ] In the first issue the magazine published after 9/11 , according to Scott McConnell of The American Conservative , " Gary Schmitt and Tom Donnelly , two employees of Kristol’s PNAC , clarified what ought to be the country’s war aims. Their rhetoric was to link Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden in virtually every paragraph, to join them at the hip in the minds of readers, and then to lay out a strategy that actually gave attacking Saddam priority over eliminating al-Qaeda." [ 30 ] On December 16, 2018, co-founder and contributing editor John Podhoretz defended the coverage answering the question by Lulu Garcia-Navarro on NPR : "Do you regret the coverage of Iraq War?" saying "I think, basically, what—all a magazine—editors, writers—can promise is that they will be honest and say what they mean and think and argue the best way that they can. And with the facts available at the time, that is what The Standard did." [ 31 ] Libel case [ edit ] In 1997, nearly a year after a cover story that included allegations of hiring a prostitute and plagiarism against best-selling author Deepak Chopra , the editors of The Weekly Standard accepted full responsibility for the errors in the story, and apologized." [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Chopra claimed that the magazine settled for $1.6 million.

[ 34 ] Notable personnel [ edit ] Editorial staff [ edit ] Stephen F. Hayes , Editor-in-Chief Bill Kristol , Editor at large Fred Barnes , Executive Editor Christopher Caldwell , Andrew Ferguson , Lee Smith , Philip Terzian , Senior Editors Jonathan V. Last , Digital Editor Matt Labash , Senior Writer Contributing editors [ edit ] Max Boot Joseph Bottum Tucker Carlson Matthew Continetti Joseph Epstein David Frum David Gelernter Reuel Marc Gerecht Michael Goldfarb Mary Katharine Ham Brit Hume Frederick Kagan Robert Kagan Charles Krauthammer Tod Lindberg Rob Messenger P. J. O'Rourke John Podhoretz Irwin Stelzer References [ edit ] ^ Farhi, Paul (December 14, 2018).

"The Weekly Standard, influential conservative magazine, will shutter" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 14, 2018 .

^ Boot, Max (December 30, 2002).

"What the Heck Is a 'Neocon'?" .

Wall Street Journal .

the Weekly Standard, ... is known as a redoubt of 'neoconservatism' ^ Rachman, Gideon (January 15, 2007).

"The neo-cons' route to disaster" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on December 10, 2022.

... the neo-con bible, The Weekly Standard ...

^ "Ten years ago, The Weekly Standard debuted, a conservative journal of opinion [f]rom Washington, D.C., edited by William Kristol". October 24, 2005.

National Review : "The Week".

^ "MediaDC.com" .

MediaDC.com . Retrieved June 21, 2016 .

^ Grynbaum, Michael M.; Rutenberg, Jim (December 14, 2018).

"The Weekly Standard, Pugnacious to the End, Will Cease Publication" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 15, 2018 .

^ Wallace-Wells, Benjamin.

"Who Killed The Weekly Standard?" .

The New Yorker .

^ McConnell, Scott. " The Weekly Standard's War ". November 21, 2005.

The American Conservative ^ Smith, Ben. " Weekly Standard may have been shooter target " June 11, 2009.

Politico .

^ Magolick, David. " The Return of the Neocons Archived August 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine " January 22, 2010.

Newsweek .

^ Carr, David. " When this weekly speaks, White House listens " March 12, 2003.

The New York Times .

^ Hirsh, Michael (February 4, 2013).

"The Winter of the Neocons' Discontent" .

National Journal . Archived from the original on February 7, 2013 . Retrieved October 25, 2013 .

^ a b Schwartz, Jason (December 4, 2018).

"Weekly Standard faces uncertain future after holding its ground against Trump" .

Politico . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ Carr, David (June 24, 2004).

"When this weekly speaks, White House listens" .

New York Times . Archived from the original on June 24, 2004 . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ Cassidy, John (October 16, 2006).

"Murdoch's Game" .

The New Yorker .

^ Carr, David (June 10, 2009).

"Will The Standard Pass From Murdoch to Anschutz?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 15, 2009 .

^ Worden, Nat (June 11, 2009).

"News Corp. Close to Selling Weekly Standard" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved June 15, 2009 .

^ " "Weekly Standard sold to Washington Examiner parent company" .

The Washington Examiner . June 17, 2009.

^ Corcoran, Michael (September 1, 2009).

"The Weekly Standard's War" .

Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting .

^ Arango, Tim (August 2, 2009).

"New Owner for Weekly Standard as Political Tastes Change" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ Mickey, Bill (October 6, 2010).

"The Weekly Standard Boosts Its Circ" .

Audience Development . Archived from the original on November 21, 2010.

^ Rupert, Evelyn (December 13, 2016).

"Bill Kristol stepping down as Weekly Standard editor-in-chief" .

The Hill . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ "Stephen F. Hayes '93 to Succeed William Kristol as Editor-in-Chief of The Weekly Standard" .

DePauw University . December 13, 2016 . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (December 5, 2018).

"Fate of The Weekly Standard is uncertain, editor tells staff" .

CNN .

^ "Facebook looks to conservative Weekly Standard to combat its fake news problem — Quartz" .

qz.com . October 7, 2017 . Retrieved September 15, 2018 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (December 14, 2018).

"The Weekly Standard, a conservative magazine critical of Trump, to shutter after 23 years" .

CNN Business .

CNN Interactive . Retrieved December 14, 2018 .

^ Pilkington, Ed (December 14, 2018).

"Weekly Standard, rightwing magazine opposed to Trump, closes after 23 years" .

The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com.

^ "Meet the Other Resistance: The Republican One" .

New York Times . April 24, 2019.

^ Kristol, Bill (November 17, 1997).

"SADDAM MUST Go" .

WeeklyStandard . Archived from the original on December 5, 2018 . Retrieved December 16, 2018 .

^ McConnell, Scott (November 21, 2005).

"The Weekly Standard's War" .

TheAmericanConservative . Retrieved December 16, 2018 .

^ "Co-Founder: 'Cannibalism,' Not Anti-Trump Stand, Killed 'Weekly Standard' " .

NPR . December 16, 2018 . Retrieved December 16, 2018 .

^ APOLOGY TO DEEPAK CHOPRA: THE WEEKLY STANDARD SUIT SETTLED Archived October 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , PR Newswire , June 23, 1997. Retrieved October 12, 2014.

^ Self-help guru settles libel lawsuit Archived October 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Spokesman-Review , June 24, 1997. Retrieved October 12, 2014.

^ The Art of the Spiritual Smackdown Archived October 19, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Salon.com , Stephen Lemons, March 7, 2000. Retrieved October 12, 2014.

External links [ edit ] Media related to The Weekly Standard at Wikimedia Commons Official website v t e The Anschutz Corporation Anschutz Entertainment Group AEG Live festivals Carolina Rebellion Coachella Edgefest Hootenanny Mile High Music Festival New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival Portola Rockfest Rocklahoma RockNess Rock on the Range Sonisphere Stagecoach SunFest Wakestock (Wales) AEG Sports Crypto.com Arena Djurgårdens IF Hockey Eisbären Berlin Hammarby IF Dignity Health Sports Park LA Galaxy LA Galaxy II Los Angeles Kings Ontario Reign Tour of California Anschutz Film Group Bristol Bay Productions Walden Media Clarity Media Group The Gazette The Denver Gazette Washington Examiner Xanterra Travel Collection Crater Lake Lodge Grand Canyon Lodges Bright Angel Lodge El Tovar Hotel Maswik Lodge Phantom Ranch Grand Canyon Railway Kingsmill Resort Oasis at Death Valley Windstar Cruises Yellowstone National Park Lodges Lake Hotel Old Faithful Inn Old Faithful Lodge Roosevelt Lodge Other subsidiaries AXS.com ASM Global AEG Presents Goldenvoice Ken Ehrlich Productions The Broadmoor-Sea Island Company The Broadmoor Pikes Peak Cog Railway Sea Island v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Weekly_Standard&oldid=1297054609 " Categories : 1995 establishments in Washington, D.C.

2018 disestablishments in the United States Anschutz Corporation Defunct political magazines published in the United States Conservative magazines published in the United States Magazines disestablished in 2018 Magazines established in 1995 Magazines published in Washington, D.C.

Neoconservatism News magazines published in the United States Weekly magazines published in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 22:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Weekly Standard 10 languages Add topic

