Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 International standardization 3 Stages and lithostratigraphy 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stage (stratigraphy) 29 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latviešu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Faunal stage ) Unit in stratigraphy Units in geochronology and stratigraphy [ 1 ] Segments of rock ( strata ) in chronostratigraphy Time spans in geochronology Notes to geochronological units Eonothem Eon 4 total, half a billion years or more Erathem Era 10 defined, several hundred million years System Period 22 defined, tens to ~one hundred million years Series Epoch 34 defined, tens of millions of years Stage Age 99 defined, millions of years Chronozone Chron subdivision of an age, not used by the ICS timescale In chronostratigraphy , a stage is a succession of rock strata laid down in a single age on the geologic timescale , which usually represents millions of years of deposition.  A given stage of rock and the corresponding age of time will by convention have the same name, and the same boundaries.

Rock series are divided into stages, just as geological epochs are divided into ages. Stages are divided into smaller stratigraphic units called chronozones or substages, and added together into superstages.

[ 2 ] The term faunal stage is sometimes used, referring to the fact that the same fauna (animals) are found throughout the layer (by definition).

Definition [ edit ] Stages are primarily defined by a consistent set of fossils ( biostratigraphy ) or a consistent magnetic polarity (see paleomagnetism ) in the rock. Usually one or more index fossils that are common, found worldwide, easily recognized, and limited to a single, or at most a few, stages are used to define the stage's bottom.

Thus, for example in the local North American subdivision, a paleontologist finding fragments of the trilobite Olenellus would identify the beds as being from the Waucoban Stage whereas fragments of a later trilobite such as Elrathia would identify the stage as Albertan .

Stages were important in the 19th and early 20th centuries as they were the major tool available for dating and correlating rock units prior to the development of seismology and radioactive dating in the second half of the 20th century. Microscopic analysis of the rock ( petrology ) is also sometimes useful in confirming that a given segment of rock is from a particular age.

Originally, faunal stages were only defined regionally. As additional stratigraphic and geochronologic tools were developed, they were defined over ever broader areas. More recently, the adjective "faunal" has been dropped as regional and global correlations of rock sequences have become relatively certain and there is less need for faunal labels to define the age of formations. A tendency developed to use European and, to a lesser extent, Asian stage names for the same time period worldwide, even though the faunas in other regions often had little in common with the stage as originally defined.

International standardization [ edit ] This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2014 ) Boundaries and names are established by the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) of the International Union of Geological Sciences .  As of 2008, the ICS is nearly finished with a task begun in 1974, subdividing the Phanerozoic eonothem into internationally accepted stages using two types of benchmark.  For younger stages, a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP), a physical outcrop clearly demonstrates the boundary.  For older stages, a Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) is an absolute date. The benchmarks will give a much greater certainty that results can be compared with confidence in the date determinations, and such results will have farther scope than any evaluation based solely on local knowledge and conditions.

In many regions local subdivisions and classification criteria are still used along with the newer internationally coordinated uniform system, but once the research establishes a more complete international system, it is expected that local systems will be abandoned.

Stages and lithostratigraphy [ edit ] Stages can include many lithostratigraphic units (for example formations , beds , members , etc.) of differing rock types that were being laid down in different environments at the same time. In the same way, a lithostratigraphic unit can include a number of stages or parts of them.

See also [ edit ] European land mammal age Geologic record Geologic time scale North American land mammal age Type locality (geology) List of geochronologic names List of Global Boundary Stratotype Sections and Points Notes [ edit ] ^ Cohen, K.M.; Finney, S.; Gibbard, P.L. (2015), International Chronostratigraphic Chart (PDF) , International Commission on Stratigraphy .

^ "International Stratigraphic Guide" . Archived from the original on 2009-08-17.

References [ edit ] Gehling, James; Jensen, Sören; Droser, Mary; Myrow, Paul; Narbonne, Guy (March 2001). "Burrowing below the basal Cambrian GSSP, Fortune Head, Newfoundland".

Geological Magazine .

138 (2): 213– 218.

Bibcode : 2001GeoM..138..213G .

doi : 10.1017/S001675680100509X .

hdl : 10662/24314 .

S2CID 131211543 . 1.

Hedberg, H.D., (editor), International stratigraphic guide: A guide to stratigraphic classification, terminology, and procedure , New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1976 International Stratigraphic Chart from the International Commission on Stratigraphy External links [ edit ] The Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) : overview Chart of The Global Boundary Stratotype Sections and Points (GSSP) : chart Geotime chart displaying geologic time periods compared to the fossil record , deals with chronology and classifications for laymen (not GSSPs) v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stage_(stratigraphy)&oldid=1294756458 " Categories : Chronostratigraphy Geological ages Geochronology Geologic time scales Geology terminology Geological units Paleogeography Paleobiology Units of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2014 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stage (stratigraphy) 29 languages Add topic

