Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In socialism Toggle In socialism subsection 1.1 Concept of socialist planning 1.1.1 Administrative-command system 1.1.2 Decentralized planning 1.1.3 Lange–Lerner–Taylor model 1.1.4 Material balances 1.1.5 Input-Output Models 2 In capitalism Toggle In capitalism subsection 2.1 Intra-firm and intra-industry planning 2.2 State development planning 3 Around the world Toggle Around the world subsection 3.1 East Asia 3.2 France 3.3 Soviet Union 3.4 United Kingdom 3.5 United States 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 Notes Toggle the table of contents Economic planning 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Română Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Resource allocation system based on a computational procedure Not to be confused with Planned economy .

Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Economic planning is a resource allocation mechanism based on a computational procedure for solving a constrained maximization problem with an iterative process for obtaining its solution. Planning is a mechanism for the allocation of resources between and within organizations contrasted with the market mechanism . As an allocation mechanism for socialism , economic planning replaces factor markets with a procedure for direct allocations of resources within an interconnected group of socially owned organizations which together comprise the productive apparatus of the economy.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] There are various forms of economic planning that vary based on their specific procedures and approach. The level of centralization or decentralization in decision-making depends on the specific type of planning mechanism employed. In addition, one can distinguish between centralized planning and decentralized planning .

[ 3 ] An economy primarily based on planning is referred to as a planned economy . In a centrally planned economy, the allocation of resources is determined by a comprehensive plan of production which specifies output requirements.

[ 4 ] Planning can also take the form of indicative planning within a market-based economy, where the state employs market instruments to induce independent firms to achieve development goals.

[ 5 ] A distinction can be made between physical planning (as in pure socialism) and financial planning (as practiced by governments and private firms in capitalism ). Physical planning involves economic planning and coordination conducted in terms of disaggregated physical units whereas financial planning involves plans formulated in terms of financial units .

[ 6 ] In socialism [ edit ] See also: Socialist economics See also: Planned economy Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Different forms of economic planning have been featured in various models of socialism. These range from decentralized-planning systems which are based on collective decision-making and disaggregated information to centralized systems of planning conducted by technical experts who use aggregated information to formulate plans of production. In a fully developed socialist economy, engineers and technical specialists, overseen or appointed in a democratic manner, would coordinate the economy in terms of physical units without any need or use for financial-based calculation. The economy of the Soviet Union never reached this stage of development, so planned its economy in financial terms throughout the duration of its existence.

[ 7 ] Nonetheless, a number of alternative metrics were developed for assessing the performance of non-financial economies in terms of physical output (i.e.

net material product versus gross domestic product ).

In general, the various models of socialist economic planning such as a socialist mode of production exist as theoretical constructs that have not been implemented fully by any economy, partially because they depend on vast changes on a global scale. In the context of mainstream economics and the field of comparative economic systems , socialist planning usually refers to the Soviet-style command economy , regardless of whether or not this economic system actually constituted a type of socialism or state capitalism or a third, non-socialist and non-capitalist type of system.

In some models of socialism, economic planning completely substitutes the market mechanism, supposedly rendering monetary relations and the price system obsolete. In other models, planning is utilized as a complement to markets.

Concept of socialist planning [ edit ] The classical conception of socialist economic planning held by Marxists involved an economic system where goods and services were valued, demanded and produced directly for their use-value as opposed to being produced as a by-product of the pursuit of profit by business enterprises. This idea of production for use is a fundamental aspect of a socialist economy. This involves social control over the allocation of the surplus product and in its most extensive theoretical form calculation-in-kind in place of financial calculation. For Marxists in particular, planning entails control of the surplus product (profit) by the associated producers in a democratic manner .

[ 8 ] This differs from planning within the framework of capitalism which is based on the planned accumulation of capital in order to either stabilize the business cycle (when undertaken by governments) or to maximize profits (when undertaken by firms) as opposed to the socialist concept of planned production for use.

In such a socialist society based on economic planning, the primary function of the state apparatus changes from one of political rule over people (via the creation and enforcement of laws) into a technical administration of production, distribution and organization; that is, the state would become a coordinating economic entity rather than a mechanism of political and class-based control and thereby ceasing to be a state in the Marxist sense.

[ 9 ] Albert Einstein advocated for a socialist planned economy with his 1949 article " Why Socialism?

" In the May 1949 issue of the Monthly Review titled " Why Socialism?

", Albert Einstein wrote: [ 10 ] I am convinced there is only one way to eliminate (the) grave evils (of capitalism), namely through the establishment of a socialist economy, accompanied by an educational system which would be oriented toward social goals. In such an economy, the means of production are owned by society itself and are utilized in a planned fashion. A planned economy, which adjusts production to the needs of the community, would distribute the work to be done among all those able to work and would guarantee a livelihood to every man, woman, and child. The education of the individual, in addition to promoting his own innate abilities, would attempt to develop in him a sense of responsibility for his fellow-men in place of the glorification of power and success in our present society.

Administrative-command system [ edit ] Main article: Administrative-command system The concept of a command economy is differentiated from the concepts of a planned economy and economic planning, especially by socialists and Marxists who liken command economies (such as that of the former Soviet Union) to that of a single capitalist firm, organized in a top-down administrative fashion based on bureaucratic organization akin to that of a capitalist corporation.

[ citation needed ] Economic analysts have argued that the economy of the Soviet Union actually represented an administrative or command economy as opposed to a planned economy because planning did not play an operational role in the allocation of resources among productive units in the economy since in actuality the main allocation mechanism was a system of command-and-control. The term administrative-command economy gained currency as a more accurate descriptor of Soviet-type economies.

[ 11 ] Decentralized planning [ edit ] See also: Decentralized planning (economics) Decentralized economic planning is a planning process that starts at the user-level in a bottom-up flow of information. Decentralized planning often appears as a complement to the idea of socialist self-management , most notably by democratic socialists and libertarian socialists .

The theoretical postulates for models of decentralized socialist planning stem from the thought of Karl Kautsky , Rosa Luxemburg , Nikolai Bukharin and Oskar R. Lange .

[ 12 ] This model involves economic decision-making based on self-governance from the bottom-up (by employees and consumers) without any directing central authority. This often contrasts with the doctrine of orthodox Marxism–Leninism which advocates directive administrative planning where directives are passed down from higher authorities (planning agencies) to agents (enterprise managers), who in turn give orders to workers.

Two contemporary models of decentralized planning are participatory economics , developed by the economist Michael Albert ; and negotiated coordination, developed by the economist Pat Devine .

Lange–Lerner–Taylor model [ edit ] See also: Lange model The economic models developed in the 1920s and 1930s by American economists Fred M. Taylor and Abba Lerner and by Polish economist Oskar R. Lange involved a form of planning based on marginal cost pricing. In Lange's model, a central planning board would set prices for producer goods through a trial-and-error method, adjusting until the price matched the marginal cost, with the aim of achieving Pareto-efficient outcomes. Although these models were often described as market socialism , they actually represented a form of market simulation planning.

Material balances [ edit ] Material balance planning was the type of economic planning employed by Soviet-type economies. This system emerged in a haphazard manner during the collectivization drive under Joseph Stalin and emphasized rapid growth and industrialization. Eventually, this method became an established part of the Soviet conception of socialism in the post-war period and other socialist states emulated it in the latter half of the 20th century. Material balancing involves a planning agency taking a survey of available inputs and raw materials and using a balance-sheet to balance them with output targets specified by industry, thereby achieving a balance of supply and demand. In the case of the Soviet Union, this task fell on Gosplan and its subsidiaries: the industrial ministries and (under Khrushchev ) the regional sovnarkhozy . The ministries in turn were subdivided into Chief Industrial Administrations ( glavki ), under which each enterprise was finally subordinated.

[ 13 ] Input-Output Models [ edit ] Input-Output models , developed by Wassily Leontief , take advantage of linear programming and matrices by dividing the economy into interdependent sectors that produce products for both themselves and other sectors; the production in one sector relies in the input of goods from another.

[ 14 ] The flow of goods strictly between sectors is modelled by a Leontief closed model where the resultant expression takes the form of ( I − − A ) X = 0 {\displaystyle (I-A)X=0} where X {\displaystyle X} as a variable may represent the optimal payment for each instance of production encoded in the matrix A {\displaystyle A} . More sophisticated methods include open models where production satisfies exterior demand, and generally takes the form X = ( I − − A ) − − 1 D {\displaystyle X=(I-A)^{-1}D} , where D {\displaystyle D} is the demand matrix.

[ 15 ] This is a modelling method proposed by some socialist economists such as Paul Cockshott , [ 16 ] who argue that the advent of modern computer technology since the times of Victor Glushkov negates the computational difficulty faced by 20th-century attempts at economic planning (See OGAS and Cybersyn ).

In capitalism [ edit ] Intra-firm and intra-industry planning [ edit ] See also: Enterprise resource planning Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Large corporations use planning to allocate resources internally among their divisions and subsidiaries. Many modern firms also use regression analysis to measure market demand to adjust prices and to decide upon the optimal quantities of output to be supplied.

Planned obsolescence is often cited as a form of economic planning that is used by large firms to increase demand for future products by deliberately limiting the operational lifespan of its products, thus forcing customers to buy replacements. The internal structures of corporations have therefore been described as centralized command economies that use both planning and hierarchical organization and management.

According to J. Bradford DeLong , many transactions in Western economies do not pass through anything resembling a market, but rather they are actually movements of value among different branches and divisions within corporations, companies and agencies. Furthermore, much economic activity is centrally planned by managers within firms in the form of production planning and marketing management (that consumer demand is estimated, targeted and included in the firm's overall plan) and in the form of production planning.

[ 17 ] In The New Industrial State , the American economist John Kenneth Galbraith noted that large firms manage both prices and consumer demand for their products by sophisticated statistical methods. Galbraith also pointed out that because of the increasingly complex nature of technology and the specialization of knowledge, management had become increasingly specialized and bureaucratized. The internal structures of corporations and companies had been transformed into what he called a " technostructure ". Its specialized groups and committees are the primary decision-makers and specialized managers, directors and financial advisers operate under formal bureaucratic procedures, replacing the individual entrepreneur's role and intrapreneurship . Galbraith stated that both the obsolete notion of entrepreneurial capitalism and democratic socialism (defined as democratic management ) are impossible organizational forms for managing a modern industrial system.

[ 18 ] Joseph Schumpeter , an economist associated with both the Austrian School and the institutional school of economics, argued that the changing nature of economic activity (specifically the increasing bureaucratization and specialization required in production and management) was the major cause for capitalism eventually evolving into socialism. The role of the businessman was increasingly bureaucratic and specific functions within the firm required increasingly specialized knowledge which could be supplied as easily by state functionaries in publicly owned enterprises.

In the first volume of Das Kapital , Karl Marx identified the process of capital accumulation as central to the law of motion of capitalism. The increased industrial capacity caused by the increasing returns to scale further socializes production. Capitalism eventually socializes labor and production to a point that the traditional notions of private ownership and commodity production become increasingly insufficient for further expanding the productive capacities of society, [ 19 ] necessitating the emergence of a socialist economy in which means of production are socially owned and the surplus value is controlled by the workforce.

[ 20 ] Many socialists viewed these tendencies, specifically the increasing trend toward economic planning in capitalist firms, as evidence of the increasing obsolescence of capitalism and inapplicability of ideals like perfect competition to the economy, with the next stage of evolution being the application of society-wide economic planning.

State development planning [ edit ] See also: Developmental state and Industrial policy State development planning or national planning entails macroeconomic policies and financial planning conducted by governments to stabilize the market or promote economic growth in market-based economies. This involves the use of monetary policy, industrial policy and fiscal policy to steer the market toward targeted outcomes. Industrial policy includes government taking measures "aimed at improving the competitiveness and capabilities of domestic firms and promoting structural transformation".

[ 21 ] In contrast to socialist planning, state development planning does not replace the market mechanism and does not eliminate the use of money in production. It only applies to privately owned and publicly owned firms in the strategic sectors of the economy and seeks to coordinate their activities through indirect means and market-based incentives (such as tax breaks or subsidies).

Around the world [ edit ] While economic planning is mainly associated with socialism and the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc , in particular its administrative-command system , government planning of the economy can also happen under other political philosophies to industrialise and modernise the economy. A different form of planned economy operated in India during the Permit Raj era from 1947 to 1990. The unusually large government sector in countries like Saudi Arabia means that even though there is a market , central government planning controls allocation of most economic resources. In the United States, the government temporarily seized large portions of the economy during World War I and World War II, resulting in a largely government-planned war economy .

East Asia [ edit ] The development models of the East Asian Tiger economies involved varying degrees of economic planning and state-directed investment in a model sometimes described as state development capitalism or the East Asian Model.

The economy in both Malaysia and South Korea were instituted by a series of macroeconomic government plans ( First Malaysia Plan and Five-Year Plans of South Korea ) that rapidly developed and industrialized their mixed economies.

The economy of Singapore was partially based on government economic planning that involved an active industrial policy and a mixture of state-owned industry and free-market economy.

France [ edit ] Under dirigisme (dirigism), France used indicative planning and established a number of state-owned enterprises in strategic sectors of the economy. The concept behind indicative planning is the early identification of oversupply, bottlenecks and shortages so that state investment behavior can be quickly modified to reduce market disequilibrium so that stable economic development and growth can be sustained. France experienced its Trente Glorieuses (Thirty Glorious), years with economic prosperity.

Soviet Union [ edit ] Main articles: Economy of the Soviet Union and Soviet-type economic planning Leon Trotsky was among the earliest Soviet figures that supported economic planning and decentralization [ 22 ] but opposed the Stalinist model.

[ 23 ] The Soviet Union was the first national economy to attempt economic planning as a substitute for factor market allocation. Soviet-type economic planning took form in the 1930s and largely remained unchanged despite mild reforms until the Soviet Union's dissolution. Soviet economic planning was centralized and organized hierarchically, with a state planning agency such as the Gosplan establishing target rates for growth and the Gossnab allocating factor inputs to enterprises and economic units throughout the national economy. The national plan was broken down by various ministries, which in turn used the plan to formulate directives for local economic units which implemented them. The system used material balance planning . Economic information, including consumer demand and enterprise resource requirements, were aggregated to balance supply from the available resource inventories, with demand based on requirements for individual economic units and enterprises through a system of iterations.

[ 24 ] Leon Trotsky was one of the earliest proponents of economic planning during the NEP period.

[ 22 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] He believed that planning and N.E.P should develop within a mixed framework until the socialist sector gradually superseded the private industry.

[ 27 ] Trotsky argued that specialisation , the concentration of production and the use of planning could “raise in the near future the coefficient of industrial growth not only two, but even three times higher than the pre-war rate of 6% and, perhaps, even higher”.

[ 28 ] According to historian Sheila Fitzpatrick , the scholarly consensus was that Stalin appropriated the position of the Left Opposition on such matters as industrialisation and collectivisation .

[ 29 ] The economy of the Soviet Union operated in a centralized and hierarchical manner during the Stalinist era. The process used directives which were issued to lower-level organizations. Thus, the Soviet economic model was often referred to as a command economy or an administered economy as plan directives were enforced by inducements in a vertical power structure, with actual planning playing little functional role in the allocation of resources. Owing to difficulties in transmitting information in a timely fashion and disseminating information on demand throughout the whole economy, administrative mechanisms of decision-making and resource allocation played the dominant role in allocating factor inputs as opposed to planning.

[ 11 ] Historian Robert Vincent Daniels regarded the Stalinist period to represent an abrupt break with Lenin's government in terms of economic planning in which a deliberated, scientific system of planning that featured former Menshevik economists at Gosplan had been replaced with a hasty version of planning with unrealistic targets, bureaucratic waste, bottlenecks and shortages . Stalin's formulations of national plans in terms of physical quantity of output was also attributed by Daniels as a source for the stagnant levels of efficiency and quality.

[ 30 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The need for long-term economic planning to promote efficiency was a central component of Labour Party thinking until the 1970s. The Conservative Party largely agreed, producing the postwar consensus , namely the broad bipartisan agreement on major policies.

[ 31 ] A long-term economic plan was a phrase often used in British politics.

United States [ edit ] The United States used economic planning during World War I. The federal government supplemented the price system with centralized resource allocation and created a number of new agencies to direct important economic sectors, notably the Food Administration, Fuel Administration, Railroad Administration and War Industries Board.

[ 32 ] During World War II, the economy experienced staggering growth under a similar system of planning. In the postwar period, United States governments utilized such measures as the Economic Stabilization Program to directly intervene in the economy to control prices and wages, among other things, in different economic sectors.

Since the start of the Cold War, the federal government has directed a significant amount of investment and funding into research and development (R&D), often initially through the United States Department of Defense . The government performs 50% of all R&D in the United States, [ 33 ] with a dynamic state-directed public-sector developing most of the technology that later becomes the basis of the private sector economy.

Noam Chomsky has referred to the United States economic model as a form of state capitalism .

[ 34 ] Examples include laser technology, the internet, nanotechnology, telecommunications and computers, with most basic research and downstream commercialization financed by the public sector . That includes research in other fields including healthcare and energy, with 75% of most innovative drugs financed through the National Institutes of Health .

[ 35 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Economic calculation problem The most notable critique of central economic planning came from Austrian economists Friedrich Hayek and Ludwig von Mises . Hayek argued that central planners could not possibly accrue the necessary information to formulate an effective plan for production because they are not exposed to the rapid changes that take place in an economy in any particular time and place and so they are unfamiliar with those circumstances. The process of transmitting all the necessary information to planners is thus inefficient without a price system for the means of production.

[ 36 ] Modern theorists such as Cottrell and Cockshott, mentioned above, argue that modern advancements in mathematics and computational technology has made the “economic planning problem” obsolete. In his analysis of socialism in 1938, Oskar R. Lange addressed this theoretical issue by pointing out that planners could gain much of the information they required by monitoring changes in plant inventory levels. In practice, economic planners in Soviet-typed planned economies were able to make use of this technique.

[ 37 ] Proponents of decentralized economic planning have also criticized central economic planning .

Leon Trotsky believed that central planners, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operated without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy and so they would be unable to respond to local conditions quickly enough to effectively coordinate all economic activity.

[ 38 ] Trotsky further specified the need for Soviet democracy in relation to the industrialisation period to the Dewey Commission: “The successes are very important, and I affirmed it every time. They are due to the abolition of private property and to the possibilities inherent in planned economy . But, they - I cannot say exactly - but I will say two or three times less than they could be under a regime of Soviet democracy”.

[ 39 ] In his work, The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and Where is it Going?

, Trotsky argued that the excessive authoritarianism under Stalin had undermined the implementation of the first five-year plan . He noted that several engineers and economists who had created the plan were themselves later put on trial as " conscious wreckers who had acted on the instructions of a foreign power".

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Calculation in kind Council democracy Cybernetics Decentralized planning (economics) Dirigisme Economic democracy Econometrics Enterprise resource planning Indicative planning Industrial policy Input–output planning Material Product System Material balance planning Mixed economy Nonmarket forces Participatory planning Peer-to-peer economy Planned economy Socialist calculation debate Socialization (economics) Socialist economics Soviet-type economic planning " The Use of Knowledge in Society " Why Socialism?

– an article written by Albert Einstein which presented a critique of modern capitalism and advocated for a planned economy .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Vohra R. (2008) Planning. In: Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Palgrave Macmillan, London.

^ Mandel, Ernest (September–October 1986).

"In defense of socialist planning" .

New Left Review .

I (159): 5– 37.

See also the PDF version .

^ Gregory, Paul R.; Stuart, Robert C. (2003).

Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First Century . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. pp.

23– 24.

ISBN 978-0-618-26181-9 .

^ Alec Nove (1987). "Planned economy".

The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics . vol. 3. pp. 879–880.

^ Nielsen K. (2008) Indicative Planning. In: Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Palgrave Macmillan, London.

^ Ellman, Michael (1989).

Socialist Planning . Cambridge University Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-521-35866-8 .

^ Bockman, Johanna (2011).

Markets in the Name of Socialism: The Left-Wing Origins of Neoliberalism . Stanford University Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-8047-7566-3 .

^ Schweickart, David; Lawler, James; Ticktin, Hillel; Ollman, Bertell (1998).

"Definitions of Market and Socialism" .

Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists . New York: Routledge. pp.

58–59 .

ISBN 978-0-415-91967-8 .

^ "Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" .

Marxists.org .

^ Einstein, Albert (May 1949).

"Why Socialism?" , Monthly Review .

^ a b Wilhelm, John Howard (1985). "The Soviet Union Has an Administered, Not a Planned, Economy".

Soviet Studies .

37 (1): 118– 130.

doi : 10.1080/09668138508411571 .

^ Dowlah, Abu F. (1992). "Theoretical Expositions of Centralized versus Decentralized Strands of Socialist Economic Systems".

International Journal of Social Economics .

19 (7/8/9): 210– 258.

doi : 10.1108/EUM0000000000497 .

^ Montias, J. M.

(1959). "Planning with Material Balances in Soviet-Type Economies".

American Economic Review .

49 (5): 963– 985.

JSTOR 1813077 .

^ "2.6: Applications – Leontief Models" .

Mathematics LibreTexts . 2020-03-22 . Retrieved 2024-11-18 .

^ Wyss-Gallifent, Justin (August 31, 2023).

"Leontief Input-Output Models" (PDF) .

Northern Kentucky University .

^ Dapprich, Jan Philipp; Cockshott, William Paul (2023-01-01).

"Input-output planning and information" .

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization .

205 : 412– 422.

doi : 10.1016/j.jebo.2022.10.043 .

ISSN 0167-2681 .

^ J. Bradford DeLong (1997).

"The Corporation as a Command Economy" (PDF) . UC Berkeley and National Bureau of Economic Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2013 .

^ Galbraith, John K.

(2007) [1967].

The New Industrial State . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691131412 .

For the Abridge version, see "Part I: The History and Nature of the New Industrial State" (1972).

^ Marx and Engels Selected Works, Lawrence and Wishart, 1968, p. 40. Capitalist property relations put a "fetter" on the productive forces.

^ Marx, Karl .

Capital, Volume I . From "Chapter 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation".

^ UNCTAD ; UNIDO (2011).

"Economic Development in Africa Report 2011: Fostering Industrial Development in Africa in the New Global Environment" (PDF) .

United Nations . p. 34 . Retrieved 27 August 2012 .

^ a b Twiss, Thomas M. (8 May 2014).

Trotsky and the Problem of Soviet Bureaucracy . BRILL. pp.

88– 113.

ISBN 978-90-04-26953-8 .

^ Van Ree, Erik (1998).

"Socialism in One Country: A Reassessment" .

Studies in East European Thought .

50 (2): 77– 117.

doi : 10.1023/A:1008651325136 .

ISSN 0925-9392 .

JSTOR 20099669 .

^ P. B. Baltes, N. J. Smelser. (November 21, 2001). International Encyclopedia of Social & Behavioral Sciences. Pergamon. pp 11483-11485.

ISBN 9780080430768 . "Under Stalin and his successors, central Soviet economic planning was organized hierarchically. The top state planning agency, Gosplan, established the target rate of national economic growth and the allocation of production across industrial sectors and geographic regions. This overall national plan was then broken down by various ministries into directives assigned to local economic units. Finally, managers and engineers at the factory or farm level were required to implement particular instructions." ^ Day, Richard B. (1973).

Leon Trotsky and the Politics of Economic Isolation . Cambridge University Press. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-521-52436-0 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (1965).

The prophet unarmed: Trotsky, 1921–1929 . New York, Vintage Books. p. 468.

ISBN 978-0-394-70747-1 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (5 January 2015).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky . Verso Books. p. 646.

ISBN 978-1-78168-721-5 .

^ Rogovin, Vadim Zakharovich (2021).

Was There an Alternative? Trotskyism: a Look Back Through the Years . Mehring Books. pp.

404– 5.

ISBN 978-1-893638-97-6 .

^ Fitzpatrick, Sheila (22 April 2010).

"The Old Man" .

London Review of Books .

32 (8).

ISSN 0260-9592 .

^ Daniels, Robert V. (November 2002).

The End of the Communist Revolution . Routledge. pp.

90– 92.

ISBN 978-1-134-92607-7 .

^ O'Hara, Glen (2007).

From Dreams to Disillusionment: Economic and Social Planning in 1960s Britain . Palgrave Macmillan. See also the PDF version .

^ Rockoff, Hugh (2010).

"U.S. Economy in World War I" .

Archived 17 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Zeh, Herbert J. Jr. (1990).

"The Federal Funding of R&D: Who Gets the Patent Rights?" .

JOM .

42 (4): 69.

Bibcode : 1990JOM....42d..69Z .

doi : 10.1007/BF03220930 .

S2CID 182786220 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (18 May 2005).

"State and Corp" .

Z Net .

Z Communications . Archived from the original on 12 October 2012.

^ Mazzucato, Mariana (25 June 2013).

"The Myth of the "Meddling" State" . Public Finance International. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

^ Hayek, Friedrich (September 1945). "The Use of Knowledge in Society".

The American Economic Review .

35 (4): 519– 530.

JSTOR 1809376 .

See the full text .

^ P. B. Baltes, N. J. Smelser. (November 21, 2001). International Encyclopedia of Social & Behavioral Sciences. Pergamon. pp 11483-11485.

ISBN 9780080430768 . "Critics argue that the Soviet planned economy failed for two main reasons. The first is inadequate information. Very early on the free market economists Ludwig von Mises and Fredrich Hayek insisted that a socialist system was doomed to fail because central economic planners, lacking the price signals of a market system, would be unable to obtain the information required to promote economic efficiency (Von Mises 1935, Hayek 1948). In fact, economic planners in the Communist world—as Polish economist Oskar Lange anticipated in an important 1938 analysis of socialism—were often able to gain much of the information they needed by monitoring changes in plant inventory levels." ^ Trotsky, Leon .

Writings of Leon Trotsky (1932–33) . p. 96.

^ Woods, Alan; Grant, Ted (1976).

Lenin and Trotsky – What they really stood for . Wellred Books. pp.

50– 151.

^ Trotsky, Leon (1991).

The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and where is it Going?

. Mehring Books. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0-929087-48-1 .

v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐qrvjc
Cached time: 20250812114546
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.652 seconds
Real time usage: 0.830 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3127/1000000
Revision size: 40710/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 190518/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2134/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 163444/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.357/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8263955/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  599.125      1 -total
 40.08%  240.139      1 Template:Reflist
 22.09%  132.355      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.72%  112.163      9 Template:Cite_journal
 17.27%  103.469      1 Template:Economic_systems_sidebar
 10.72%   64.220      1 Template:Short_description
 10.41%   62.377      1 Template:Economics
 10.15%   60.791     13 Template:Cite_book
 10.08%   60.409      1 Template:Navbox
  6.38%   38.208      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4610544:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812114546 and revision id 1303320936. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_planning&oldid=1303320936 " Categories : Economic planning Socialism Economic ideologies Economic systems Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 08:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic planning 15 languages Add topic

