Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By country Toggle By country subsection 1.1 Christian and historically Christian countries 1.1.1 Australia 1.1.2 Austria 1.1.3 Brazil 1.1.4 Canada 1.1.5 Denmark 1.1.6 El Salvador 1.1.7 Finland 1.1.8 France 1.1.9 Germany 1.1.10 Greece 1.1.11 Iceland 1.1.12 Ireland 1.1.13 Italy 1.1.14 Malta 1.1.15 Nigeria 1.1.16 Netherlands 1.1.17 New Zealand 1.1.18 Norway 1.1.19 Philippines 1.1.20 Poland 1.1.21 Romania 1.1.22 Russia 1.1.23 South Africa 1.1.24 Spain 1.1.25 Sweden 1.1.26 Switzerland 1.1.27 Tanzania 1.1.28 United Kingdom 1.1.29 United States 1.2 Muslim-majority countries 1.2.1 Afghanistan 1.2.2 Algeria 1.2.3 Bangladesh 1.2.4 Egypt 1.2.5 Indonesia 1.2.6 Iran 1.2.7 Jordan 1.2.8 Kuwait 1.2.9 Malaysia 1.2.10 Mauritania 1.2.11 Pakistan 1.2.12 Palestine 1.2.13 Qatar 1.2.14 Saudi Arabia 1.2.15 Sudan 1.2.16 Turkey 1.2.17 United Arab Emirates 1.2.18 Yemen 1.3 Atheist state 1.3.1 China 1.4 Jewish state 1.4.1 Israel 1.5 Hindu and Buddhist-majority countries 1.5.1 India 1.5.2 Myanmar 1.5.3 Nepal 1.5.4 Thailand 2 Defamation of religion and the United Nations 3 Campaigns for repeal Toggle Campaigns for repeal subsection 3.1 Initiatives in Europe 3.2 Repealings by jurisdiction 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Blasphemy law 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law prohibiting blasphemy No blasphemy laws Blasphemy laws abolished Subnational restrictions Fines and restrictions Prison sentences Death sentences Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By country Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e A blasphemy law is a law prohibiting blasphemy , which is the act of insulting or showing contempt or lack of reverence to a deity , or sacred objects, or toward something considered sacred or inviolable .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] According to Pew Research Center , about a quarter of the world's countries and territories (26%) had anti-blasphemy laws or policies as of 2014.

[ 5 ] In some states, blasphemy laws are used to protect the religious beliefs of a majority, while in other countries, they serve to offer protection of the religious beliefs of minorities .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In addition to prohibitions against blasphemy or blasphemous libel , blasphemy laws include all laws which give redress to those insulted on account of their religion. These blasphemy laws may forbid: the vilification of religion and religious groups, defamation of religion and its practitioners, denigration of religion and its followers, offending religious feelings, or the contempt of religion. Some blasphemy laws, such as those formerly existing in Denmark , do not criminalize "speech that expresses critique," but rather, "sanctions speech that insults." [ 9 ] Human rights experts argue for laws which adequately distinguish between protection of individuals' freedoms and laws which over-broadly restrict freedom of speech . Article 20 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights obliges countries to adopt legislative measures against "any advocacy of national racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence." [ 10 ] However, they also note that such protections must be carefully circumscribed, and do not support prohibition of blasphemy per se .

[ 11 ] By country [ edit ] Christian and historically Christian countries [ edit ] Further information: Blasphemy § Christianity In a number of states with a majority-Christian or formerly majority-Christian population blasphemy laws may criminalize abusive or scurrilous speech about Christianity , and oftentimes, other religions and their adherents, as such offenses "have the tendency to lead to a breach of peace".

[ 10 ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Australia Emerging as a British colony in the 1780s, Australia received English common law , including the Blasphemy Act 1697 . The first colonial laws were the Blasphemous and Seditious Libels Act 1827 for New South Wales (repealed in 1898), and legislation that governor Arthur Phillip enacted in Van Diemen's Land in the same year that regulated printing and publishing and prohibited 'blasphemous and seditious libels' as part of a law to maintain public order.

[ 12 ] The last attempted prosecution for blasphemy by the Crown occurred in the State of Victoria in 1919.

[ 13 ] Australia abolished and repealed all blasphemy laws at the federal level with the Australia Criminal Code Act 1995 , but blasphemy laws remain in some states and territories .

[ 12 ] The states, territories, and the Commonwealth of Australia are not uniform in their treatment of blasphemy. Blasphemy is an offence in some jurisdictions, including New South Wales (section 49 of the Defamation Act 1974 (NSW)), Victoria, Tasmania, and South Australia , [ 12 ] but is not in others. The present legal situation regarding blasphemy in the Australian Capital Territory , Western Australia and Queensland is unclear.

[ 14 ] Austria [ edit ] In Austria , a section of the penal code relates to blasphemy: [ 15 ] § 188 : Vilification of Religious Teachings Austria was the birthplace of the famous European Court of Human Rights test case E.S. v. Austria (2018) on blasphemy, which narrowly upheld Austria's blasphemy law by suggesting the state had a legitimate aim in maintaining it.

Brazil [ edit ] Art. 208 of the penal code states that "publicly vilifying an act or object of religious worship" is a crime punishable with one month to one year of prison, or fine.

[ 16 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemous libel See also: Hate speech laws in Canada Blasphemous libel was a crime in Canada under section 296 of the Criminal Code R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46. Subsection (1) read: "Every one who publishes a blasphemous libel is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years".

Subsection (3) read: "No person shall be convicted of an offence under this section for expressing in good faith and in decent language, or attempting to establish by argument used in good faith and conveyed in decent language, an opinion on a religious subject".

Over the summer of 2016, a petition to Parliament asking that the blasphemous libel law be repealed was circulated by several Canadian humanist groups.

[ 17 ] The petition was presented to the Government in December 2016. It responded in January 2017, stating that "blasphemous libel, along with numerous other provisions of the Criminal Code, are presently under review by the Minister [of Justice] and her officials".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] On 6 June 2017, Justice Minister Jody Wilson-Raybould introduced Bill C-51 in the House of Commons , an Act to Amend the Criminal Code including repeal of section 296 of the Criminal Code relating to blasphemous libel and various other provisions of the Criminal Code which have been ruled or may be unconstitutional.

[ 20 ] The Bill passed both the House of Commons and the Senate on 11 December 2018.

[ 21 ] On 13 December 2018, the Governor General formally granted Royal Assent , making the repeal official.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Denmark [ edit ] A Church of Denmark parish church in Holte , with the Dannebrog flying in its churchyard In Denmark , Paragraph 140 of the penal code was about blasphemy. Since 1866, this law has only led to two convictions, in 1938 and in 1946. A further charge was brought to court in 1971, but led to acquittal.

[ 25 ] In 2017, a man was charged with blasphemy for posting a video of himself burning the Quran on social media under the slogan Yes to freedom – no to Islam .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In 2012, a survey indicated that 66% of Denmark's population still supported the blasphemy law, which made it illegal to "mock legal religions and faiths in Denmark".

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] Before 2017, abolition of the blasphemy clause was proposed several times by members of the parliament, but failed to win a majority vote.

[ 28 ] The law was repealed on 2 June 2017 several days before the 2017 charge was due to come to trial. While public insults of a religion are no longer forbidden, speech and actions threatening or demeaning certain groups of people because of their religious beliefs continued to be punishable pursuant to §266(b) of the penal code.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Denmark reinstated blasphemy laws in 2023.

[ 31 ] It bans improper treatment of a significant religious writing in public or with intent to spread such act publicly.

[ 32 ] El Salvador [ edit ] El Salvador is a mostly Catholic country, where freedom of religion is protected under the constitution, with the Catholic Church receiving some privileges. El Salvador's penal code bans insulting religion and is punishable from 1–3 years in prison. People convicted of "insulting religion" are given a maximum penalty of 3–8 years in prison.

[ 33 ] Finland [ edit ] In Finland , section 10 of chapter 17 of the Criminal Code relates to blasphemy. The section is titled "Breach of the sanctity of religion", but the text of the law explicitly includes "publicly blaspheming against God" as well as defaming what is held sacred by a religious community.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Unsuccessful attempts have been made to remove the particular reference to the Christian God in 1914, 1917, 1965, 1970, and most recently in 1998, when the Finnish Parliament unexpectedly voted to retain it.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Blasphemy is punishable with fines or at most six months in prison.

This prohibition has given rise to a number of highly publicized cases in recent Finnish history. The author Hannu Salama was convicted of blasphemy for his 1964 novel Juhannustanssit .

[ 38 ] In 1969, artist Harro Koskinen was prosecuted and fined for works including his painting Pig Messiah , a crucified pig; the works were later displayed in art galleries.

[ 39 ] Writer and politician Jussi Halla-aho , who later became a Member of the Parliament of Finland , was fined for insinuating connections between pedophilia and Islam in a 2008 blog text.

[ 40 ] France [ edit ] The definition of blasphemy was introduced into French law in the 13th century (after great debate among the French Moralists), based on the definition given by St. Thomas Aquinas : a sin of language, "a failure to declare one's faith", thus representing an attack on the purity of religion. This justified punishment by law, which became extreme during the reign of Louis IX . Later canonized by the Catholic church as Saint Louis, he became highly committed to his fight against heretics, Jews and Muslims, and set the punishment for blasphemy to mutilation of the tongue and lips.

[ 41 ] Louis IX passed this law against blasphemy in 1254 after his return home from the Seventh Crusade .

[ 42 ] At the beginning of the French Revolution , articles 10 and 11 of the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (Déclaration des Droits de l'Homme et du Citoyen) [ 43 ] motivated the 1791 elimination of the notion of blasphemy from French law, but it continued to prohibit the use of abusive language or disturbance of the peace. Sacrilege actions towards cultural objects became a crime in 1825 during an extreme phase of the Bourbon Restoration (1814), to be revoked under the less conservative Louis Philippe in 1830. "Religious insult" (" outrage à la morale religieuse ") was introduced by the Act of 17 May 1819, and definitively removed from French law by the Act of 29 July 1881 which instituted freedom of the press.

[ 44 ] As of 2018 [update] , and since the 1972 ratification of the European Convention of Human Rights, French law proscribed hate or violence against, and slander or libel against, people due to their membership of a religious group, nationality, ethnic group, race, sexual orientation or handicap (Art.23, 24, 32). The Act of 1881 protects individuals and groups of individuals against defamation or insult (" injure " and " outrage " for foreign ambassadors), but not the divinities ( (in French) like Jesus Christ ) and their doctrines as for blasphemy.

The Alsace-Moselle region was a specific exception, as it was annexed to Germany from 1871 to 1918 and therefore not part of France when the "religious insult" law was repealed. The German penal code replaced the pre-1871 French law between 1871 and 1918, and the local law in Alsace-Moselle retained some elements of both the German penal code and pre-1871 French law when the regions reverted to France in 1919, like the religious legislation and the articles 166 and 167. This long included a ban of "blasphemy" (as translated from the German word lästerung ) against Christianity and Judaism, without mention of Islam which at the time had very few followers in Alsace.

[ 45 ] Since the dispositions of article 166 were not among those finally transposed officially in French law since the Act of 1 June 1924, whose article 1 and 1 s) introduced as well in Alsace-Moselle the generally referred to Act of 29 July 1881, [ 46 ] then translated into French in 2013 by the decrees n•2013-395 and particularly n•2013-776, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] they received no application since then, as the appeal court of Colmar refused to apply this article in 1954, contrary to article 167 (obstacle to the exercise of worship). The minister of justice replied to some senators that article 166 was already implicitly repealed because contrary to the French fundamental law.

[ 50 ] Its validity could have also been questioned by a court since 1975 and by a prioritary question of constitutionality since 2008. In response to the Charlie Hebdo attack and with the full support of the Alsatian churches, an October 2016 vote of the French parliament symbolically repealed this long-dormant Alsace-Moselle blasphemy law [ 51 ] which was long implicitly unenforceable.

[ 52 ] Germany [ edit ] In Germany, religious defamation is covered by Article 166 of the Strafgesetzbuch , the German criminal law. If a deed is capable of disturbing the public peace, defamation is actionable. The article reads as follows: [ 53 ] § 166 Defamation of religious denominations, religious societies and World view associations (1) Whoever publicly or by dissemination of writings (§ 11 par. 3) defames, in a manner suitable to disturb the public peace, the substance of the religious or world view conviction of others, shall be fined or imprisoned for up to three years.

(2) Whoever publicly or by dissemination of writings (§ 11 par. 3) defames, in a manner suitable to disturb the public peace, a church existing in Germany or other religious society or world view association, or their institutions or customs , shall be punished likewise.

In 2006, the application of this article received much media attention when a Manfred van H. (also known as "Mahavo") was prosecuted for defamation for distributing rolls of toilet paper with the words "Koran, the Holy Koran" stamped on them.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] The defendant claimed he wanted to protest the murder of Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh in 2004 and the London bombings of 2005 . Beyond the sentence he also received death threats from Islamists and needed a police bodyguard.

[ 56 ] Greece [ edit ] Until 2019, articles 198, 199, and 201 of the Greek Penal Code created offenses which involved blasphemy. Article 198 "Malicious Blasphemy" provided: 1. One who...blasphemes God shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than two years .

2. [O]ne who...manifests a lack of respect for the divinity shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than three months .

[ 57 ] Article 199 "Blasphemy Concerning Religions" restated most of Article 198, and criminalized blasphemy against the Greek Orthodox Church.

[ 57 ] Article 201 criminalized acts committed "blasphemously and improperly toward a grave".

[ 57 ] Greece had not used its laws about blasphemy to protect any religion other than the Greek Orthodox Church, which is the state church of Greece.

[ 57 ] In December 2003, Greece prosecuted for blasphemy Gerhard Haderer , an Austrian, along with his Greek publisher and four booksellers. Haderer is the author of an illustrated, humorous book entitled The Life of Jesus . The prosecutor contended that the book's depiction of Jesus as a hippie was blasphemous. On 13 April 2005, the Court of Appeal of Athens, reversed the judgment of the Court of First Instance, and acquitted Haderer.

[ 58 ] Greece complemented its laws against blasphemy with laws against "religious insult". The laws forbade the creation, display or trade in work that "insults public sentiment" or that "offends people's religious sentiments".

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] The new Criminal Code, which came into force in July 2019, under the Syriza government, removed articles 198 and 199, thus ending its ban on blasphemy.

[ 61 ] The conservative New Democracy government initially announced in November its intention to reintroduce the criminalization of blasphemy, with punishment up to two years in jail [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] but backtracked on the announcement following a domestic and international outcry.

[ 66 ] Iceland [ edit ] The Icelandic blasphemy law was repealed on 2 July 2015, after a strong push by the Icelandic Pirate Party and a number of associations including Icelandic Ethical Humanist Association (Siðmennt), the bishop of Iceland, the Icelandic priesthood, the Association of Publishers, PEN Iceland, IMMI (The International Modern Media Institute) an Icelandic-based international organization of information and freedom of expression, and an atheist group called Vantrú.

[ 67 ] Formerly, blasphemy was forbidden with a fine or prison sentence up to three months (Article 125 of the General Penal Code of Iceland , enacted on 12 February 1940).

[ 68 ] The constitution also mentions the state religion and religion in general.

[ citation needed ] Ireland [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in the Republic of Ireland Stephen Fry in June 2016 In Ireland, blasphemy against any form of religion was prohibited by the 2009 Defamation Act until its repeal on 17 January 2020.

[ 69 ] Blasphemy against Christianity was prohibited by the constitution and carried a maximum fine of €25,000; however, the offence of blasphemous libel, last prosecuted in 1855 in connection to an alleged Bible -burning, [ 70 ] was ruled in 1999 to be incompatible with the Constitution's guarantee of religious equality. A controversial law was passed on 9 July 2009 and went into effect on 1 January 2010.

[ 71 ] The law prohibited publishing or uttering "matter that is grossly abusive or insulting in relation to matters held sacred by any religion, thereby causing outrage among a substantial number of the adherents of that religion".

[ 69 ] The Irish Constitutional Convention in 2013 recommended, and the Government endorsed, the repeal of the constitutional prohibition on blasphemy (Article 40.6.1.i.), but the Taoiseach indicated to postpone the issue.

[ 72 ] Calls for repeal resurged after the January 2015 Charlie Hebdo shooting .

[ 72 ] The law had not been invoked until in February 2015 English comedian Stephen Fry , when asked during an RTÉ programme what he might say to God at the gates of heaven, responded, without specifying any religion, [ 73 ] I'd say: "Bone cancer in children, what's that about? How dare you? How dare you create a world in which there is such misery that is not our fault? It's not right. It's utterly, utterly evil. Why should I respect a capricious, mean-minded, stupid god who creates a world which is so full of injustice and pain?" That's what I'd say ... the god who created this universe, if it was created by a god, is quite clearly a maniac, an utter maniac, totally selfish ...

An allegation of blasphemy was made to police at the time, and in 2017 police contacted Fry to inform him that the incident was being investigated.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] News of the investigation caused a big stir, but a few days later it was reported that the police, the Garda Síochána , had dropped the case as there was no injured party.

[ 76 ] The Garda Síochána could not find enough people outraged over the actor's anti-God remarks. One individual complaint alone cannot result in a prosecution under the legislation and only one viewer made a formal complaint against Fry's comments. The complainant said that he was not personally offended by the programme but simply believed that the comments made by Fry on RTÉ were criminal blasphemy and that he was doing his civic duty by reporting a crime.

[ 77 ] In June 2018, the Irish government agreed to a referendum to remove the offense of blasphemy from the Constitution.

The referendum , which took place on 26 October 2018, abolished the constitutional ban on blasphemy by a margin of 64.85% to 35.15%.

[ 70 ] In January 2020, Minister of Justice and Equality Charles Flanagan signed an order commencing an amendment to the law.

[ 78 ] Until then, blasphemy had been prohibited by sections 36 and 37 of the Defamation Act 2009, for which offenders could face a fine of up to €25,000.

[ 79 ] [ 70 ] In 2021, the Irish government proposed legislation criminalizing hate speech. Previously, Irish politicians Mattie McGrath and Keith Redmond stated that hate speech legislation was "secular blasphemy law" in their unsuccessful attempts to oppose it.

[ 80 ] Italy [ edit ] In Italy , under article 724 of the Penal Code, blasphemy in public is considered an "administrative offense" and punished with a fine ranging from €51 to €309. First introduced in 1930 under Mussolini , blasphemy was decriminalized as per art.57, d.lgs. n.507 of 30 December 1999. Following a ruling of the Corte Costituzionale in sentence n.440 of 18 October 1995, the law punishes only blasphemy against the "Deity".

[ 81 ] Article 404 of the penal code also punishes public offenses to religion, and has been invoked against artists using religious imagery in satirical art.

[ 82 ] At the end of July 2019, public blasphemy was also made illegal on the local level in the Italian town of Saonara , punishing alleged blasphemers with a fine of €400.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Malta [ edit ] Instead of a law against blasphemy, Malta had laws against the vilification of religion, and against immorality . Enacted in 1933, Article 163 of Malta's Criminal Code prohibited "vilification of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion", [ 85 ] which is Malta's state religion. Vilification of Malta's religion made the vilifier liable to imprisonment for a term from one to six months. By Article 164, vilification of any cult "tolerated by law" made the vilifier liable to imprisonment for a term from one to three months. Article 338(bb) imposes liability upon anyone who, "even though in a state of intoxication, publicly utters any obscene or indecent words, or makes obscene acts or gestures, or in any other manner not otherwise provided for in this Code, offends against public morality, propriety or decency". Article 342 provides: In respect of the contravention under article 338(bb), where the act consists in uttering blasphemous words or expressions, the minimum punishment to be awarded shall in no case be less than a fine ( amenda ) of eleven euro and sixty-five cents (11.65) and the maximum punishment may be imprisonment for a term of three months ...

In 2008, criminal procedures were initiated against 162 people for blaspheming in public.

[ 86 ] In July 2016, the parliament of Malta repealed articles 163 and 164 of the criminal code.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Nigeria [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Nigeria Nigeria prohibits blasphemy by section 204 of its Criminal Code and by permitting Sharia courts to operate in some states.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Vigilantism frequently usurps the jurisdiction of the courts.

[ 91 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Gerard Reve kisses a donkey (1969). Found guilty of 'blasphemy' in 1966 for describing a sex scene with God-turned-donkey in his novel Nader tot U , he successfully appealed in 1968.

With the introduction of the Dutch Criminal Code of 1881, in force since 1886, the Netherlands obtained its first law against blasphemy. The Minister of Justice argued that, although God would be perfectly capable of protecting his own rights, the Dutch legislator had to 'protect the rights of society'.

[ 92 ] In 1932, a bill was proposed to tighten the 1886 law. Parliament was divided between confessional and non-confessional parties, but also between different confessional parties on the question whether the purpose of the bill was protecting God or religion, or religious people. The bill passed on 1 June 1932 with 49 against 44 votes in the House, 28 against 18 votes in the Senate, and was adopted on 4 November 1932.

[ 93 ] Article 147 punished (by up to three months in jail or a fine of the second category (i.e. up to €3,800 [ 94 ] )) anyone who publicly, orally or in writing or depiction, offends religious feelings by scornful blasphemy.

[ 95 ] Furthermore, article 429bis prohibited displaying blasphemous material at places visible from the public road.

[ 96 ] The law came into being in the 1930s after the Communist Party called for Christmas to be dropped from the list of state holidays.

[ 97 ] The last successful conviction under Article 147 took place in the early 1960s when a student newspaper was fined 100 guilders for satirizing the New Testament .

[ 97 ] The law against blasphemy complements laws against racial discrimination and incitement to violence.

[ citation needed ] In 1966, the Public Prosecution Service prosecuted writer Gerard Reve under Article 147. In his novel Nader tot U (" Nearer to Thee "), Reve describes the narrator's sexual intercourse with God, who is incarnated in a donkey. The court of first instance convicted Reve, but he appealed. In April 1968, an appeals court quashed the conviction.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In November 2008, Justice Minister Ernst Hirsch Ballin expressed the country's coalition government's intent to repeal Article 147.

[ 98 ] He said the government would strengthen the legislation against discrimination to prohibit any insult to any group of people.

[ 100 ] In May 2009, the government decided to leave the law as it is. The decision followed a high court ruling in which a man who had put up a poster that read "stop the tumour that is Islam" was found not guilty of insulting a group of people on the grounds of their religion.

[ 100 ] The decision not to abolish the ban on blasphemy was partly motivated to ensure the support of the conservative Reformed Christian SGP for the minority government in the senate. After a general election in 2012, a new coalition government was formed and a majority of parliament pledged to support a proposal to repeal the blasphemy law.

[ 101 ] In November 2012, parliament decided to overturn the blasphemy laws.

[ 102 ] It would pass with support from the VVD , but the SGP were strongly opposed to the measure. According to the SGP, the decision to lift the ban on blasphemy is a "painful loss of a moral anchor and a symptom of a spiritual crisis". On 1 February 2014, the law on blasphemy was abolished.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Correspondence on whether Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979) should be banned in New Zealand for blasphemy Main article: Blasphemy law in New Zealand In New Zealand , Section 123 [ 105 ] of the Crimes Act 1961 allowed for imprisonment of up to one year for anyone who published any "blasphemous libel". Cases were only prosecuted at the discretion of the New Zealand Attorney-General, who usually cited overriding free speech objections so as not to pursue such a case. The only prosecution for blasphemous libel in New Zealand was the case of John Glover, publisher of the newspaper The Maoriland Worker , in 1922. Glover was acquitted.

The British comedy film Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979) about a fictional Jewish man living at the same time and neighbourhood as Jesus Christ, generated significant international controversy and was banned in several countries including Ireland and Norway. Hundreds of letters were sent to the Film Censor's Office to have the film banned in New Zealand as well on the grounds of it being 'blasphemous' against the Christian faith, but the Chief Censor of Films responded by stating that they had found no evidence of blasphemy or sacrilegiousness in the film.

In March 2018, Justice Minister Andrew Little ( Labour Party ) introduced a Crimes Amendment Bill that included repeal of Section 123, the crime of blasphemous libel. The bill passed the third reading on 5 March 2019 with the unanimous support of parliament, received the royal assent on 11 March and came into force on 12 March 2019.

[ 106 ] An earlier Labour repeal attempt in 2017 was blocked by the then governing National Party .

[ 107 ] Norway [ edit ] In 2009, the Norwegian Parliament voted to remove the dormant law against blasphemy (§ 142 in the penal code).

[ 108 ] It was, however, removed from the penal code of 2005, which did not come into force until October 2015.

[ 109 ] Therefore, blasphemy was illegal until 2015 under the old Penal Code of 1902.

[ 108 ] [ 110 ] The famous writer and social activist Arnulf Øverland was the last to be tried by this law, in 1933, [ 111 ] after giving a speech named "Kristendommen – den tiende landeplage" ("Christianity – the tenth plague"), but was acquitted. The last person sentenced for blasphemy in Norway was Arnfred Olsen in 1912, and he had to pay a fine of 10 Norwegian krone .

[ 112 ] The British comedy film Monty Python's Life of Brian (1979) was briefly banned in Norway by the authorities in early 1980, because it 'was believed to commit the crime of blasphemy by violating people's religious feelings'. However, the ban was lifted in October 1980 after a group of theologians who had seen the film produced a statement saying that there was no good reason for a total ban.

Life of Brian was allowed on the big screen, provided with a poster at the beginning which stated that Brian was not Jesus.

[ 113 ] It was then marketed in Sweden as "The film so funny that it was banned in Norway".

[ 114 ] Philippines [ edit ] Further information: Offending religious feelings (Philippines) "Crimes against religious worship" are stated under section four of the Revised Penal Code of the Philippines . Under article 132 and 133, respectively, "interruption of religious worship" and "offending the religious feelings" are punishable by law. "Interruption of religious worship" is defined as "preventing or disturbing the ceremonies or manifestations of any religion" and " offending the religious feelings " is defined as "performing acts notoriously offensive to the feelings of the faithful" in a place devoted to religious worship or during the celebration of any religious ceremony.

[ 115 ] Penalties range from imprisonment of four months and a day to six months; crimes that involve violence or threats can carry a penalty of up to six years in jail.

Poland [ edit ] Main article: Offending religious feelings (Poland) While Poland 's penal code makes no reference to any sort of blasphemy law, it states that "Whoever offends religious feelings of other people by publicly insulting an object of religious cult or a place for public holding of religious ceremonies, is subject to a fine, restriction of liberty or loss of liberty for up to 2 years". The article has been used by pro-Church politicians and activists on numerous occasions, whenever they felt their religious feelings had been offended in any way.

[ 116 ] Opponents of the article maintain that due to its vagueness it is abused by seriously limiting the freedom of speech and effectively preventing any kind of debate on Church's sexual crimes and the Church's widespread influence on social, sexual and political life of Poland.

[ 117 ] A notable conviction on the basis of this law was that of the pop singer Dorota "Doda" Rabczewska who in 2012 was fined for the amount of 5,000 złotych for saying in an interview that the Bible was written by people 'drunk on wine and smoking some kind of herbs'.

[ 118 ] Her complaint was rejected by the Constitutional Tribunal , which confirmed that the law did not violate the Constitution .

[ 119 ] In March 2019, a notable Polish journalist Jerzy Urban was fined 120,000 złotych (around US$30,000) and additional 28,000 PLN of court costs for publishing an image of christ astonished in his newspaper " NIE ".

In 2022 United Poland part of the ruling government called for tougher blasphemy laws in Poland , such as three-year jail terms for insulting church or interrupting mass.

[ 120 ] In October 2022, they submitted a citizens' legislative initiative for the tougher blasphemy laws with close to 400,000 signatures to parliament.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Romania [ edit ] Romania never had blasphemy laws active. According to Romanian law, "cults, religious associations and religious groups ... must not infringe upon ... fundamental human rights and liberties", [ 123 ] which, according to the Constitution of Romania , include freedom of conscience and freedom of expression.

[ 124 ] In May 2011, a National Liberal deputy proposed a bill for the prevention of religious intolerance, which would have criminalized blasphemy. The bill was withdrawn, however, later that month.

[ 125 ] The central sculptural group of the exhibition "Nymphs and Zombies" by Paul Baraka. Bucharest, Art Safari Temporary Museum, 2023.

In January 2024, the management of the CNCD (National Council for Combating Discrimination) decided to fine [ citation needed ] the Bucharest City Museum, the Cultural Centre Art Society Foundation and the British curator Ruth Hibbard, for the Nymphs & Zombies exhibition, organized by Art Safari [ 126 ] in the summer of 2023 to Bucharest. Artist Paul Baraka [ 127 ] also received a warning for his works, including an installation in which Jesus is crucified in boxers and wearing deer horns, being worshiped by a group of "zombies" and an oil on canvas painting with elements from the Virgin Mary and the Child icon. In September 2023, the works were described by Vasile Bănescu, [ 128 ] the spokesperson of the Romanian Orthodox Church, in terms such as "obscenity", "mockery", "blasphemy", "sacrilege".

Russia [ edit ] After the 2012 Pussy Riot incident , Russian lawmakers started considering a bill proposing prison sentences for desecration .

[ 129 ] The State Duma investigated "the situation of sacrilegious acts against Church property and proposed amendments to the Russian Penal Code" in a bill submitted in September 2012.

[ 130 ] The Union of Orthodox Citizens and MP of United Russia supported the proposal, the latter stating: "We really should make some amendments to the Penal Code in order to cool down these outcasts who have nothing else to do in their lives other than commit such offenses." [ 131 ] The bill was accepted 11 June 2013.

[ 130 ] According to Article 148 of Russian Criminal Code it is declared a crime to conduct "public actions expressing explicit disrespect for society and committed for the purpose of offending the religious feelings of believers". Part 2 of the same article establishes stricter punishments for the aforementioned actions when coupled with desecration of holy symbols and (or) religious texts.

South Africa [ edit ] Blasphemy is a common law offence in South Africa, defined as "unlawfully, intentionally and publicly acting contemptuously towards God." [ 132 ] [ 133 ] Several legal writers have suggested that the illegality of blasphemy has become unconstitutional as a result of the adoption in 1994 of the Bill of Rights , which includes the right to freedom of expression .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] It has also been suggested that it is unconstitutional because the criminal prohibition only applies to blasphemy against Christianity, and therefore discriminates on the basis of religion.

[ 132 ] [ 134 ] Blasphemy prosecutions have been rare since the start of the twentieth century, to the point that writers in the early part of the century suggested that the crime had been abrogated through disuse. However, in 1934 a newspaper editor was convicted of blasphemy for publishing a story in which a nun has a vision of a sexual relationship with Jesus Christ, and the validity of the conviction was affirmed by the Appellate Division .

[ 134 ] In 1962 Harold Rubin was prosecuted for a painting depicting Christ naked on the cross along with inversions of Biblical sayings, but he was acquitted.

[ 134 ] In 1968 the editor of Varsity was prosecuted for publishing a report of a symposium on the topic " Is God Dead?

", which quoted statements that "We must write God off entirely" and "[God] is beginning to stink".

[ 136 ] He was convicted, but at sentencing received only a caution and discharge.

[ 137 ] The Equality Act of 2000 forbids hate speech , which is defined as "words based on one or more of the prohibited grounds, against any person, that could reasonably be construed to demonstrate a clear intention to: (a) be hurtful; (b) be harmful or to incite harm; (c) promote or propagate hatred." The "prohibited grounds" include religion, and thus some blasphemous speech falls within the scope of hate speech. The prohibition of hate speech is, however, not a criminal prohibition, and only civil penalties would result.

[ 138 ] Spain [ edit ] In 1988, the Spanish Parliament removed the blasphemy law from their legal system. However, article 525 of the Penal Code in Spain considers "vilification" of religious "feelings", "dogmas", "beliefs" or "rituals". This extension to "dogmas" and "beliefs" is considered by some as very close to a blasphemy law in practice.

For instance, in 2012 it was used to prosecute a famous artist, Javier Krahe , for a scene (shot 34 years earlier, and lasting just 54 seconds) in a documentary about him.

[ 139 ] He was discharged the same year.

[ 140 ] In 2018, following the case of Willy Toledo and three feminist protesters accused of blasphemy, the governing PSOE and supporting party Unidas Podemos pledged an end to the "medieval laws on offending religious sentiments and insult to the Crown ". Legislation was suspended following the announcement of the 2019 Spanish general election . The government and its allies were subsequently returned to power, which means the proposals will now likely return to the national parliament.

[ 141 ] [ needs update ] Sweden [ edit ] Swedish laws do not explicitly prohibit blasphemy. In Sweden the 20th century saw the public adoption of the principle that religion was a personal matter.

[ citation needed ] King Erik XIV had introduced a law in 1563 that specifically protected religion. That was followed by similar Acts until 1949, when they were replaced by an Act on "Peace of Faith" which was a milder form of restriction. In 1970, the 1949 Act was repealed and a new Act was introduced on "agitation against a specific group of people". The new Act protects minority groups who share "race, skin colour, national or ethnic origin, faith or sexual orientation". Thus, the Act does not protect any religion as such, but instead can protect the religion's practitioners. The new Act has most often been enforced when Jews and homosexuals have been attacked.

[ 142 ] The lack of prohibition and therefore legality to blaspheme the Quran , has been in the spotlight since 2020 as some people burnt the Quran in public. Some Muslim countries have demanded this be stopped by law in Sweden.

[ citation needed ] In 2023, a man was given a suspended sentence for "agitation against a specific group of people", after having burnt a Quran and published a video of the event.

[ 143 ] More people have been sentenced since this, including far-right politician Rasmus Paludan , who was given a prison sentence.

[ 144 ] Switzerland [ edit ] In Switzerland , Article 261 of the penal code titled "Attack on the freedom of faith and the freedom to worship" (Störung der Glaubens- und Kultusfreiheit) is defined as: [ 145 ] "Any person who publicly and maliciously insults or mocks the religious convictions of others, and in particularly their belief in God, or maliciously desecrates objects of religious veneration, any person who maliciously prevents, disrupts or publicly mocks an act of worship, the conduct of which is guaranteed by the Constitution, or any person who maliciously desecrates a place or object that is intended for a religious ceremony or an act of worship the conduct of which is guaranteed by the Constitution, shall be liable to a monetary penalty." Tanzania [ edit ] The Constitution of Tanzania defines it as a secular state (Article 3), and protects freedom of expression (Article 18), freedom of conscience, faith and choice in matters of religion (Article 19). However, these provisions are not always upheld in practice.

[ 146 ] Zanzibar is a semi-autonomous island of Tanzania with its own constitution and a separate judicial system of Khadi's courts that may apply sharia in certain cases.

[ 146 ] On mainland Tanzania, the Penal Code criminalises acts of sacrilege (destroying, damaging or defiling buildings or objects 'held sacred by any class of persons') and acts of uttering words with intent to wound religious feelings of any person under Articles 125 and 129 respectively; both count as misdemeanours that may be punished with imprisonment for up to one year. No information is available regarding whether or to what extent this provision is enforced.

[ 146 ] In Zanzibar, Section XIV of the Penal Decree Act of 2004 similarly criminalises acts of sacrilege (Article 117); Article 21 clarifies that this offence is punishable by imprisonment not exceeding two years and/or a fine. Uttering words with the intent to wound the religious feelings of any other person is punishable by imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year (Article 121).

[ 146 ] In July 2012, Eva Abdulla was sentenced to two years' imprisonment on charges of blasphemy after she was accused of having urinated on a Quran. Abdullah was acquitted on appeal and released in January 2013.

[ 146 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in the United Kingdom The United Kingdom is made up of four distinct parts and several legal jurisdictions. In criminal justice matters, these jurisdictions are England and Wales , Scotland , and Northern Ireland . Blasphemy laws dating back to the medieval times were abolished in England and Wales in 2008 and Scotland in 2021. Equivalent laws remain in Northern Ireland but have not been used for many years.

English blasphemy laws were historically defended [ by whom?

] with the following reasoning: the "[blasphemy] law is needed to uphold the national law, which is based on Christianity. Thus, targeting Christianity is targeting the very foundation of England." [ 147 ] The last attempted prosecution under these laws was in 2007 when the evangelical group Christian Voice sought a private prosecution against the BBC over its broadcasting of the show Jerry Springer: The Opera (which includes a scene depicting Jesus, dressed as a baby, professing to be "a bit gay"). The charges were rejected by the City of Westminster magistrates court. Christian Voice applied to have this ruling overturned by the High Court , but the application was rejected. The court found that the common law blasphemy offences specifically did not apply to stage productions (s. 2(4) of the Theatres Act 1968 ) and broadcasts (s. 6 of the Broadcasting Act 1990 ).

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] The last successful blasphemy prosecution (also a private prosecution) was Whitehouse v. Lemon in 1977, when Denis Lemon , the editor of Gay News , was found guilty. His newspaper had published James Kirkup 's poem " The Love that Dares to Speak its Name ", which allegedly vilified Christ and his life. Lemon was fined £500 and given a suspended sentence of nine months' imprisonment. It had been "touch and go", said the judge, whether he would actually send Lemon to jail.

[ 150 ] In 2002, a deliberate and well-publicized public repeat reading of the poem took place on the steps of St Martin-in-the-Fields church in Trafalgar Square , but did not lead to any prosecution.

[ 151 ] In 1696, a Scottish court sentenced Thomas Aikenhead to death for blasphemy.

[ 152 ] The last prosecution for blasphemy in Scotland was in 1843.

[ 153 ] The last person in Britain to be imprisoned for blasphemy was John William Gott , on 9 December 1921. He had three previous convictions for blasphemy when he was prosecuted for publishing two pamphlets which satirized the biblical story of Jesus entering Jerusalem ( Matthew 21 :2–7), comparing Jesus to a circus clown. His last sentence was for nine months' hard labour.

[ 154 ] In 1985, the Law Commission (England and Wales) published a report, Criminal Law: Offences against Religious and Public Worship , that concluded that the common law offences of blasphemy and blasphemous libel should be abolished [ 155 ] without replacement. On 5 March 2008, an amendment was passed to the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 which abolished the common law offences of blasphemy and blasphemous libel in England and Wales. After royal assent [ 156 ] [ 157 ] the relevant section came into force on 8 July 2008.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Blasphemy remains an offence under the common law in Northern Ireland.

[ 160 ] The 1989 film Visions of Ecstasy was the only film ever banned in the UK for blasphemy. Following the abolition of the blasphemy laws in England and Wales in 2008, the film was eventually classified by the BBFC for release as 18-rated in 2012.

[ 161 ] In 2021, the Scottish Parliament passed the Hate Crime and Public Order (Scotland) Act 2021 to reform hate crime legislation, providing better protection against race, sex, age and religious discrimination, and also decriminalising blasphemy.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] The common law offence of blasphemy was abolished from 1 April 2024.

[ 164 ] Humanists UK had been campaigning for repeal of Scotland's blasphemy law since 2015, and welcomed the change.

[ 165 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in the United States An Act against Atheism and Blasphemy , Massachusetts Bay Colony, 1697 In 1636, the Puritan -controlled Massachusetts Bay Colony made blasphemy – defined as "a cursing of God by atheism, or the like" – punishable by death.

[ 166 ] Blasphemy was recognized as proscribed speech in the U.S. well into the 20th-century.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] The Constitution entailed a right to articulate views on religion, but not to commit blasphemy, with the Harvard Law Review stating, "The English common law had punished blasphemy as a crime, while excluding "disputes between learned men upon particular controverted points" from the scope of criminal blasphemy. Looking to this precedent, 19th-century American appellate courts consistently upheld proscriptions on blasphemy, drawing a line between punishable blasphemy and protected religious speech." [ 167 ] In Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1952 that New York could not enforce a censorship law against filmmakers whose films contained "sacrilegious" content. The opinion of the Court, by Justice Clark, stated that: "From the standpoint of freedom of speech and the press, it is enough to point out that the state has no legitimate interest in protecting any or all religions from views distasteful to them which is sufficient to justify prior restraints upon the expression of those views. It is not the business of government in our nation to suppress real or imagined attacks upon a particular religious doctrine, whether they appear in publications, speeches, or motion pictures".

[ 169 ] The Pennsylvania General Assembly enacted a blasphemy law in 1977 that forbade corporations from incorporating names containing words that "constitute blasphemy, profane cursing or swearing, or that profane the Lord's name." [ 170 ] In 2007, filmmaker George Kalman had filed a limited liability company named I Choose Hell Productions, LLC .

[ 171 ] A week later he had received an unsigned letter explaining that his application was rejected because his company's name could not "contain words that constitute blasphemy." In February 2009, Kalman filed suit to have the provision against blasphemy struck down as unconstitutional. On June 30, 2010, U.S. District Judge Michael M. Bayslon of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, in a 68-page opinion, ruled in favor of Kalman, finding that Pennsylvania's blasphemy statute violated both the Establishment Clause and the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.

[ 172 ] The United States and some individual state jurisdictions provide for stronger criminal penalties for crimes when committed against a person because of that person's religious or some other affiliations. For instance, Section 3A1.1 of the 2009 United States Sentencing Guidelines states that: "If the finder of fact at trial or, in the case of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere , the court at sentencing determines beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant intentionally selected any victim or any property as the object of the offense of conviction because of the actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, ethnicity, gender, disability, or sexual orientation of any person," the sentencing court is required to increase the standard sentencing range.

[ 173 ] Muslim-majority countries [ edit ] Part of a series on Islamization Islamizations Late Antiquity - Middle Ages - Modern Islamization Spread of Islam Early Muslim conquests Islamic missionary activity Islamization of Palestine Islamization of Jerusalem Islamization of Syria Islamization of Egypt Islamization of Iran Islamization and Turkification of Xinjiang Islamization of Bosnia and Herzegovina Islamization of the Sudan region Spread of Islam in Southeast Asia Spread of Islam in Indonesia Islamization of Albania Islamization in Pakistan Islamization in Bangladesh Conversion to Islam Conversion to Islam in prisons Conversion to Islam in U.S. prisons Conversion of non-Islamic places of worship into mosques List of converts to Islam v t e In a number of countries where Islam is the state religion or where Muslims are a majority, values and attitudes derived from Islam have influenced censorious laws criminalising blasphemy, often attached to heavy punishments.

Blasphemy in Islam is broadly defined as impious utterance or action concerning God, Muhammad or anything considered sacred in Islam.

[ 174 ] The Islamic holy book, the Quran , admonishes blasphemy, but does not specify the punishment. The hadiths , which are another source of sharia, suggest various punishments for blasphemy, including death.

Afghanistan [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Afghanistan An Islamic emirate, Afghanistan prohibits blasphemy as an offense under Sharia. Blasphemy can be punished by retaliatory penalties up to and including execution by hanging.

[ 175 ] Since the Taliban takeover in 2021, people have been arrested for blasphemy.

[ 176 ] Algeria [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Algeria Although ninety-nine percent of Algeria 's population is Sunni Muslim , and the Constitution declares that Islam is the state religion, Algeria uses retaliatory legislation rather than Sharia to combat blasphemy against Islam. The penalty for blasphemy can be up to 5 years of imprisonment and a fine.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Bangladesh [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Bangladesh Bangladesh forbids blasphemy by a provision in its penal code that prohibits "hurting religious sentiments", and by other laws and policies that attack freedom of speech.

[ 179 ] In April 2013, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina rejected calls for new laws from radical Islamist groups, notably Hefajat-e Islam, demanding death penalty for people involved in blasphemy. She described Bangladesh as a "secular democracy, where every religion had a right to be practiced freely and fairly", and that "if anyone was found guilty of hurting the sentiments of the followers of any religion or its venerable figures, there was a law to deal with it".

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] [ 182 ] Egypt [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Egypt Article 98(f) of the Egyptian Penal Code, as amended by Law 147/2006 states the penalty for blasphemy and similar crimes: Confinement for a period of not less than six months and not exceeding five years, or a fine of not less than five hundred pounds and not exceeding one thousand pounds shall be the penalty inflicted on whoever makes use of religion in propagating, either by words, in writing, or in any other means, extreme ideas for the purpose of inciting strife, ridiculing or insulting a heavenly religion or a sect following it, or damaging national unity.

[ 183 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Basuki Tjahaja Purnama (left) was convicted of blasphemy against Islam and sentenced to two years' imprisonment. His speech in which he referenced a verse from the Quran sparked wide protests asking for his conviction.

[ 184 ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Indonesia Article 156(a) of Indonesia's Criminal Code forbids anyone from deliberately, in public, expressing feelings of hostility, hatred, or contempt against religions with the purpose of preventing others from adhering to any religion, and forbids anyone from disgracing a religion. The penalty for violating Article 156(a) is a maximum of five years of imprisonment.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] Iran [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Iran An Islamic theocracy, Iran derives its law against blasphemy from Sharia. The law against blasphemy complements laws against criticizing the Islamic government, insulting Islam, and publishing materials that deviate from Islamic standards.

[ 187 ] Jordan [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Jordan Article 273 of Jordan's Penal Code criminalizes "scorning or reviling any of the Prophets" with imprisonment for up to three years. While article 278 criminalizes "publishing anything that would insult the religious feelings or religious beliefs of other people".

[ 188 ] Kuwait [ edit ] Main article: Legal system of Kuwait Article 6 of Kuwait's cybercrime laws mention a punishment of up to 12 months in prison and a 20,000 KWD (US$66,000) fine for insulting "God, the Holy Quran, Prophets, the Noble Companions of Prophet Muhammad, Wives of the Prophet, or persons who are part of the Prophet's family".

[ 189 ] Malaysia [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Malaysia Malaysia prevents insult to religion and to the religious by education, by restrictions upon the broadcasting and publishing media, and by the legal system. Some states in the Malaysian federation operate Sharia courts to protect Islam, and, when Sharia is not applicable, the Malaysian Penal Code provides penalties for offenses against religion.

[ 190 ] Mauritania [ edit ] The crime of apostasy is defined in section IV (entitled Act of Indecency toward Islam) of the Mauritanian Penal Code, established under the order of 9 July 1983. Article 306, paragraph 1 of the criminal code indicates, "Every Muslim guilty of the crime of apostasy, either by word or by action of apparent or obvious, will be invited to repent within three days." [ 191 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Pakistan Protest to repeal Pakistan's blasphemy law in Bradford (2014) More people are on death row or serving life sentences for blasphemy in Pakistan than in any other country in the world.

[ 192 ] The anti-blasphemy laws in Pakistan are quite complicated. Offenders may be vigorously prosecuted. Chapter XV of Pakistan Penal Code deals with "offences relating to religion": [ 193 ] §295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class.

[ 193 ] §295-A. Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting Its religion or religious beliefs.

[ 193 ] §295-B. Defiling, etc., of Holy Qur'an.

[ 193 ] §295-C. Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of the Holy Prophet.

[ 193 ] §296. Disturbing religious assembly.

[ 193 ] §297. Trespassing on burial places, etc.

[ 193 ] §298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings.

[ 193 ] §298-A. Use of derogatory remarks, etc., in respect of holy personages.

[ 193 ] §298-B. Misuse of epithets, descriptions and titles, etc., reserved for certain holy personages or places.

[ 193 ] §298-C. Person of Qadiani group, etc., calling himself a Muslim or preaching or propagating his faith: [ 193 ] There is a death penalty for blasphemy in Pakistan (only under section 295 c). Those prosecuted are usually minorities such as Ahmadiyya and Christians but it seems that they are also increasingly other Muslims.

[ 194 ] Persons accused of blasphemy as well as police, lawyers, and judges have been subject to harassment, threats, attacks, and murders when blasphemy is the issue.

[ 195 ] In November 2008 Pakistan's government appointed Shahbaz Bhatti as Federal Minister for Minorities and gave him cabinet rank. Bhatti had promised that the Asif Ali Zardari government would review Pakistan's blasphemy laws.

[ 196 ] Pakistan has been an active supporter of the campaign by the Organisation of the Islamic Conference to create global laws against blasphemy .

[ 196 ] Minister Bhatti was shot dead on 2 March 2011 in Islamabad , the capital of Pakistan. On 19 March 2014, Pakistani English-language newspaper, The Nation , conducted a poll of its readers that showed only 8% of Pakistanis believe the blasphemy law should be repealed.

[ 197 ] In September 2016 a sixteen-year-old Christian teenage boy, Nabeel Chohan, was arrested in Pakistan after he made a Facebook post that was blasphemous. According to Punjab Police, the teenager was jailed and was awaiting trial for sharing the post on social media.

[ 198 ] In November 2017 a well-known and Influential Islamist group Tehreek-i-Labaik Ya Rasool Allah Pakistan in Pakistan staged a sit-in in the capital Islamabad. They forced the government to abandon an amendment to the oath sworn by election candidates that allowed for a variation in the oath because of the candidates religious beliefs. They also caused the law minister Zahid Hamid to resign.

[ 199 ] Palestine [ edit ] Waleed Al-Husseini signs a copy of The Blasphemer in 2015.

The Palestinian National Authority has several provisions in civil and military law against blasphemy. An infamous 2010 case, in which these were employed to attempt a prosecution, was that of Waleed Al-Husseini , a young man from the West Bank town of Qalqilya who had left Islam to become an atheist , and openly challenged and ridiculed religion online. He was arrested without charges and jailed in October 2010, after which the Palestinian Authority alleged Al-Husseini had committed blasphemy on the Internet.

[ 200 ] A Palestinian human rights expert at the time expected Al-Husseini to be tried according to a 1960 Jordanian law against defaming religion, which was still in force in the West Bank.

[ 200 ] Instead, Al-Husseini was charged with three counts of incitement according to the Palestine Military Code of Justice, namely: "inciting religious hatred" (Article 177), "insulting religious leaders" (Article 225 and 226/B), and "offending religious views" (Article 230/A).

[ 201 ] He was eventually released after 10 months in prison due to heavy international diplomatic pressure, primarily exerted by France.

[ 202 ] Qatar [ edit ] The penalty for committing blasphemy in Qatar is a jail sentence of up to seven years.

[ 203 ] Additionally, the law stipulates a one-year prison sentence or QR1,000 fine for defamation of Islam by producing or promoting defamatory imagery.

[ 204 ] Religious criticism on websites is censored in Qatar.

[ 205 ] The censorship office of the Qatar General Broadcasting and Television Corporation monitors imported foreign broadcasting for sensitive religious content.

[ 206 ] A blasphemy accusation against a Muslim could be taken as evidence of apostasy from Islam , a separate criminal offence which carries the death penalty. However, no punishment for apostasy has been recorded since 1971.

[ 207 ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Saudi Arabian activist Raif Badawi was arrested for blasphemy.

Main article: Blasphemy law in Saudi Arabia Islam is Saudi Arabia's state religion. The country's monarchy follows Sunni Islam .

[ 208 ] The country's laws are an amalgam of rules from Sharia, royal edicts, and fatawa from the Council of Senior Religious Scholars; they prescribe penalties up to the death penalty for blasphemy.

[ 209 ] Sudan [ edit ] Section 125 of the Sudanese Criminal Act prohibits "insulting religion, inciting hatred and showing contempt for religious beliefs". The section includes as penalties: imprisonment, a fine, and a maximum of forty lashes . In November 2007, the section gave rise to the Sudanese teddy bear blasphemy case . In December 2007, the section was used against two Egyptian booksellers. They were sentenced to six months in prison because they sold a book that the court deemed an insult to Aisha, one of Prophet Mohammed 's wives.

[ 210 ] In May 2005, the authorities arrested Mohammed Taha Mohammed Ahmed, and charged him with violating section 125. Ahmed was the editor-in-chief of a daily newspaper Al-Wifaq . The paper had published an article about a 500-year-old Islamic manuscript which says the real name of Mohammed's father was not Abdallah but Abdel Lat, or Slave of Lat , an idol of the pre-Islamic era.

[ 211 ] A court fined Al-Wifaq eight million Sudanese pounds—the paper was shut down for three months—but acquitted Ahmed. Ahmed was found decapitated in September 2006.

[ 212 ] In July 2020, Sudan repealed its apostasy law (Article 126 of the Penal Code). The United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) applauded this on 15 July 2020, but urged Sudanese lawmakers to repeal the blasphemy law (Article 125 of the Sudanese Penal Code) as well.

[ 213 ] Turkey [ edit ] Fazıl Say during rehearsals in 2011 Article 216 of the Turkish Penal Code ("Provoking people to be rancorous and hostile") criminalizes blasphemy and religious insult, as well as hate speech. The article, which is in the fifth section of the Turkish Penal Code ("Offenses Against Public Peace") is as follows: [ 214 ] Article 216. – Provoking people to be rancorous and hostile (1) Any person who openly provokes a group of people belonging to different social class, religion, race, sect, or coming from another origin, to be rancorous or hostile against another group, is punished with imprisonment from one year to three years in case of such act causes risk from the aspect of public safety.

(2) Any person who openly humiliates another person just because they belong to different social class, religion, race, sect, or comes from another origin, is punished with imprisonment from six months to one year.

(3) Any person who openly disrespects the religious belief of a group is punished with imprisonment from six months to one year if such act causes potential risk for public peace.

On 1 June 2012, pianist Fazıl Say came under investigation by the Istanbul Prosecutor's Office over statements made on Twitter , declaring himself an atheist and retweeting a message poking fun at the Islamic conception of paradise .

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] On 15 April 2013, Say was sentenced to 10 months in jail, reduced from 12 months for good behavior in court. The sentence was suspended, meaning he was allowed to move freely provided he did not repeat the offence in the next five years.

[ 217 ] On appeal, Turkey's Supreme Court of Appeals reversed the conviction on 26 October 2015, ruling that Say's Twitter posts fell within the bounds of freedom of thought and freedom of expression.

[ 218 ] United Arab Emirates [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in the United Arab Emirates The United Arab Emirates (UAE) law against blasphemy is governed by article 312 of the United Arab Emirates Penal Code. The country's state religion is Islam . According to the article, the following offences if perpetrated publicly shall be a subject to a jail sentence for a minimum period of one year or a fine: [ 219 ] Offence to any of the Islamic sacred beliefs or rites.

Insult to any of the divine recognized religions.

Approving, encouraging or promoting sinful actions.

Knowingly eating pork meat by Muslims Yemen [ edit ] Main article: Blasphemy law in Yemen This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Accusations of blasphemy in Yemen are often aimed at religious minorities, intellectuals and artists, reporters, human rights defenders , and opponents of the ruling party. Vigilantism or abuse by the authorities can kill an accused or force them into exile. The accused in Yemen is subject to Islamic law (Sharia). Sharia, according to some interpretations, prescribes death as the proper punishment for blasphemy.

Atheist state [ edit ] China [ edit ] China, officially an atheist state , [ 220 ] banned a book titled " Xing Fengsu " ("Sexual Customs"), which had allegedly insulted Islam, and placed its authors under arrest in 1989, after protests in Lanzhou and Beijing by Chinese Hui Muslims, during which the Chinese police provided protection to the Hui Muslim protestors, and the Chinese government organized public burnings of the book.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] [ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] [ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] The Chinese government assisted them and gave into their demands because Hui do not have a separatist movement, unlike the Uyghurs , [ 231 ] Hui Muslim protestors who violently rioted by vandalizing property during the protests against the book were let off by the Chinese government and went unpunished while Uyghur protestors were imprisoned.

[ 232 ] In 2007, anticipating the coming "Year of the Pig" in the Chinese calendar , depictions of pigs were banned from CCTV "to avoid conflicts with ethnic minorities".

[ 233 ] This is believed to refer to China's population of 20 million Muslims (to whom pigs are considered " unclean ").

In response to the 2015 Charlie Hebdo shooting Chinese state-run media attacked Charlie Hebdo for publishing the cartoons insulting Muhammad, with the state-run Xinhua advocated limiting freedom of speech, while another state-run newspaper Global Times said the attack was "payback" for what it characterized as Western colonialism and accusing Charlie Hebdo of trying to incite a clash of civilizations.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] Jewish state [ edit ] Israel [ edit ] In Israel , blasphemy laws were first enacted by the pre-State British Mandate in an attempt to suppress the 1929 Palestine riots .

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] Blasphemy is covered by Articles 170 and 173 of the penal code: [ 238 ] [ 239 ] Insult to religion 170. If a person destroys, damages, or desecrates a place of worship or any object which is held sacred by a group of persons, with the intention of reviling their religion, or in the knowledge that they are liable to deem that act an insult to their religion, then the one is liable to three years' imprisonment.

Injury to religious sentiment 173. If a person does any of the following, then the one is liable to one year's imprisonment: (1) One publishes a publication that is liable to crudely offend the religious faith or sentiment of others; (2) One voices in a public place and in the hearing of another person any word or sound that is liable to crudely offend the religious faith or sentiment of others.

The law has been rarely enforced. However, one right-wing Jewish activist was sentenced to two years in prison after scattering leaflets in Hebron in 1997, which pictured Muhammed as a pig desecrating the Quran.

[ 237 ] Hindu and Buddhist-majority countries [ edit ] India [ edit ] Main articles: Hate speech laws in India and Section 295A of the Indian Penal Code Indian religions (also called Dharmic religions ), Hinduism and its offshoots Buddhism and Jainism , traditionally have no concept of blasphemy .

Nāstika , roughly translated as atheist or atheism , are valid and accepted streams of in Indian religions where Buddhism, Jainism, as well as Samkhya , Cārvāka and Ājīvika in Hinduism are considered atheist or agnostic school of philosophy in the Indian religions.

[ 240 ] [ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 243 ] Section 295A of the Indian Penal Code has been used as a blasphemy law to prevent insulting Christianity, Islam and other religions practised in India.

[ 244 ] The British-era section 295A of the penal code is extant and has not been repealed; it contains an anti-blasphemy law.

[ 245 ] Section 295A was introduced in 1927, in the aftermath of Rangila Rasul incident, to prevent "hate speech that insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs" of any class of citizen with deliberate and malicious intention to outrage their religious feelings but the main purpose of this law has been to maintain "public order in a multireligious and religiously sensitive society." [ 245 ] [ 246 ] An important difference between the offence in the Indian Penal Code and English common law is that the defendant must have a "deliberate and malicious intention of outraging religious feelings" in the Indian code while English common law had no such inclusion.

[ 247 ] Section 295A has, nevertheless, been used a number of times to prevent free and honest discussion on religious issues and remains a threat to freedom of expression. The same section 295A appears in the penal codes of Pakistan and Myanmar where it is used as a blasphemy law. There have been widespread calls in India from civil society to repeal the regressive British-era code.

[ 248 ] In 1860, laws were created in British India that made it a "crime to disturb a religious assembly, trespass on burial grounds, insult religious beliefs or intentionally destroy or defile a place or an object of worship, punishable by up to 10 years in jail." [ 249 ] In India, many people are arrested in accordance with the above-mentioned laws. Cases include those of: Kamlesh Tiwari , [ 250 ] Tarak Biswas, [ 251 ] and Sanal Edamaruku .

[ 252 ] Many books are banned for blasphemous content.

Myanmar [ edit ] Section 295A and 298 of the Myanmar Penal Code are used to prosecute people for blasphemy.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] The Myanmar Penal Code shares a common origin with the penal codes of Pakistan and India and other British colonies in the Penal Code of 1860.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] The offences are: Chapter XV OF OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION 295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class.

295A. Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs.

296. Disturbing religious assembly.

297. Trespassing on burial – places, etc.

298. Uttering words, etc.; with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings.

Section 295 and 295A carry a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment, a fine, or both, and sections 296, 297 and 298 a maximum of one year's imprisonment, a fine, or both. Section 295A was added to the Penal code by a legislative amendment in 1927, in the aftermath of Rangeela Rasool incident where a Muslim fatally stabbed a Hindu editor after he was acquitted by the then existing law. It was intended to protect religious minorities. It was a response to a perceived need to prohibit incitement against Muslim minorities by Hindu nationalists in India, but is now used in Myanmar to protect Buddhist nationalists against prosecution for incitement against Muslim minorities.

[ 256 ] In December 2014, bar owner Tun Thurein and bar managers Htut Ko Lwin and New Zealander Philip Blackwood who ran the VGastro Bar in Yangon were arrested and sentenced in March 2015 to two-and-a-half years of hard labour after posting a psychedelic image of the Buddha wearing headphones to promote their bar on the internet.

[ 257 ] In June 2015, writer and former National League for Democracy information officer, Htin Lin Oo was sentenced to two years of hard labour for violating section 295A. The charge resulted from a speech in which he accused several prominent Buddhist organisations of extreme nationalism with particularly reference to Ashin Wirathu , who has been accused of hate speech and incitement of violence against Muslims by international observers many times since anti-Rohingya violence erupted in 2012.

[ 256 ] [ 258 ] [ 259 ] Nepal [ edit ] Section 9.156 of a new criminal code act passed by parliament on 8 August 2017 serves as a blasphemy law. It criminalised for the first time the 'hurting of religious sentiment' and carries a penalty of up to two years imprisonment and a fine of 20,000 Rupees.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] The new law came into force on 17 August 2018 [ 263 ] Thailand [ edit ] Despite Thailand 's constitution declaring freedom of religion and the lack of an official religion, Theravada Buddhism still plays a very important role in Thai society, both legally and culturally. The constitution declares that the King of Thailand must be Buddhist and a defender of Buddhism.

[ 264 ] The 1962 Sangha Act outlaws insults or defamation of Buddhism and Buddhist clergy. These include damaging statues of the Buddha; stealing, buying or taking these out of Thailand; taking photos of them; sitting with feet facing them; touching these on the head; and wearing tattoos depicting the Buddha. Foreigners visiting Thailand are sternly warned not to do the aforementioned acts when entering the country. The 1956 penal code, in sections 206 and 208, also outlaws insulting or disrupting places and services of any religion recognized by the Thai government. Violations range from 1 to 7 years imprisonment, to a fine of 2,000 to 14,000 baht .

[ 265 ] Defamation of religion and the United Nations [ edit ] Main article: Defamation of religion and the United Nations Article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) 1976 obliges signatory countries to guarantee everyone the right to hold opinions without restriction and to guarantee the right to freedom of expression, to impart information and ideas of all kinds, either orally, in writing or in print, in art, or through any other media. Paragraph 3 of article 19 allows for certain restrictions to freedom expression that are both necessary and provided by law to safeguard the reputations of others, for the protection of national security or of public order, or of public health or morals and article 20 obliges countries to prohibit "propaganda for war or advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence." [ 10 ] In July 2011, the UN Human Rights Committee released a 52-paragraph statement, General Comment 34 on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, concerning freedoms of opinion and expression.

[ 266 ] Paragraph 48 states: Prohibitions of displays of lack of respect for a religion or other belief system, including blasphemy laws, are incompatible with the Covenant, except in the specific circumstances envisaged in article 20, paragraph 2, of the Covenant. Such prohibitions must also comply with the strict requirements of article 19, paragraph 3, as well as such articles as 2, 5, 17, 18 and 26. Thus, for instance, it would be impermissible for any such laws to discriminate in favour of or against one or certain religions or belief systems, or their adherents over another, or religious believers over non-believers. Nor would it be permissible for such prohibitions to be used to prevent or punish criticism of religious leaders or commentary on religious doctrine and tenets of faith.

The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation have petitioned the " United Nations to create global laws criminalising insults to religion".

[ 267 ] Three United Nations Special Rapporteurs—the Special Rapporteurs on freedom of religion or belief, on the right to freedom of opinion and expression and on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance—released a joint statement during the Durban Review Conference in Geneva in 2009. They stated that: "the difficulties in providing an objective definition of the term "defamation of religions" at the international level make the whole concept open to abuse. At the national level, domestic blasphemy laws can prove counter-productive, since this could result in the de facto censure of all inter-religious and intra-religious criticism. Many of these laws afford different levels of protection to different religions and have often proved to be applied in a discriminatory manner. There are numerous examples of persecution of religious minorities or dissenters, but also of atheists and non-theists, as a result of legislation on religious offences or overzealous application of laws that are fairly neutral." [ 268 ] The Rabat Plan of Action (2012) on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence Conclusions and recommendations emanating from the four regional expert workshops organised by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in 2011, and adopted by experts in Rabat, Morocco on 5 October 2012 stated that: "At the national level, blasphemy laws are counter-productive, since they may result in the de facto censure of all inter-religious/belief and intra-religious/belief dialogue, debate, and also criticism, most of which could be constructive, healthy and needed. In addition, many of these blasphemy laws afford different levels of protection to different religions and have often proved to be applied in a discriminatory manner. There are numerous examples of persecution of religious minorities or dissenters, but also of atheists and non-theists, as a result of legislation on religious offences or overzealous application of various laws that use a neutral language. Moreover, the right to freedom of religion or belief, as enshrined in relevant international legal standards, does not include the right to have a religion or a belief that is free from criticism or ridicule." The Plan of Action recommended that: "States that have blasphemy laws should repeal these as such laws have a stifling impact on the enjoyment of freedom of religion or belief and healthy dialogue and debate about religion".

[ 269 ] Campaigns for repeal [ edit ] France (apart from Alsace-Moselle) repealed its blasphemy law in 1881, Sweden in 1970. A series of countries, especially in Europe, began repealing their blasphemy laws in the early 21st century. A systematic global campaign to abolish all blasphemy laws around the world was launched under the slogan "End Blasphemy Laws" by secular humanist and atheist organizations, such as International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU), the European Humanist Federation (EHF) and numerous coalition partners on 30 January 2015, in direct response to the Charlie Hebdo shooting on 7 January 2015.

[ 270 ] Initiatives in Europe [ edit ] The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in Strasbourg , France , which has been deliberating on the issue of blasphemy law, the resolution that blasphemy should not be a criminal offence, [ 271 ] adopted on 29 June 2007 in the Recommendation 1805 (2007) on blasphemy, religious insults and hate speech against persons on grounds of their religion. This Recommendation set a number of guidelines for member states of the Council of Europe in view of Articles 10 (freedom of expression) and 9 (freedom of thought, conscience and religion) of the European Convention on Human Rights .

In place of blasphemy or in addition to blasphemy in some European countries is the crime of "religious insult", which is a subset of the crime of blasphemy. As of March 2009 [update] , it was forbidden in Andorra, Cyprus, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Spain, Finland, Germany, Greece, Italy, Lithuania, Norway, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, the Russian Federation, Slovakia, Switzerland, Turkey and Ukraine.

[ 272 ] On 23 October 2008, the Venice Commission , the Council of Europe's advisory body on constitutional matters, issued a report about blasphemy, religious insult, and incitement to religious hatred.

[ 273 ] The report noted that, at the time in Europe, blasphemy was an offence in Austria, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Italy, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands, and San Marino.

Repealings by jurisdiction [ edit ] The common law offences of blasphemy and blasphemous libel were abolished in England and Wales in 2008 with the passage of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act .

[ 274 ] Other countries to abolish or repeal blasphemy laws include France in 1881 (except for the Alsace-Moselle region , part of Germany at the time), Sweden in 1970, Norway with Acts in 2009 and 2015, the Netherlands in 2014, Iceland in 2015, Malta in 2016, France for its Alsace-Moselle region in 2016, Denmark in 2017, Canada in 2018, [ 21 ] New Zealand [ 106 ] and Greece in 2019, Ireland in 2020, and Scotland in 2021.

Australia abolished and repealed all blasphemy laws at the Federal Level in 1995 but blasphemy laws remain in some States and Territories.

[ 12 ] On 26 October 2018, a referendum in the Republic of Ireland resulted in the removal of the Constitutional provision and the 2009 Defamation Act provision against blasphemy, which was implemented in January 2020.

[ 70 ] Jurisdiction Enacted Repealed Notes Australia 1788 [ 12 ] 1995 [ 12 ] Abolished at federal level, but some States and Territories still maintain blasphemy laws.

[ 12 ] Canada 1892 2018 [ 21 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The Criminal Code Act 1892 abolished the pre-existing common law offences of Blasphemy and Blasphemous libel but enacted the crime of Blasphemous libel.

Denmark 1683 [ 30 ] 2017 [ 30 ] (reenacted in 2023) England and Wales 1539 [ 275 ] 2008 [ 274 ] France 1254 [ 42 ] 1881 [ 44 ] Not abolished in the Alsace-Moselle region until 2016.

[ 51 ] Greece 1834 2019 [ 276 ] Enacted on 1 July 2019.

[ 276 ] Iceland 1940 [ 68 ] 2015 [ 67 ] Ireland 1937 [ 79 ] 2018/20 Following the Thirty-seventh Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland in 2018, mentions of blasphemy were removed from Irish statute by legislation in January 2020.

Malta 1933 [ 85 ] 2016 [ 87 ] Netherlands 1886 [ 92 ] 2014 [ 104 ] In 1932, the law was made more strict.

[ 93 ] New Zealand 1893 2019 [ 106 ] The Criminal Code Act 1893 abolished and replaced the common law offences of Blasphemy and Blasphemous libel introduced in 1840 with a code offence of Blasphemous libel.

Norway 1902 [ 108 ] 2009/15 In 2009 removed from the new 2005 penal code, which was not enacted until 2015.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Scotland 1661 2021 [ 277 ] Last prosecution was in 1843.

[ 278 ] 2021 legislation for repeal took effect in 2024.

Sweden 1563 [ 142 ] 1970 [ 142 ] The 1563 law was replaced in 1949.

[ 142 ] See also [ edit ] Freedom of speech Backlash against anti–blasphemy laws Defamation of religion and the United Nations International Blasphemy Day Islam and blasphemy Insult (legal) Lists of executed people for religious offenses References [ edit ] ^ Miriam Díez Bosch and Jordi Sànchez Torrents (2015).

On blasphemy . Barcelona: Blanquerna Observatory on Media, Religion and Culture.

ISBN 978-84-941193-3-0 .

^ "Blasphemy" . Random House Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 January 2015 .

Quote: impious utterance or action concerning God or sacred things.; the crime of assuming to oneself the rights or qualities of God.

^ Blasphemy Archived 23 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine Merriam Webster (July 2013); 1. great disrespect shown to God or to something holy 2. irreverence toward something considered sacred or inviolable ^ Blasphemies , in Webster's New World College Dictionary, 4th Ed, 1. profane or contemptuous speech, writing, or action concerning God or anything held as divine.

2. any remark or action held to be irreverent or disrespectful ^ Angelina E. Theodorou (29 July 2016).

"Which countries still outlaw apostasy and blasphemy?" . Pew Research Center.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2016 .

^ a b "Denmark still largely in support of 'blasphemy' law" .

IceNews . 2 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2016 . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

A recent survey has shown that Danish citizens still largely back the country's 'blasphemy' law. The law, which makes it illegal to "mock legal religions and faiths in Denmark", is supported by around 66 percent of Danish voters, according to a recent survey conducted by the liberal group CEPOS. Speaking about the report, religious expert Tim Jensen from the University of Southern Denmark said, "Danes may see the blasphemy law as helping integration because it promotes the acceptance of a multicultural and multi-faith society. But it can also be problematic if it reflects a belief that the feelings of religious people have a special status and require special protection," the Berlingske news agency reports.

^ Scolnicov, Anat (18 October 2010).

The Right to Religious Freedom in International Law: Between Group Rights and Individual Rights . Routledge. p. 261.

ISBN 9781136907050 .

A different argument for the retention of the offence of blasphemy (and for its extension to the protection of all religions in the UK [the offence protected only the majority religion]) has been offered by Parekh: a majority religion does not need the protection offered by an offence of blasphemy, but minority religions do because of their vulnerability in the face of the majority.

^ a b "Danes overwhelmingly support their own blasphemy law" .

The Copenhagen Post . 21 September 2012 . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

Denmark's own blasphemy law makes it an offence to "mock legal religions and faiths in Denmark", and according to a study carried out on behalf of the liberal think-tank CEPOS, 66 percent of the 1,000 Danes questioned answered that the law should not be repealed.

^ Hare, Ivan; Weinstein, James (18 November 2011).

Extreme Speech and Democracy .

Oxford University Press . p. 187.

ISBN 9780199601790 .

^ a b c Hashemi, Kamran (2008).

Religious Legal Traditions, International Human Rights Law and Muslim States .

Brill Academic Publishers . p. 45.

ISBN 9789004165557 .

^ "General comment No. 34. Article 19: Freedoms of opinion and expression. General remarks" (PDF) .

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . 12 September 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 September 2018 . Retrieved 11 October 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g Temperman, Jeroen; Koltay, András (2017).

Blasphemy and Freedom of Expression: Comparative, Theoretical and Historical Reflections after the Charlie Hebdo Massacre . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

512– 514.

ISBN 9781108267991 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ Priestly, Brenton (n.d.).

"Blasphemy and the Law: A Comparative Study (2006)" .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ Temperman & Koltay, p. 518.

^ "Strafbare Handlungen gegen den religiösen Frieden und die Ruhe der Toten: Herabwürdigung religiöser Lehren" .

Rechtsinformationssystem des Bundes . 1975. § 188 . Retrieved 13 October 2015 .

^ "Art. 208 do Cód. Penal Brasileiro" .

Jus Brasil . 1940.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2012 . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

^ "Parliamentary E-Petition Opposing Canada's Blasphemy Law – Centre for Inquiry Canada" .

centreforinquiry.ca . 22 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2016 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ Petition e-382 – House of Commons E-petitions online service, as accessed 11 February 2017 ^ Response to Petition No. 421-01047 Archived 15 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine – House of Commons of Canada ^ Bill C-51 Archived 9 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine | access-date = 6 June 2017 ^ a b c "Canada repeals blasphemy law" .

British Columbia Humanist Association . 11 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2019 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "STATUTES OF CANADA 2018 CHAPTER 29 BILL C-51" . Parliament of Canada.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2019 . Retrieved 6 March 2019 .

^ a b "LEGISinfo – House Government Bill C-51" .

Parliament of Canada . 13 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2019 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ a b Zimonjic, Peter (13 December 2018).

"Liberals' election reform bill becomes law on last day of parliamentary sitting" .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

C-51 was made law Thursday ^ "Bag om blasfemiparagraffen" (in Danish).

Kristeligt Dagblad . 21 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ "En 42-årig mand er blevet tiltalt for blasfemi ved at afbrænde koranen" .

Jyllands-Posten . 22 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2017 . Retrieved 9 March 2017 .

^ "Danish man charged with blasphemy for burning Quran" . CNN. 23 February 2017.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ Søren Sandfeld Jakobsen.

"Denmark: The Case Regarding the Danish Muhammad Drawings" . Merlin.obs.coe.int. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Stort flertal har afskaffet blasfemiparagraffen" .

Politiken.dk (in Danish). 2 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2017 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ a b c Agence France-Press (2 June 2017).

"Denmark scraps 334-year-old blasphemy law" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ "Dismay as Denmark re-introduces blasphemy law" .

^ "Til lovforslag nr. L 65 – Lov om ændring af straffeloven" [The same penalty is given to whoever publicly or with intent to spread in a wider circle is guilty in improper treatment of a writing, which has significant religious significance for a recognized religious community, or an object, which appears as such writing.] (PDF) (in Danish).

Folketinget . 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

^ "End Blasphemy Laws= El Salvador" .

End Blasphemy Laws .

^ Oy, Edita Publishing.

"FINLEX ® – Ajantasainen lainsäädäntö: Rikoslaki 39/1889" .

www.finlex.fi .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2009 .

^ "An unofficial translation of the Criminal Code of Finland] (there is no official translation)" (PDF) . finlex.fi. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2009 .

^ "Uskontorikoslakien historia" .

uskonnonvapaus.fi .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ Hautamäki, Jaakko (9 June 1998).

"Jumalanpilkka palasi yllättäen lakitekstiin eduskunnan äänestyksessä" .

Helsingin Sanomat . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ "Hannu Salama – kirjallisuuspalkittu jumalanpilkkaaja" .

Ylen Elävä arkisto (in Finnish).

Archived from the original on 29 July 2014 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

^ "Sikamaalari Harro Koskinen" .

Ylen Elävä arkisto (in Finnish). 7 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2014 .

^ "Halla-aholle tuomio uskonrauhan rikkomisesta" .

Yle (in Finnish). 8 September 2009.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2011 . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

^ Olivier Bobineau, "Retour de l'ordre religieux ou signe de bonne santé de notre pluralisme laïc ? " [archive], Le Monde.fr, 8 décembre 2011 (consulté le 15 janvier 2015) [ dead link ] ^ a b Temperman & Koltay, p. 26.

^ Temperman & Koltay, p. 25.

^ a b Temperman & Koltay, p. 38.

^ Charlie Hebdo has controversial history Archived 17 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine , CBC News, 8 January 2015 ^ (in French) Act of 1 June 1924 Archived 7 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine "Mettant en vigueur la législation civile française dans les départements du Bas-Rhin, du Haut-Rhin et de la Moselle ", on gallica.bnf.fr.

^ (in French) Decree n°2013-776 of 27 August 2013 about Alsace-Moselle laws and regulations, as retained in 1924, without their later modifications Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine on legifrance.gouv.fr.

^ (in French) "Arrêté n°2013241-0001 portant publication de la traduction de lois et règlements locaux maintenus en vigueur par les lois du 1er juin 1924 dans les départements du Bas-Rhin, du Haut-Rhin et de la Moselle " Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Special "Recueil des Actes Administratifs "n°40 of the Haut-Rhin departement, August 2013, p. 6.

^ According to the Act of 24 July 1921 and the Decree of 15 May 1922, German remained, until 2012, the official judiciary language in the maintained local law matters, as was confirmed by article 12 of the Act of 1 June 1924 which considered the French version for "documentary" purposes only.

^ (in French) Answers to the written questions of senators Laborde and Abate n°11076 of 27 March 2014 and n°15521 of 2 April 2015 Archived 7 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine , on senat.fr.

^ a b "Blasphemy law abolished in Alsace-Moselle region of France" .

End Blasphemy Laws . IHEU & EHF. 31 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ "Le Sénat supprime le délit de blasphème qui s'applique en Alsace-Moselle" .

Patronage Laïque Jules Vallès (in French). 14 October 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ "StGB – Einzelnorm" .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Suspended prison for German who insulted Koran" .

Expatica . 23 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 May 2010 .

^ Report in the Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger (in German) ^ a b "Urteil: Ein Jahr Bewährung für Koran auf Klopapier" .

Spiegel -Verlag . 23 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ a b c d "Analysis of the domestic law concerning blasphemy, religious insults and inciting religious hatred" . Archived from the original on 1 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 June 2009 .

^ "Austrian author acquitted on appeal in blasphemy case" . 25 April 2005.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2013 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 – via IFEX.

^ "Blasphemy and Sacrilege: European Law and Cases" Archived 13 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Report: On the Relationship Between Freedom of Expression and Freedom of Religion: The Issue of Regulation and Prosecution of Blasphemy, Religious Insult and Incitement to Religious Hatred" .

Venice Commission . Archived from the original on 1 April 2009.

^ At Long Last, Greece Will Finally Get Rid of Its Blasphemy Laws Archived 20 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Patheos ^ NEWSROOM (11 November 2019).

"Ποινικός Κώδικας: Ποινή φυλάκισης για καθύβριση των θείων- Αυστηρότερες ποινές για παιδεραστία, διακίνηση μεταναστών" .

News 24/7 (in Greek) . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ "Φυλάκιση έως δύο έτη για όποιον καθυβρίζει τον Θεό και τη θρησκεία" .

www.voria.gr . 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ "Up to two years in prison for malicious blasphemy" .

Orthodox Times . 11 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ "Archbishop Ieronymos: Reinstating malicious blasphemy aims to preserve religious sentiment" .

Orthodox Times . 12 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ Kampouris, Nick (12 November 2019).

"Greece Scraps Reinstatement of Blasphemy Law Following Public Outcry" .

greece.greekreporter.com . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ a b "Blasphemy Law Abolished in Iceland!" .

Icelandic Ethical Humanist Association . 2 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ a b "Almenn hegningarlög (General Criminal Code)" (in Icelandic). Parliament of Iceland.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ a b Jacob, Katherine A. E. (2012).

"Defending Blasphemy: Exploring Religious Expression under Ireland's Blasphemy law" .

Case Western Reserve Journal of International Law .

44 (3). Case Western Reserve University School of Law . Retrieved 16 August 2024 .

^ a b c d "Ireland votes to remove blasphemy from Constitution by 64.85% to 35.15%" .

RTÉ . 28 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2018 . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

^ Henry MacDonald, "Irish to vote on repealing blasphemy ban" Archived 4 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Melbourne Age , 17 March 2010.

^ a b "Blasphemy law needs to be repealed" .

The Irish Times . 17 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2016 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ Joanna Robinson (3 February 2015).

"What Would Actor Stephen Fry Say If He Met God? "How Dare You" " .

Vanity Fair .

Archived from the original on 12 April 2016 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ "Stephen Fry faces blasphemy probe after God comments" .

BBC News . 6 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 6 May 2017 .

^ "Stephen Fry investigated by Irish police for alleged blasphemy" .

The Guardian . 7 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2017 . Retrieved 8 June 2017 .

^ "Irish police drop Stephen Fry blasphemy probe" .

BBC News . 9 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2017 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ "Irish police halt investigation of Stephen Fry for blasphemy" .

The Guardian . 9 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 June 2017 . Retrieved 8 June 2017 .

^ "Blasphemy officially abolished as a criminal offence" .

Irish Legal News .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ a b Peter Taggart (27 October 2018).

"Ireland awaits result in referendum on repealing blasphemy ban" .

Local 10 .

WPLG .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2018 . Retrieved 28 October 2018 .

^ Hate crime laws are a 'secular blasphemy' says Mattie McGrath Archived 27 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine by Chai Brady, The Irish Catholic , November 14, 2019 ^ "Art. 724 codice penale – Bestemmia e manifestazioni oltraggiose verso i defunti" . Brocardi.it.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ Ro, Christine (7 November 2017).

"Artist Charged with Public Offense to Religion in Italy Over Image of Aroused Jesus" .

Hyperallergic .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 August 2018 .

^ Josephine McKenna (26 July 2019).

"Thou shalt not take the Lord's name in vain: Italian town to issue €400 blasphemy fines" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ Donica Phifer (27 July 2019).

"Italian Town to Issue Fines for Blasphemy, Cursing in Public" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 30 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ a b "Title IV: Of crimes against the religious sentiment. Chapter 9. Article 163: Vilification of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Religion" .

Criminal Code of Malta . Court Services.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ "Criminal proceedings for blaspheming and littering with cigarette butts" . Allied Newspapers Ltd. 14 October 2009.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2009 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ a b "Repealing blasphemy law a victory for freedom of speech, says Humanist Association" . Allied Newspapers Ltd. 14 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 August 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Criminal Code (Amendment) Act 2016" .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2017 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "Criminal Code Act" .

Chapter 77 (Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 1990) . Nigeria. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2009 .

^ "Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999" . Nigeria.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2009 .

^ "2008 Human Rights Report: Introduction" . U.S. State Department. 25 February 2008. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009 . Retrieved 2 August 2009 .

^ a b Temperman & Koltay, p. 620.

^ a b Temperman & Koltay, p. 623.

^ "Penal code of the Netherlands, article 23" (in Dutch).

Archived from the original on 26 May 2024 . Retrieved 9 October 2010 .

^ "Europe: Where there's a will, there is a law" .

Straits Times . AsiaMedia. 8 February 2006. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ "Penal code of the Netherlands, article 429bis" (in Dutch).

Archived from the original on 26 May 2024 . Retrieved 9 October 2010 .

^ a b Conger, George (9 November 2008).

"Blasphemy law is dropped in Netherlands" . Religious Intelligence. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009 . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ a b "Blasphemy law ditched by the Dutch" . Radio Netherlands Worldwide. 1 November 2008. Archived from the original on 12 January 2013 . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ Tamis, Theo (9 April 2006).

"Nearer to Thee, Gerard Reve dies" . Radio Nederland Wereldomroep. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ a b "Cabinet drops repeal of blasphemy law" . DutchNews.nl. 28 May 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ "Liberal VVD ensure majority support for scrapping blasphemy laws" . DutchNews.nl. 28 November 2012.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2012 . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ Bezhan, Frud (29 November 2012).

"Dutch Parliament To Revoke Blasphemy Law" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2012 . Retrieved 28 December 2012 .

^ Wet van 23 januari 2014 tot wijziging van het Wetboek van Strafrecht in verband met het laten vervallen van het verbod op godslastering, Stb.

2014, 39. (Law of 23 January 2014 to amend the Criminal Code in connection with the abolishment of the ban on blasphemy) ^ a b Temperman & Koltay, p. 619.

^ "Crimes Act 1961 No 43 (as at 07 November 2015), Public Act 123 Blasphemous libel – New Zealand Legislation" .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ a b c Little, Andrew.

"Blasphemous libel law repealed" . No. 5 March 2019. Scoop.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 5 March 2019 .

^ Craig McCulloch (20 March 2018).

"Outdated blasphemy law to be repealed" .

Radio New Zealand .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ a b c d Gran, Even (27 August 2012).

"Norge har fortsatt en blasfemiparagraf" .

fritanke.no (in Norwegian).

Human-Etisk Forbund .

Archived from the original on 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

^ a b "The Penal Code (Norwegian penal code of 2005)" .

Lovdata . Government of Norway.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2019 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ Hultgren, Gunnar (22 April 2013).

"Åtte år etter at Stortinget vedtok ny lov, er loven fortsatt ikke tatt i bruk" (in Norwegian). Dagbladet.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

^ Blasfemiparagrafen [ permanent dead link ] (in Norwegian) Human.no , retrieved 15 February 2015 ^ Andre krenkelser Archived 4 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in Norwegian) Nored.no , retrieved 2 June 2013 ^ Marit Hverven & Mehda Ghalegolabi (12 January 2010).

"Norsk forbud absolutt nonsens" .

NRK (in Norwegian).

Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ "Python's Jones Passionate About 'Life Of Brian's' Return" . 27 March 2007. Archived from the original on 27 March 2007 . Retrieved 15 September 2020 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2012 . Retrieved 8 September 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Agnosiewicz, Mariusz.

"Obraza uczuć religijnych" [Offense of Religious Feelings].

Racjonalista (in Polish).

Archived from the original on 6 June 2017 . Retrieved 10 February 2017 .

^ Agnosiewicz, Mariusz.

"Uczucia religijne: ochrona czy cenzura?" [Religious Feelings: Defense or Censorship?].

Racjonalista (in Polish).

Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 10 February 2017 .

^ Doda skazana za obrazę uczuć religijnych Archived 19 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine , rp.pl ^ "Trybunał Konstytucyjny odrzucił skargę Dody. W sprawie obrazy uczuć religijnych" .

TVN24.pl .

^ "Polish coalition party proposes three-year jail terms for insulting church or interrupting mass" . 14 April 2022.

^ " "Insulting or ridiculing church" to be jailable crime under bill supported by Polish justice minister" . 7 October 2022.

^ "Blasphemy law Poland may be toughened" .

^ "Law no. 489/2006 on religious freedom and the general status of cults" .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2013 . Retrieved 26 January 2013 .

^ "Constitution of Romania, Chapter II" .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2020 . Retrieved 26 January 2013 .

^ "BP264/2011 Propunere legislativă pentru prevenirea intoleranţei religioase" .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 .

^ "Nymphs and Zombies: Ondine's Hope and Baraka's Despair – Art Safari" .

^ "De vorbă cu artiștii Mihai Toth și Paul Baraka Marat despre Spațiul Baraka din Timișoara" . 6 December 2023.

^ "Purtătorul de cuvânt al Patriarhiei Române şi un deputat independent au criticat în termeni duri o expoziţie din Art Safari » Interne" . 8 September 2023.

^ "End Blasphemy Laws Russia" .

End Blasphemy Laws . 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ a b Russian Lawmakers Back Jail Terms for Insulting Religion Archived 12 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine // RIA Novosti, 11/06/2013 ^ "Les miliciens orthodoxes déclarent ouverte la chasse aux hérétiques" . Le Courrier de Russie. 22 August 2012. Archived from the original on 27 August 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2012 .

^ a b Milton, John (1996). "Chapter 17: Blasphemy".

South African Criminal Law and Procedure: Common-law Crimes (3rd ed.). Cape Town: Juta. pp.

293– 300.

ISBN 9780702137730 .

^ Burchell, Jonathan (2005). "Chapter 74: Blasphemy".

Principles of Criminal Law (3rd ed.). Cape Town: Juta. pp.

880– 883.

ISBN 9780702165573 .

^ a b c d Smith, Nicholas (1999). "The crime of blasphemy and the protection of fundamental human rights".

South African Law Journal .

116 (1): 162– 173.

^ de Vos, Pierre (2 November 2012).

"On Woolworths and freedom of conscience" .

Constitutionally Speaking .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 4 September 2012 .

^ Uys, Stanley (20 January 1968).

" 'Is God Dead?': Court Case Centers on Issue" .

The St. Petersburg Times .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 September 2012 .

^ Merrett, Christopher Edmond (1994).

A Culture of Censorship: Secrecy and Intellectual Repression in South Africa . Cape Town: David Philip. p.

67 .

ISBN 0864862598 .

^ "Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act 4 of 2000" (PDF) . Department of Justice and Constitutional Development.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2011 . Retrieved 2 June 2013 .

^ "Juicio oral contra Javier Krahe por su corto 'Cómo cocinar a un Cristo' " . 20 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2014 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ Gómez, Rosario G. (8 June 2012).

"Krahe, absuelto en el juicio por el vídeo en el que se cocinaba un Cristo" .

El País .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 9 July 2017 – via elpais.com.

^ "Las propuestas de PSOE y Podemos... esto es lo que se nos viene encima" .

El Toro TV . 29 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2019 .

^ a b c d eurel Sociological and legal data on religions in Europe, Sweden, Blasphemy Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine 16 May 2014 Retrieved 6 June 2017 ^ "Dom i mål om hets mot folkgrupp" (in Swedish). Swedish Courts of Law. 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ "Efter Civil Rights Defenders anmälan – Paludan döms för hets mot folkgrupp" (in Swedish). Civil Rights Defenders. 5 November 2024 . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ P, Bundeskanzlei -.

"SR 311.0 Schweizerisches Strafgesetzbuch vom 21. Dezember 1937" .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ a b c d e "Tanzania" .

Freedom of Thought Report . Humanists International.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2020 . Retrieved 30 December 2020 .

^ Gubo, Darara Timotewos (24 December 2014).

Blasphemy And Defamation of Religions in a Polarized World: How Religious Fundamentalism Is Challenging Fundamental Human Rights . Lexington Books. p. 89.

ISBN 9780739189733 .

^ "Springer opera court fight fails" .

BBC News . 5 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2009 . Retrieved 5 December 2007 .

^ Green, R (on the application of) v The City of Westminster Magistrates' Court [2007] EWHC 2785 (Admin) (5 December 2007) ^ "Brett Humphreys: The Law That Dared to Lay the Blame " . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 May 2009 .

^ "Erotic poem challenges blasphemy law" . 11 July 2002.

Archived from the original on 29 February 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "McLaurin's Arguments and Definitions" .

The Scots Magazine . 1 July 1774 . Retrieved 10 January 2015 – via British Newspaper Archive .

^ Hugh Barclay: A Digest of the Law of Scotland: With Special Reference to the Office , T & T Clark, Edinburgh, 1855, p.86 ^ Royle, Edward. "Gott, John William".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/47693 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Common law is abolished rather than repealed.

^ Ruth Geller.

"Goodbye to Blasphemy in Britain" . Institute for Humanist Studies. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008 . Retrieved 6 June 2008 .

^ Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 Archived 29 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine , see section 79 and Part 5 of Schedule 28.

^ JURIST – Paper Chase: UK House of Lords votes to abolish criminal blasphemy Archived 9 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 Archived 6 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine , section 153: Commencement ^ "5 Nov 2009: Column 402" .

Hansard . House of Commons. 5 November 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ "Visions of Ecstasy gets UK rating after 23-year ban" .

BBC News . 31 January 2012.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2013 . Retrieved 20 June 2018 .

^ "Hate Crime and Public Order (Scotland) Act 2021" .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 March 2022 .

^ "Hate Crime and Public Order (Scotland) Bill" .

Scottish Parliament .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ Scottish Parliament.

The Hate Crime and Public Order (Scotland) Act 2021 (Commencement and Transitional Provision) Regulations 2024 as made, from legislation.gov.uk .

^ "Blasphemy to be decriminalised in Scottish hate crime bill" .

The Guardian . 24 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2020 . Retrieved 25 April 2020 .

^ Williams Levy, Leonard (1995).

Blasphemy: Verbal Offense Against the Sacred, from Moses to Salman Rushdie . University of North Carolina Press Books. p. 242.

^ a b "Blasphemy and the Original Meaning of the First Amendment" .

Harvard Law Review . 10 December 2021.

Until well into the twentieth century, American law recognized blasphemy as proscribable speech. The blackletter rule was clear. Constitutional liberty entailed a right to articulate views on religion, but not a right to commit blasphemy — the offense of "maliciously reviling God", which encompassed "profane ridicule of Christ". The English common law had punished blasphemy as a crime, while excluding "disputes between learned men upon particular controverted points" from the scope of criminal blasphemy. Looking to this precedent, nineteenth-century American appellate courts consistently upheld proscriptions on blasphemy, drawing a line between punishable blasphemy and protected religious speech.

^ Church-State Issues in America Today (3 volumes) . Bloomsbury. 2007. p. 18.

ISBN 9781573567541 .

^ "Joseph Burstyn, Inc. v. Wilson" .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2013 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ 15 Pa. Cons. Stat. §1303(c)(2)(ii) ^ 723 F. Supp. 2d 766 ^ Kalman v. Cortes Archived 2011-06-01 at the Wayback Machine , 723 F. Supp. 2d 766.

^ United States Sentencing Commission Guidelines Manual § 3A1.1 (2009) Archived 15 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Langer Archived 28 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine , 2014, 331 ^ "2008 Report on International Religious Freedom – Afghanistan" . United States Department of State. 19 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 July 2009 .

^ "The Taliban Arrests Afghan YouTuber and Colleagues on Charges of Blasphemy" .

Khaama Press . The KHAAMA PRESS News Agency. 8 June 2022 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ "Algeria" .

End Blasphemy Laws . Retrieved 27 June 2023 .

^ "Country Update: Algeria" .

United States Commission on International Religious Freedom .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Strict blasphemy laws limit religious debate in Bangladesh" . AsiaMedia. 18 May 2006. Archived from the original on 12 July 2010 . Retrieved 5 August 2009 .

^ "No blasphemy law needed: B'desh PM" , Asia News Net ^ "Bangladesh PM Sheikh Hasina rejects blasphemy law" Archived 9 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News ^ "Sheikh Hasina rejects call for blasphemy law" Archived 10 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Hindu ^ Farahat, Cynthia (24 February 2008).

"In protection of religion or protection from it?" .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 July 2009 .

^ "Ahok Jailed for Two Years" . metrotvnews.com. 9 May 2017. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017 . Retrieved 9 May 2017 .

^ "Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom May 2009" (PDF) .

Indonesia .

United States Commission on International Religious Freedom . May 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

^ Al 'Afghani, Mohamad Mova (3 December 2007).

"Ruling against blasphemy unconstitutional" .

The Jakarta Post .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ "Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom May 2009" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ Ma'ayeh, Suha (30 May 2008).

"Jordan court to rule on cartoon case" . The National (United Arab Emirates). Archived from the original on 20 July 2009 . Retrieved 30 June 2009 .

^ "Kuwait: Cybercrime Law a Blow to Free Speech" . 22 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 May 2020 . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ "Background Note: Malaysia" . U.S. State Department. July 2009.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2009 .

^ "TALSOUH: Free Mohamed Cheikh sentenced to death in Mauritania" . Talsou.wesign.it.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom, 2016 page 2 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Pakistan Penal Code Archived 27 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Chap. XV "Of Offences Relating to Religion" pp. 79–81 ^ Ahmed, Akbar S. (19 May 2002).

"Pakistan's Blasphemy Law: Words Fail Me" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 28 June 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (8 October 2008).

"Asma Jahangir" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2009 . Retrieved 27 June 2009 .

^ a b "Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom May 2009" (PDF) .

Pakistan .

United States Commission on International Religious Freedom . May 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

^ Share (19 March 2014).

"ePaper & Archives &#8211 The Nation" . Nation.com.pk.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Teenage boy arrested for sharing 'blasphemous' Facebook post" .

The Independent . 21 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2017 . Retrieved 10 December 2017 .

^ "Pakistan's blasphemy law hands fringe Islamists dangerous weapon" .

www.egypttoday.com . 28 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2017 . Retrieved 10 December 2017 .

^ a b Isabel Kershner (15 November 2010).

"Palestinian Blogger Angers West Bank Muslims" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ Al-Husseini, Waleed (2017).

The Blasphemer: The Price I Paid for Rejecting Islam . Arcade. p. 95.

ISBN 9781628726749 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ al-Husseini, Waleed (8 December 2014).

"What It's Like to Be an Atheist in Palestine" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ "Religious law, prison for "blasphemy", severe sexual inequalilty: Qatar's human rights review" . International Humanist and Ethical Union. 22 September 2014.

Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 January 2015 .

^ "2012 International Religious Freedom Report on Qatar" (PDF) . The United States Federal Government.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 March 2017 . Retrieved 27 January 2015 .

^ Blanchard, Christoper (2014).

Qatar: Background and U.S. Relations . Congressional Research Service. p. 17.

ISBN 9781437987089 .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ Figenschou, Tine Ustad (2013).

Al Jazeera and the Global Media Landscape: The South is Talking Back . Routledge. p. 38.

ISBN 978-0415814430 .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2015 . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ "Qatar" .

Freedom of Thought Report . Humanists International.

Archived from the original on 11 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom May 2009.

^ "News" . Archived from the original on 22 March 2011 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Sudan jails two Egyptians for blasphemy" .

Sudan Tribune . 18 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2008 . Retrieved 28 July 2009 .

^ "Alarm about trial of journalist on blasphemy charge" . Reporters Without Borders. 12 May 2005. Archived from the original on 30 October 2007 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ "Kidnapped Sudanese Editor Found Slain / Journalist beheaded in Khartoum" . One-click News. 6 September 2006.

Archived from the original on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 July 2009 .

^ "USCIRF Applauds Sudan's Repeal of Apostasy Law through Passage of New Fundamental Rights and Freedoms Act" . United States Commission on International Religious Freedom. 15 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2020 .

^ "Legislationline" . Legislationline.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Probe launched against pianist Say over controversial tweets" .

Today's Zaman . 12 April 2012. Archived from the original on 15 June 2012 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ Sebnem Arsu and Daniel J. Wakin (1 June 2012).

"Turkish Pianist is Accused of Insulting Islam" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2012 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 .

^ "Pianist Fazil Say gets jail term for blasphemy" .

Gulf News . Gulf News. AFP. 15 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

^ Mesut Hasan Benli (26 October 2015).

"Top appeals court reverses blasphemy decision against Turkish pianist Say" .

Hürriyet Daily News .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 October 2015 .

^ "قانون العقوبات لدولة الامارات العربية المتحدة" (PDF) . Dubai Judicial Institute. 2020. p. 117.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 November 2021 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 .

^ Formichi, Chiara (1 October 2013).

Religious Pluralism, State and Society in Asia . Taylor & Francis. p. 152.

ISBN 9781134575428 .

China is officially an atheist state. Communist Party members cannot be religious believers, or take part in religious activities.

^ Beijing Review, Volume 32 1989 Archived 12 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 13.

^ Gladney 1991 , p. 2.

^ Schein 2000 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 154.

^ Gladney 2004 Archived 12 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 66.

^ Bulag 2010 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 104.

^ Gladney 2005 Archived 12 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 257.

^ Gladney 2013 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 144.

^ Sautman 2000 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 79.

^ Gladney 1996 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 341.

^ Lipman 1996 Archived 8 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 299.

^ Harold Miles Tanner (2009).

China: a history . Hackett Publishing. p. 581.

ISBN 978-0-87220-915-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2015 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Gladney 2004 Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , p. 232.

^ Lim, Louisa (6 February 2007).

"Ban Thwarts 'Year of the Pig' Ads in China" . National Public Radio.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Charlie Hebdo Attack Shows Need for Press Limits, Xinhua Says" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2015 . Retrieved 14 January 2015 .

^ "Beijing jumps onto Paris attack to feed state propaganda machine" .

The Japan Times .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2015 .

^ "Make fun of God, but leave his believers alone" Archived 23 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Haaretz , 27 August 2003 ^ a b Aran, Gideon (2016). "Khilul Hashem: Blasphemy in Past and Present Israel".

Israel Studies .

21 (2): 155– 181.

doi : 10.2979/israelstudies.21.2.07 .

ISSN 1084-9513 .

JSTOR 10.2979/israelstudies.21.2.07 .

S2CID 147665850 .

^ "חוק העונשין – ויקיטקסט" .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2016 . Retrieved 11 September 2016 .

^ "Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 April 2012 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 .

^ For instance , the Atheist Society of India produces a monthly publications Nastika Yuga , which it translates as 'The Age of Atheism'.

Archived 18 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Nicholson, Andrew J. 2013.

Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0231149877 . ch. 9.

^ Francis Clooney (2008). "Restoring 'Hindu Theology' as a category in Indian intellectual discourse". In Gavin Flood (ed.).

The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism . Blackwell Academic. pp.

451– 455.

ISBN 978-0-470-99868-7 .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 5 August 2021 .

"By Sāṃkhya reasoning, the material principle itself simply evolves into complex forms, and there is no need to hold that some spiritual power governs the material principle or its ultimate source." ^ Francis Clooney (2003). Flood, Gavin (ed.).

Blackwell companion to Hinduism .

Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 0-631-21535-2 .

, pp=82, 224–49.

^ Price, Monroe; Stremlau, Nicole (30 November 2017).

Speech and Society: Comparative Perspectives .

Cambridge University Press . pp. 241–.

ISBN 9781108117678 .

^ a b Esmaeili, Hossein; Marboe, Irmgard; Rehman, Javaid (14 December 2017).

The Rule of Law, Freedom of Expression and Islamic Law . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 151.

ISBN 9781782257509 .

The original intent of the British instigated anti-blasphemy law as contained in the Indian Penal Code (1860) had been the maintenance of public order in a multireligious and religiously sensitive society.

^ "Indian Penal Code Section 295A" . Vakil No1. Archived from the original on 26 May 2010 . Retrieved 21 May 2010 .

^ Addison, Neil (12 March 2007).

Religious Discrimination and Hatred Law . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134110087 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2017 – via Google Books.

^ "Thou shalt not blaspheme" .

The Telegraph . 5 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .

^ "Asia Bibi: Pakistan acquits Christian woman on death row" .

BBC . 31 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2019 . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

^ "Lucknow: Man arrested for 'derogatory remark' against Prophet" .

The Indian Express . 3 December 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ "Blogger arrested in India's Bengal for criticising Islam on social media" .

WION . 20 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ Dissanayake, Samanthi (3 June 2014).

"The Indian miracle-buster stuck in Finland" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ "Myanmar Penal Code" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ " "Blasphemy" in Myanmar: three people convicted for "insulting Buddhism" " .

AsiaNews . 17 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ "Myanmar Penal Code 1861" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 February 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ a b c "Myanmar's Religious Hate Speech Law" .

The Diplomat . 5 May 2015.

Archived from the original on 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ " "Blasphemy" in Myanmar: three people convicted for "insulting Buddhism" " .

AsiaNews . 17 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 30 October 2020 .

^ "Myanmar's Blasphemy statutes deny human rights" .

Myanmar Times . 21 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ " "They can arrest you at any time" − The Criminalization of Peaceful Expression in Burma" . Human Rights Watch. 29 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ World Watch Monitor Nepal (22 August 2017).

"Nepal criminalises conversions and 'hurting religious sentiment' " . World Watch Monitor.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2018 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 .

^ Ochab, Ewelina (7 February 2018).

"Nepal's Protection of Religious Freedom on Downward Spiral" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2018 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 .

^ International Commission of Jurists (July 2018).

Challenges to Freedom of Religion or Belief in Nepal A Briefing Paper (PDF) . Geneva, Switzerland: International Commission of Jurists.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 .

^ World Watch Monitor Nepal (17 August 2018).

"Nepali law criminalising 'hurting of religious feelings' comes into force" . World Watch Monitor.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 March 2019 .

^ "Buddhism in Thailand – Chiang Mai Temples" .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

^ "Thailand" .

End Blasphemy Laws .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2019 .

^ " United Nations Human Rights Committee General Comment 34 on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) 1976 " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ Lester, Anthony (18 April 2016).

Five Ideas to Fight For: How Our Freedom Is Under Threat and Why It Matters . Oneworld Publications. p. 128.

ISBN 9781780747620 .

^ Freedom of expression and incitement to racial or religious hatred Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) side event 22 April 2009 ^ Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) 5 October 2012 ^ "Let's abolish all blasphemy laws, worldwide" .

End Blasphemy Laws . IHEU & EHF. 30 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ "PACE – Recommendation 1805 (2007) – Blasphemy, religious insults and hate speech against persons on grounds of their religion" .

assembly.coe.int .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 .

^ Matthew Vella.

"Blasphemy? It's not criminal – Council of Europe" Archived 26 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Malta Today . 8 March 2009 ^ European Commission for Democracy through Law.

'Report on the Relationship between Freedom of Expression and Freedom of Religion: The issue of Regulation and Prosecution of blasphemy, religious insult, and incitement to religious hatred' Archived 11 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Adopted by the Venice Commission at its 76th Plenary Session at Venice , Italy , on 17–18 October 2008.

^ a b Beckford, Martin (10 May 2008).

"Blasphemy laws are lifted" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ Temperman & Koltay, p. 121.

^ a b "Greece quietly drops 'blasphemy' laws from new criminal code" .

End Blasphemy Laws . Humanists International. 14 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2019 . Retrieved 14 June 2019 .

^ "Blasphemy repealed in Scotland" .

End Blasphemy Laws .

Humanists International . 12 March 2021.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 12 March 2021 .

^ Gerald H. Gordon (1842).

The Oracle of Reason, Or, Philosophy Vindicated, Issues 1–103 . Field, Southwell & Company. p. 33.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 12 March 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Langer, Lorenz (2014).

Religious Offence and Human Rights: The Implications of Defamation of Religions . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-03957-5 .

Temperman, Jeroen; Koltay, András (2017).

Blasphemy and Freedom of Expression: Comparative, Theoretical and Historical Reflections after the Charlie Hebdo Massacre . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. p. 770.

ISBN 9781108267991 .

External links [ edit ] Landmarks in blasphemy Thomas Hammarberg , CoE Commissioner for Human Rights: Do not criminalize critical remarks against religions , 2007 End Blasphemy Laws Blasphemy in New Zealand Archived 14 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine v t e Blasphemy law by country Afghanistan Algeria Australia Bangladesh Egypt Finland Germany Greece Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria Norway Pakistan Palestine Philippines Poland Saudi Arabia South Africa Sudan Switzerland United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Yemen Blasphemy Defamation of religion and the United Nations v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blasphemy_law&oldid=1306285908 " Categories : Blasphemy law Blasphemy law by country Crimes in religion Freedom of expression Censorship Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2018 Articles with French-language sources (fr) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) CS1 Icelandic-language sources (is) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with dead external links from July 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with dead external links from June 2021 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from May 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2009 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 23:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blasphemy law 10 languages Add topic

