Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Process Toggle Process subsection 2.1 Strategy 2.2 Criticism 3 In social work and community psychology Toggle In social work and community psychology subsection 3.1 In health promotion practice and research 4 In economics Toggle In economics subsection 4.1 Consumer empowerment 4.2 Customer empowerment 4.3 Increasingly engaged corporate directors 5 Legal 6 Gender 7 In workplace management Toggle In workplace management subsection 7.1 Evolution 7.2 Implications for company culture 7.3 Criticisms 8 In Programming Language 9 In artificial intelligence 10 "Age of Popular Empowerment" 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Empowerment 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Slovenščina Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the concept in artificial intelligence, see Empowerment (artificial intelligence) . For the sculpture by Stephen Broadbent, see Empowerment (sculpture) .

"Empowered" redirects here. For the comic book series, see Empowered (comics) . For the 2018 Spanish film, see Empowered (film) .

Autonomy and self-determination in people and communities Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Empowerment is the degree of autonomy and self-determination in people and in communities. This enables them to represent their interests in a responsible and self-determined way, acting on their own authority. It is the process of becoming stronger and more confident, especially in controlling one's life and claiming one's rights . Empowerment as action refers both to the process of self-empowerment and to professional support of people, which enables them to overcome their sense of powerlessness and lack of influence, and to recognize and use their resources .

As a term, empowerment originates from American community psychology and is associated with the social scientist Julian Rappaport (1981).

[ 1 ] In social work , empowerment forms a practical approach of resource-oriented intervention. In the field of citizenship education and democratic education , empowerment is seen [ by whom?

] as a tool to increase the responsibility of the citizen. Empowerment is a key concept in the discourse on promoting civic engagement . Empowerment as a concept, which is characterized by a move away from a deficit -oriented towards a more strength-oriented perception, can increasingly be found in management concepts, as well as in the areas of continuing education and self-help .

[ citation needed ] Definitions [ edit ] Robert Adams points to the limitations of any single definition of 'empowerment', and the danger that academic or specialist definitions might take away the word and the connected practices from the very people they are supposed to belong to.

[ 2 ] Still, he offers a minimal definition of the term: 
'Empowerment: the capacity of individuals, groups and/or communities to take control of their circumstances, exercise power and achieve their own goals, and the process by which, individually and collectively, they are able to help themselves and others to maximize the quality of their lives.' [ 3 ] One definition for the term is "an intentional, ongoing process centered in the local community, involving mutual respect, critical reflection, caring, and group participation, through which people lacking an equal share of resources gain greater access to and control over those resources".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Rappaport's (1984) definition includes: "Empowerment is viewed as a process: the mechanism by which people, organizations, and communities gain mastery over their lives." [ 6 ] Sociological empowerment often addresses members of groups that social discrimination processes have excluded from decision-making processes through – for example – discrimination based on disability, race , ethnicity, religion, or gender. Empowerment as a methodology is also associated with feminism .

Process [ edit ] Empowerment is the process of obtaining basic opportunities for marginalized people, either directly by those people, or through the help of non-marginalized others who share their own access to these opportunities. It also includes actively thwarting attempts to deny those opportunities. Empowerment also includes encouraging, and developing the skills for, self-sufficiency , with a focus on eliminating the future need for charity or welfare in the individuals of the group. This process can be difficult to start and to implement effectively.

Strategy [ edit ] One empowerment strategy is to assist marginalized people to create their own nonprofit organization , using the rationale that only the marginalized people, themselves, can know what their own people need most, and that control of the organization by outsiders can actually help to further entrench marginalization. Charitable organizations lead from outside of the community, for example, can disempower the community by entrenching a dependence charity or welfare. A nonprofit organization can target strategies that cause structural changes, reducing the need for ongoing dependence.

Red Cross , for example, can focus on improving the health of indigenous people, but does not have authority in its charter to install water-delivery and purification systems, even though the lack of such a system profoundly, directly and negatively impacts health. A nonprofit composed of the indigenous people, however, could ensure their own organization does have such authority and could set their own agendas, make their own plans, seek the needed resources, do as much of the work as they can, and take responsibility – and credit – for the success of their projects (or the consequences, should they fail).

The process of which enables individuals/groups to fully access personal or collective power, authority and influence, and to employ that strength when engaging with other people, institutions or society. In other words, "Empowerment is not giving people power, people already have plenty of power, in the wealth of their knowledge and motivation, to do their jobs magnificently. We define empowerment as letting this power out." [ 7 ] It encourages people to gain the skills and knowledge that will allow them to overcome obstacles in life or work environment and ultimately, help them develop within themselves or in the society.

To empower a female "...sounds as though we are dismissing or ignoring males, but the truth is, both genders desperately need to be equally empowered." [ 8 ] Empowerment occurs through improvement of conditions, standards, events, and a global perspective of life.

Criticism [ edit ] Before there can be the finding that a particular group requires empowerment and that therefore their self-esteem needs to be consolidated on the basis of awareness of their strengths, there needs to be a deficit diagnosis usually carried out by experts assessing the problems of this group. The fundamental asymmetry of the relationship between experts and clients is usually not questioned by empowerment processes. It also needs to be regarded critically, in how far the empowerment approach is really applicable to all patients/clients. It is particularly questionable whether [mentally ill] people in acute crisis situations are in a position to make their own decisions. According to Albert Lenz, people behave primarily regressive in acute crisis situations and tend to leave the responsibility to professionals.

[ 9 ] It must be assumed, therefore, that the implementation of the empowerment concept requires a minimum level of communication and reflectivity of the persons involved.

Another criticism is that empowerment implies that the drive for change comes from an external person. For example, in healthcare, a patient being encouraged by their doctor to track their symptoms and adjust their medication accordingly would be empowerment, where as a patient deciding on their own that they wanted to improve their medication regimen and thus started tracking would be an example of self-empowerment . A recently coined term, self-empowerment "describes patients’ and informal caregivers’ power to perform activities that are not mandated by health care and to take control over their own lives and self-management with increased self-efficacy and confidence".

[ 10 ] In social work and community psychology [ edit ] Empowerment in the work for senior citizens in a residential home in Germany In social work , empowerment offers an approach that allows social workers to increase the capacity for self-help of their clients. For example, this allows clients not to be seen as passive, helpless 'victims' to be rescued but instead as a self-empowered person fighting abuse/ oppression; a fight, in which the social worker takes the position of a facilitator, instead of the position of a 'rescuer'.

[ 11 ] Marginalized people who lack self-sufficiency become, at a minimum, dependent on charity, or welfare.  They lose their self-confidence because they cannot be fully self-supporting.  The opportunities that denied them also deprive them of the pride of accomplishment which others, who have those opportunities, can develop for themselves. This in turn can lead to psychological, social and even mental health problems. " Marginalized " here refers to the overt or covert trends within societies whereby those perceived as lacking desirable traits or deviating from the group norms tend to be excluded by wider society and ostracized as undesirables.

In health promotion practice and research [ edit ] As a concept, and model of practice, empowerment is also used in health promotion research and practice. The key principle is for individuals to gain increased control over factors that influence their health status.

[ 12 ] To empower individuals and to obtain more equity in health, it is also important to address health-related behaviors.

[ 13 ] Studies suggest that health promotion interventions aiming at empowering adolescents should enable active learning activities, use visualizing tools to facilitate self-reflection, and allow the adolescents to influence intervention activities.

[ 14 ] In economics [ edit ] According to Robert Adams, there is a long tradition in the UK and the USA respectively to advance forms of self-help that have developed and contributed to more recent concepts of empowerment. For example, the free enterprise economic theories of Milton Friedman embraced self-help as a respectable contributor to the economy. Both the Republicans in the US and the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher built on these theories. 'At the same time, the mutual aid aspects of the concept of self-help retained some currency with socialists and democrats.' [ 15 ] In economic development , the empowerment approach focuses on mobilizing the self-help efforts of the poor, rather than providing them with social welfare . Economic empowerment is also the empowering of previously disadvantaged sections of the population, for example, in many previously colonized African countries.

[ 16 ] Consumer empowerment [ edit ] A consumer empowerment strategy was put in place in the United Kingdom by the 2010-2015 coalition government .

[ 17 ] The strategy, produced by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills and the Behavioural Insights Team at the UK Cabinet Office , sought to introduce voluntary measures and "nudges" which could help consumers "find and adopt the best choices for their circumstances and needs".

[ 18 ] Activities promoted by the strategy included the midata programme under the direction of Professor Nigel Shadbolt , annual credit card usage statements, collective purchasing schemes, and presentational work on Energy Performance Certificates , motor vehicle sales literature and food hygiene ratings, so that consumers can make better use of the information they contain.

[ 18 ] : Annex Customer empowerment [ edit ] Companies that empower their customers have the potential to create superior products at reduced costs and risks, provided that customers are willing and able to contribute valuable input in the new product development process.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] Businesses that involve and empower customers in the process of creating new products can sometimes have a competitive edge over traditional firms that do not give their customers such involvement. This advantage is evident in the fact that consumers generally prefer the former.

[ 23 ] When customers have the authority to choose which products are brought to market , they exhibit increased demand for the chosen products, even when they are objectively of the same quality . This apparently irrational phenomenon can be explained by the heightened sense of psychological ownership that consumers develop for the selected products. Two conditions limit this effect: (1) it diminishes when the joint decision-making outcome does not align with consumers' preferences and (2) when consumers lack confidence in their ability to make informed decisions.

[ 24 ] Increasingly engaged corporate directors [ edit ] The World Pensions Council (WPC) has argued that large institutional investors such as pension funds and endowments are exercising a greater influence on the process of adding and replacing corporate directors – as they are themselves steered to do so by their own board members (pension trustees).

This could eventually put more pressure on the CEOs of publicly listed companies , as “more than ever before, many [North American], UK and European Union pension trustees speak enthusiastically about flexing their fiduciary muscles for the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals ”, and other ESG-centric investment practices [ 25 ] Legal [ edit ] Legal empowerment happens when marginalised people or groups use the legal mobilisation i.e., law, legal systems and justice mechanisms to improve or transform their social, political or economic situations. Legal empowerment approaches are interested in understanding how they can use the law to advance interests and priorities of the marginalised.

[ 26 ] According to 'Open society foundations' (an NGO)  "Legal empowerment is about strengthening the capacity of all people to exercise their rights , either as individuals or as members of a community. Legal empowerment is about grass root justice, about ensuring that law is not confined to books or courtrooms, but rather is available and meaningful to ordinary people.

[ 27 ] Lorenzo Cotula in his book ' Legal Empowerment for Local Resource Control ' outlines the fact that legal tools for securing local resource rights are enshrined in legal system, does not necessarily mean that local resource users are in position to use them and benefit from them. The state legal system is constrained by a range of different factors – from lack of resources to cultural issues. Among these factors economic, geographic, linguistic and other constraints on access to courts, lack of legal awareness as well as legal assistance tend to be recurrent problems.

[ 28 ] In many context, marginalised groups do not trust the legal system owing to the widespread manipulation that it has historically been subjected to by the more powerful. 'To what extent one knows the law , and make it work for themselves with 'para legal tools',  is legal empowerment; assisted utilizing innovative approaches like legal literacy and awareness training, broadcasting legal information , conducting participatory legal discourses , supporting local resource user in negotiating with other agencies and stake holders and to strategies combining use of legal processes with advocacy along with media engagement, and socio legal mobilisation .

[ 28 ] Sometimes groups are marginalized by society at large, with governments participating in the process of marginalization.

Equal opportunity laws which actively oppose such marginalization, are supposed to allow empowerment to occur. These laws made it illegal to restrict access to schools and public places based on race. They can also be seen as a symptom of minorities' and women's empowerment through lobbying.

Gender [ edit ] Main articles: Gender empowerment and Women's empowerment Gender empowerment conventionally refers to the empowerment of women , which is a significant topic of discussion in regards to development and economics nowadays. It also points to approaches regarding other marginalized genders in a particular political or social context. This approach to empowerment is partly informed by feminism and employed legal empowerment by building on international human rights . Empowerment is one of the main procedural concerns when addressing human rights and development .

The Human Development and Capabilities Approach , The Millennium Development Goals , and other credible approaches/goals point to empowerment and participation as a necessary step if a country is to overcome the obstacles associated with poverty and development.

[ 29 ] The UN Sustainable Development Goals ( SDG 5 ) targets gender equality and women's empowerment for the global development agenda.

[ 30 ] In workplace management [ edit ] According to Thomas A. Potterfield, many organizational theorists and practitioners regard employee empowerment as one of the most important and popular contemporary management concepts.

[ 31 ] .

In the sphere of management and organizational theory, "empowerment" often refers loosely to processes for giving subordinates (or workers generally) greater discretion and resources: distributing control in order to better serve both customers and the interests of employing organizations. It also giving employees the authority to take initiatives, make their own decisions, find and execute solutions. Data from survey research using confirmatory factor analysis , empowerment can be captures through four dimensions, namely meaning, competence, self-determination, and impact; whereas some exploratory factor analysis identifies only three dimensions, namely meaning, competence, and influence (a conflation of self-determination and impact).

Evolution [ edit ] One account of the history of workplace empowerment in the United States recalls the clash of management styles in railroad construction in the American West in the mid-19th century, where "traditional" hierarchical East-Coast models of control encountered individualistic pioneer workers, strongly supplemented by methods of efficiency -oriented "worker responsibility " brought to the scene by Chinese laborers . In this case, empowerment at the level of work teams or brigades achieved a notable (but short-lived) demonstrated superiority. See the views of Robert L. Webb.

[ where?

] Since the 1980s and 1990s, empowerment has become a point of interest in management concepts and business administration. In this context, empowerment involves approaches that promise greater participation and integration to the employee in order to cope with their tasks as independently as possible and responsibly can. A strength-based approach known as "empowerment circle" has become an instrument of organizational development. Multidisciplinary empowerment teams aim for the development of quality circles to improve the organizational culture, strengthening the motivation and the skills of employees. The target of subjective job satisfaction of employees is pursued through flat hierarchies, participation in decisions, opening of creative effort, a positive, appreciative team culture, self-evaluation, taking responsibility (for results), more self-determination and constant further learning. The optimal use of existing potential and abilities can supposedly be better reached by satisfied and active workers. Here, knowledge management contributes significantly to implement employee participation as a guiding principle, for example through the creation of communities of practice .

[ 32 ] However, it is important to ensure that the individual employee has the skills to meet their allocated responsibilities and that the company's structure sets up the right incentives for employees to reward their taking responsibilities. Otherwise there is a danger of being overwhelmed or even becoming lethargic.

[ 33 ] Implications for company culture [ edit ] Empowerment of employees requires a culture of trust in the organization and an appropriate information and communication system. The aim of these activities is to save control costs, that become redundant when employees act independently and in a self-motivated fashion. In the book Empowerment Takes More Than a Minute , the authors illustrate three keys that organizations can use to open the knowledge, experience, and motivation power that people already have.

[ 7 ] The three keys that managers must use to empower their employees are: Share information with everyone Create autonomy through boundaries Replace the old hierarchy with self-directed work teams According to Stewart, in order to guarantee a successful work environment, managers need to exercise the "right kind of authority " (p. 6). To summarize, "empowerment is simply the effective use of a manager’s authority", and subsequently, it is a productive way to maximize all-around work efficiency .

[ 34 ] These keys are hard to put into place and it is a journey to achieve empowerment in the workplace. It is important to train employees and makes sure they have trust in what empowerment will bring to a company.

[ 7 ] Criticisms [ edit ] The implementation of the concept of empowerment in management has been criticized for failing to live up to its claims.

[ 35 ] American philosopher Joanne Ciulla discusses the issue of bogus empowerment.

[ 36 ] In Programming Language [ edit ] Language like Rust (programming language) has gained recognition as an empowering programming language that 
democratizes systems programming by making it more accessible to 
developers of varying skill levels. The language's design philosophy 
centers on providing developers with powerful tools while maintaining 
safety and performance guarantees.

[ 37 ] In artificial intelligence [ edit ] Empowerment in the study of artificial intelligence is an information-theoretic quantity that measures the perceived capacity of an agent to influence its environment. Empowerment is an approach to modelling intrinsic motivation where advantageous actions are chosen by agent with just knowledge of the structure of the environment, rather than satisfying an externally imposed need as in homeostasis.

Experiments have shown that artificial agents acting to maximise their empowerment, in the absence of a defined goal, exhibit advantageous exploratory behaviour that, in a range of simulated environments, resembles intelligent behaviour in living things.

[ 38 ] "Age of Popular Empowerment" [ edit ] Marshall McLuhan insisted that the development of electronic media would eventually weaken the hierarchical structures that underpin central governments, large corporation, academia and, more generally, rigid, “ linear-Cartesian” forms of social organization.

[ 39 ] From that perspective, new, “electronic forms of awareness” driven by information technology would empower citizen, employees and students by disseminating in near-real-time vast amounts of information once reserved to a small number of experts and specialists. Citizens would be bound to ask for substantially more say in the management of government affairs, production, consumption, and education [ 39 ] World Pensions Council (WPC) economist Nicolas Firzli has argued that rapidly rising cultural tides, notably new forms of online engagement and increased demands for ESG-driven public policies and managerial decisions are transforming the way governments and corporation interact with citizen-consumers in the “Age of Empowerment” [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Citizen Science Decentralization Delegation Learned helplessness Learned optimism Popular education Self-help Capacity building Positive psychology Self-ownership Employee engagement Power (social and political) Youth empowerment Black economic empowerment Angela Rose Minority rights Women's rights Gender empowerment Legal awareness Legal mobilisation References [ edit ] ^ Rappaport, Julian. In praise of paradox. A social policy of empowerment over prevention, in: American Journal of Community Psychology, Vol. 9 (1), 1981, 1–25 (13) ^ Adams, Robert.

Empowerment, participation and social work . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, p.6.

^ Adams, Robert.

Empowerment, participation and social work . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, p.xvi ^ Cornell Empowerment Group. (1989, October). Empowerment and family support. Networking Bulletin, 1(1)2 ^ Zimmerman, M.A. (2000). Empowerment Theory: Psychological, Organizational and Community Levels of Analysis. "Handbook of Community Psychology," 43–63.

^ Rappaport, J. (1984). Studies in empowerment: Introduction to the issue. "Prevention in Human Services," 3, 1–7.

^ a b c Blanchard, Kenneth H.; John P. Carlos; Alan Randolph (1996).

Empowerment Takes More than a Minute . San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.

ISBN 9781881052838 .

^ "Encouraging and Empowering Girls - Canadian Counselling and Psychotherapy Association" .

Ccpa-accp.ca . 13 July 2012 . Retrieved 30 October 2017 .

^ Albert Lenz: Empowerment und Ressourcenaktivierung – Perspektiven für die psychosoziale Praxis.

^ Scott Duncan, Therese (2023).

Patients' self-empowerment : patients and informal caregivers taking the lead . Karolinska Institutet.

ISBN 978-91-8016-891-5 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 .

^ Adams, Robert.

Empowerment, participation and social work . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, p.12ff.

^ "Health Promotion Glossary - World Health Organization" (PDF) .

WHO.int . Retrieved 4 Nov 2018 .

^ "Health Promotion Glossary - World Health Organization" (PDF) .

WHO.int . Retrieved 4 Nov 2018 .

^ Holmberg, Christopher; Larsson, Christel; Korp, Peter; Lindgren, Eva-Carin; Jonsson, Linus; Fröberg, Andreas; Chaplin, John E.; Berg, Christina (2018-07-04).

"Empowering aspects for healthy food and physical activity habits: adolescents' experiences of a school-based intervention in a disadvantaged urban community" .

International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being .

13 (sup 1): 1487759.

doi : 10.1080/17482631.2018.1487759 .

PMC 6032021 .

PMID 29972679 .

^ Adams, Robert.

Empowerment, participation and social work . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008, p.7-9 ^ "Welcome to MicroEmpowering!" . Microempowering.org . Retrieved 2012-08-24 .

^ "Next steps making midata a reality – GOV.UK" .

gov.uk . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ a b Department for Business, Innovation & Skills, Better Choices: Better Deals: Report on progress on the Consumer Empowerment Strategy , URN 12/1324, published December 2012, accessed 27 December 2023 ^ Lilien, Gary L.; Morrison, Pamela D.; Searls, Kathleen; Sonnack, Mary; Hippel, Eric von (August 2002).

"Performance Assessment of the Lead User Idea-Generation Process for New Product Development" .

Management Science .

48 (8): 1042– 1059.

doi : 10.1287/mnsc.48.8.1042.171 .

ISSN 0025-1909 .

^ Dahan, Ely; Hauser, John R. (September 2002).

"The virtual customer" .

Journal of Product Innovation Management .

19 (5): 332– 353.

doi : 10.1111/1540-5885.1950332 .

ISSN 0737-6782 .

^ Ogawa, Susumu; Piller, Frank T. (2006-01-01).

"Reducing the Risks of New Product Development" .

MIT Sloan Management Review .

^ Sawhney, Mohanbir; Verona, Gianmario; Prandelli, Emanuela (November 2005).

"Collaborating to create: The Internet as a platform for customer engagement in product innovation" .

Journal of Interactive Marketing .

19 (4): 4– 17.

doi : 10.1002/dir.20046 .

ISSN 1094-9968 .

^ Fuchs, Christoph; Schreier, Martin (January 2011).

"Customer Empowerment in New Product Development*: Customer Empowerment in New Product Development" .

Journal of Product Innovation Management .

28 (1): 17– 32.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5885.2010.00778.x .

hdl : 1765/40039 .

^ Fuchs, Christoph; Prandelli, Emanuela; Schreier, Martin (2010) [2010].

"The Psychological Effects of Empowerment Strategies on Consumers' Product Demand" .

Journal of Marketing .

74 (1): 65– 79.

doi : 10.1509/jmkg.74.1.65 .

^ a b Firzli, Nicolas (3 April 2018).

"Greening, Governance and Growth in the Age of Popular Empowerment" .

FT Pensions Experts . Financial Times . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ "The politics of legal empowerment: legal mobilisation strategies and implications for development" .

Odi.org . Retrieved 24 November 2014 .

^ "What Is Legal Empowerment?" . Retrieved 29 December 2014 .

^ a b Cotula, Lorenzo (1 Jan 2007).

Legal Empowerment for Local Resource Control: Securing Local Resource Rights Within Foreign Investment Projects in Africa . IIED, 2007. p. 48.

ISBN 9781843696674 . Retrieved 24 November 2014 .

^ U.N. General Assembly, 55th Session. “United Nations Millennium Declaration.” (A/55/L.2).  8 September 2000. (Online) Available: www.un.org/millennium/declaration/ares552e.pdf (accessed January 2, 2008) ^ "United Nations: Gender equality and women's empowerment" .

Un.org . Retrieved 30 October 2017 .

^ Potterfield, Thomas, "The Business of Employee Empowerment: Democracy and Ideology in the Workplace", Quorum Books, 1999, p. 6 ^ Goldsmith, Marshall (2010-04-23).

"Empowering Your Employees to Empower Themselves" .

Harvard Business Review . hbr.org . Retrieved 2015-09-17 .

^ Argyris, Chris (May 1998).

"Empowerment: The Emperor's New Clothes" .

Harvard Business Review .

76 (3). hbr.org: 98– 105.

PMID 10179657 . Retrieved 2015-09-17 .

^ Stewart, Aileen Mitchell, Empowering People (Institute of Management). Pitman. London: Financial Times Management, 1994.

^ Marquet, David (2015-05-27).

"6 Myths About Empowering Employees" .

Harvard Business Review . hbr.org . Retrieved 2015-09-17 .

^ Ciulla, Joanne B. (2004), "Leadership and the Problem of Bogus Empowerment", in Ciulla, Joanne B. (ed.), Ethics, the Heart of Leadership (2 ed.), Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-275-98248-5 , [...] in many organizations, promises of empowerment are bogus.

^ "Rust, A language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software" .

^ Klyubin, A., Polani, D., and Nehaniv, C. (2008). Keep your options open: an information-based driving principle for sensorimotor systems. PLOS ONE, 3(12):e4018.

https://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0004018 ^ a b McLuhan, Marshall (27 June 1977).

" 'ABC TV Monday Conference: The Medium is the Message (Part 1)" .

ABC TV Monday Conference . ABC TV Monday Conference.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-11 . Retrieved 28 April 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adams, Robert.

Empowerment, participation and social work . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008.

Christens, Brian.

Community Power and Empowerment .  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.

Humphries, Beth.

Critical Perspectives on Empowerment . Birmingham: Venture, 1996.

Rappaport, Julian, Carolyn F. Swift, and Robert Hess.

Studies in Empowerment: Steps toward Understanding and Action . New York: Haworth, 1984.

Schutz, Aaron.

Empowerment: A Primer .  New York: Routledge, 2019.

Thomas, K. W. and Velthouse, B. A. (1990) "Cognitive Elements of Empowerment: An 'Interpretive' Model of Intrinsic Task Motivation".

Academy of Management Review , Vol 15, No. 4, 666–681.

Wilkinson, A. 1998.

Empowerment: theory and practice. Personnel Review . [online]. Vol. 27, No. 1, 40–56. Accessed February 16, 2004.

Empower Employment in India Archived 2021-06-20 at the Wayback Machine v t e Youth empowerment Elements Evolving capacities Free-range parenting Future generations Intergenerational equity Leaving the nest Student voice Youth-adult partnership Youth mainstreaming Youth rights Youth voice Types Anarchistic free school Community youth development Democratic education Popular education Positive youth development Student activism Student-centered learning Student rights Teen court Youth activism Youth council Youth engagement Youth leadership Youth-led media Youth organizations Youth participation Youth philanthropy Youth politics Youth service Youth suffrage Youth vote Youth work Barriers Adultcentrism Adultism Age restrictions Ageism Control freak Eleutherophobia Ephebiphobia Fear of children Gerontocracy Grounding Helicopter parent Infantilization Intrusiveness Narcissism Parental respect Paternalism Patriarchy School-to-prison pipeline Vicariousness Youth control complex Youth exclusion Related topics Age of candidacy Age of consent Age-of-consent reform Age of criminal responsibility Beat Generation Beatnik The Catcher in the Rye Counterculture of the 1960s Greaser Hippies Hungry generation International Youth Year LGBTQ student movement Subcultures of the 1950s Taking Children Seriously The Teenage Liberation Handbook Teenage rebellion UK underground Voting age Index of youth rights–related articles v t e Aspects of workplaces Topics Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aggression Anti-pattern Artificial intelligence Bullying Climate Culture Computer surveillance Conflict Control freak Counterproductive behaviour Coworking Culture of fear Democracy Deviance Discrimination Diversity Divide and rule Drug tests Effects of overtime Emotional labor Emotions Employee assistance Employee engagement Employee experience Employee monitoring Employee morale Employee recognition Employee silence Employee surveys Empowerment Evaluation Feminisation Generations Goofing off Gossip Happiness Harassment Health promotion Health surveillance Hostile work environment Humor Incivility Inequality Intervention Jargon Kick the cat Kiss up kick down Listening Machiavellianism Menopause Micromanagement Mobbing Narcissism Office politics Overwork Parkinson's law Performance appraisal Personality clash Phobia Positive psychology Privacy Probation Profanity Psychopathy Quality of working life Queen bee syndrome Rat race Relationships Revenge Robotics safety Role conflict Sabotage Spirituality Strategy Stress Toxic workplace Toxic leader Training Turnover Undermining Violence Virtual Wellness Work–family conflict Workload Workplace harassment Workwear See also Corporation Employment Factory Headquarters Job Job sharing Labour movement Labor rights Office Organization Remote work Strike action Trade union Whistleblower Templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Employment v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Empowerment&oldid=1303826942 " Categories : Empowerment Law and economics Culture Social work Egalitarianism Management Majority–minority relations Power (social and political) concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from June 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Empowerment 24 languages Add topic

