Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Les Trois Vérités 2.2 Discours chretiens 2.3 De la sagesse 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Influences 3.2 Psychology 3.3 Theology 3.4 Politics 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Works 4.2 Secondary sources 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Charron 26 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina مصرى مازِرونی 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina کوردی Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French theologian and philosopher (1541–1603) Pierre Charron Born 1541 Paris , France Died 16 November 1603 (1603-11-16) (aged 61–62) Paris, France Philosophical work Era Renaissance philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scepticism Pierre Charron ( French pronunciation: [pjɛʁ ʃaʁɔ̃] ; 1541 – 16 November 1603) was a French Catholic theologian and major contributor to the new thought of the 17th century. He is remembered for his controversial form of skepticism and his separation of ethics from religion as an independent philosophical discipline.

Biography [ edit ] Pierre Charron's obituary Pierre Charron was born in Paris , one of the twenty-five children of a bookseller.  After studying law at Orléans and Bourges he practiced as an advocate, for a few years.

[ 1 ] He then entered the church and soon became a popular priest, rising to become a canon.

He moved to the southwest of France, invited by Arnaud de Pontac , Bishop of Bazas .

[ 2 ] He was appointed priest in ordinary to Marguerite de Valois , wife of Henry IV of Navarre . In about 1588, Charron decided to become a monk, but being rejected by both the Carthusians and the Celestines , he returned to his old profession. He delivered a course of sermons at Angers , and in the next year moved to Bordeaux , where he formed a famous friendship with Michel de Montaigne .  On Montaigne's death, in 1592, Charron was requested in the will to bear the Montaigne arms.

[ 3 ] From 1594, he used his own name; he spent from 1594 to 1600 under the protection of Antoine Hérbrard de Saint-Sulpice , [ 2 ] Bishop of Cahors , who appointed him grand vicar and theological canon. His first book led to his being chosen deputy to the general assembly of the clergy , for which he became chief secretary.

Charron retired to Condom in 1600; he died suddenly of a stroke; his works were then receiving attention.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Works [ edit ] Charron first published his works anonymously. Later he wrote under the name of "Benoit Vaillant, Advocate of the Holy Faith." While Charron's reading of Montaigne is now considered dogmatic and indeed something of a distortion, it was important in its time and during the 17th century as a whole.

[ 6 ] Les Trois Vérités [ edit ] In 1594, he published a long work, Les Trois Vérités , in which Charron sought to prove that there is a God and a true religion, that the true religion is Christianity , and that the true church is Roman Catholicism . It was a response to the Protestant work Le Traité de l'Eglise, by Philippe de Mornay . In the second edition (1595), there is an elaborate reply to criticisms of the third Vérité by a Protestant writer.

Les Trois Vérités ran through several editions.

Discours chretiens [ edit ] Then followed, in 1600, Discours chretiens , a book of sermons with a similar tone, half of which is about the Eucharist [ citation needed ] .

De la sagesse [ edit ] De la sagesse : trois livres / par Pierre Charron. – 3me ed. rev. et augm.– Paris : David Deuceur Libraire Iuré, 1607.

In 1601, Charron published in Bordeaux his third work, De la sagesse , a system of moral philosophy that develops ideas of Montaigne .

[ 7 ] Charron also connected Montaigne's scepticism with the anti-rational strand in Christianity.

[ 4 ] It received the support of Henry IV and of magistrate Pierre Jeannin . A second revised edition appeared in 1603, supported by Claude Dormy , the second Bishop of Boulogne .

[ 4 ] De la sagesse also was attacked, in particular by the Jesuit François Garasse (1585–1631), who described Charron as an atheist .

Pierre Charron; "Of Wisdom" London: Printed for Nathaniel Ranew and Jonathan Robinson, 1670 A summary and defence of the book, written shortly before his death, appeared in 1606. In 1604, Charron's friend Michel de la Roche prefixed a "Life" to an edition of De la sagesse, which depicts Charron as an amiable man of good character. His complete works, with this contribution by de la Roche, were published in 1635. An abridgment of the Sagesse is given in Wilhelm Gottlieb Tennemann 's Philosophie , vol. ix. An edition with notes by A. Duval appeared in 1820. It was translated into English as Of Wisdome (1612) by Samson Lennard ; [ 8 ] and again by George Stanhope (1697).

[ 9 ] Views [ edit ] Influences [ edit ] Apart from the major influence of Montaigne, Charron took from Raymond of Sabunde (Sibiuda).

[ 10 ] Another influence was neostoicism , as handled by Justus Lipsius .

[ 11 ] Psychology [ edit ] According to Charron, the soul , located in the ventricles of the brain , is affected by the temperament of the individual; the dry temperament produces acute intelligence; the moist, memory; the hot, imagination. Dividing the intelligent soul into these three faculties, he writes the branches of science corresponding with each. On the nature of the soul, he quotes opinions. The belief in its immortality , he says, is the most universal of beliefs, but the most feebly supported by reason. As to a human's power of attaining truth, he declares that none of our faculties enable us to distinguish truth from error. In comparing humans with animals, Charron insists that there are no breaks in nature. Though inferior in some respects, in others, animals are superior. Namely, humanity's essential qualities are vanity, weakness, inconstancy, and presumption.

Theology [ edit ] Charron writes that all religions teach that God is to be appeased by prayers, presents, vows, but especially, and, most irrationally, by human suffering [ citation needed ] . Each religion is said by its devotees to have commenced by divine inspiration . A human is a Christian , Jew , or Muslim , before he or she knows that they are persons. Furthermore, he writes that one religion is built upon another.

While Charron declares religion to be "strange to common sense," the practical result at which he arrives is that one is not to sit in judgment on his or her faith, but to be "simple and obedient," and to submit to public authority [ citation needed ] . He writes that this is one rule of wisdom with regard to religion. Another equally important is to avoid superstition , which he defines as the belief that God is like a hard judge who, eager to find fault, narrowly examines our slightest act, that he is vengeful and hard to appease, and that, therefore, he must be flattered and won over by pain and sacrifice.

Charron states that true piety , which is the first of duties, is the knowledge of God and of one's self; the latter knowledge being necessary to the former. The belief that what God sends is all good, and that all the bad is from ourselves is the abasing of humanity and the exalting of God. It leads to spiritual worship, for external ceremony is merely for our advantage, not for his glory.

Politics [ edit ] Charron declares the sovereign to be the source of law, and asserts that popular freedom is dangerous.

[ citation needed ] Bibliography [ edit ] Works [ edit ] De la Sagesse Livres Trois; par M. Pierre le Charron, Parisien, Chanoine Theologal & Chantre en l'Eglise Cathedrale de Comdom Bourdeaus, S. Millanges, 1604.

Toutes les Oeuvres de Pierre Charron; Parisien, Docteur es Droiets, Chantre et Chanoine Theologal de Condom derniere edition. Reveues, corrigees & augmentees. 2 vols. Paris Jacques Villery, 1635.

Discours chrétiens (Bordeaux, 1600).

Secondary sources [ edit ] Michel Adam , Etudes sur Pierre Charron . Bordeaux: Presses Universitaires de Bordeaux, 1991.

Henry Thomas Buckle , Introduction to History of Civilization in England , vol. ii. 19.

Claudiu Gaiu, La prudence de l’homme d’esprit. L’éthique de Pierre Charron . Préface de Denis Kambouchner, Bucharest: Zeta Books, 2010.

Tullio Gregory , "Pierre Charron's Scandalous Book", p. 87-110 in: Michael Hunter & David Wootton (eds.), Atheism from the Reformation to the Enlightenment , Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1992.

ISBN 0-19-822736-1 .

Francoise Kaye , Charron et Montaigne; du plagiat a l'originalite , Ottawa: Editions de l'Universite d'Ottawa, 1982.

William Edward Hartpole Lecky , Rationalism in Europe (1865).

Adrien Lezat , De la predication sous Henri IV.

c. vi.

Hugo Liebscher , Charron u. sein Werk, De la sagesse (Leipzig, 1890).

John Mackinnon Robertson , Short History of Free Thought (London, 1906), vol. ii.

John Owen , Skeptics of the French Renaissance (1893).

Jeffrey Zuniga , Toward a Life of Wisdom, Pierre Charron in the Light of Modern and Postmodern skepticism Manila: University of St. Thomas Press, 2000.

References [ edit ] ^ Schaff-Herzog article ^ a b "Annales du Midi" .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Pierre Charron" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ a b c Richard Popkin , The History of Scepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza (1979), p. 56-7.

^ Gale Dictionary of Philosophy ^ "Michel de Montaigne" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2019.

^ Kraye, Jill (1990). "Moral Philosophy". In Charles B. Schmitt; Quentin Skinner (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. p. 315.

ISBN 978-0-521-39748-3 .

^ Dictionary of National Biography , Lennard, Samson (d 1633), genealogist and translator, by Thompson Cooper . Published 1892.

^ "Stanhope, George" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

^ Emmanuel Faye, Philosophie et perfection de l'homme: de la Renaissance à Descartes ^ "Neo-Stoicism | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

Further reading [ edit ] Maryanne Cline Horowitz, Natural Law as the Foundation for an Autonomous Ethic: Pierre Charron's De la Sagesse , Studies in the Renaissance Vol. 21, (1974), pp. 204–227; [ 1 ] External links [ edit ] Claudiu Gaiu, Le concept de discrétion chez Pierre Charron Wikiquote has quotations related to Pierre Charron .

Of Wisdom; in three books by Pierre Charron Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Charron, Pierre ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

948– 949.

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX ^ Horowitz, Maryanne Cline (1974).

"Natural Law as the Foundation for an Autonomous Ethic: Pierre Charron's De la Sagesse" .

Studies in the Renaissance .

21 : 204– 227.

doi : 10.2307/2857155 .

ISSN 0081-8658 .

JSTOR 2857155 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Charron&oldid=1298384960 " Categories : 1541 births 1603 deaths People from Paris Catholic philosophers Christian humanists 16th-century French Roman Catholic priests 17th-century French Roman Catholic priests 16th-century French philosophers 16th-century French male writers 17th-century French philosophers French male non-fiction writers French Roman Catholic writers 16th-century French Catholic theologians 17th-century French Catholic theologians French Renaissance humanists Writers from Paris French sceptics Skeptic philosophers Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 04:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Charron 26 languages Add topic

