Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Hannah Bay 2.2 Islands 3 Human development Toggle Human development subsection 3.1 Coastal communities 3.2 Economic development 4 Recreation Toggle Recreation subsection 4.1 Canoeing 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents James Bay 51 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 53°30′N 80°30′W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.500°N 80.500°W ﻿ / 53.500; -80.500 ﻿ ( James Bay ) [ 1 ] From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bay on the southern end of the Hudson Bay, Canada This article is about the body of water. For the singer, see James Bay (singer) . For the former municipality, see Baie-James . For other uses, see James Bay (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a travel guide .

Please help rewrite it in a neutral , encyclopedic style, or move its content to Wikivoyage . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) James Bay A satellite image of James Bay James Bay Location Southern end of Hudson Bay , between Ontario and Quebec , politically part of Nunavut Coordinates 53°30′N 80°30′W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.500°N 80.500°W ﻿ / 53.500; -80.500 ﻿ ( James Bay ) [ 1 ] Basin countries Canada Max. length 443 km (275 mi) [ 2 ] Max. width 217 km (135 mi) [ 2 ] Surface area 68,300 km 2 (26,400 sq mi) Average depth 60 m (200 ft) [ 2 ] James Bay ( French : Baie James , [ 3 ] pronounced [bɛ dʒɛmz] ; Cree : ᐐᓂᐯᒄ , romanized: Wînipekw , lit.

'dirty water') is a large body of water located on the southern end of Hudson Bay in Canada. It borders the provinces of Quebec and Ontario , and is politically part of Nunavut . Its largest island is Akimiski Island .

Numerous waterways of the James Bay watershed have been modified with dams or diversion for several major hydroelectric projects. These waterways are also destinations for river-based recreation. Several communities are located near or alongside James Bay, including a number of Aboriginal Canadian communities, such as the Kashechewan First Nation and nine communities affiliated with the Cree of northern Quebec.

As with the rest of Hudson Bay, the waters of James Bay routinely freeze over in winter. It is the last part of Hudson Bay to freeze over in winter, and the first to thaw in summer.

History [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Human presence along the shores of the bay began after the retreat of the glaciers at the end of the last ice age , around 8,150 years ago. A variety of indigenous cultures have lived in this area. At the time of contact with Europeans, the indigenous peoples along both shores of the bay were ethnically Cree peoples.

Henry Hudson is believed to have been the first European to enter the bay, when he explored it in 1610 as part of his exploration of the larger bay that was named for him. This southerly bay was named in honour of Thomas James , a Welsh captain who explored the area more thoroughly in 1630 and 1631.

James Bay is important in the history of Canada as one of the most hospitable parts of the Hudson Bay region, although it has had a low human population. It was an area of importance to the Hudson's Bay Company and British expansion into Canada . The fur-trapping duo of explorers Pierre-Esprit Radisson and Médard des Groseilliers convinced the English Crown, primarily Prince Rupert of the Rhine , a favoured nephew of Charles I and cousin to Charles II , that a colonial enterprise in the north would yield wealth in minerals and fur. Des Groseilliers accompanied Captain Zachariah Gillam on the ketch Nonsuch and they jointly founded Charles Fort, the first European fur-trading post on James Bay.

Their success was such that the company was chartered by Charles II on their return, although they did not bring any minerals. This charter granted a complete trading monopoly to the company of the whole Hudson Bay basin (including James Bay). At the same time, the first English colony on what is now mainland Canada, Rupert's Land , was formed, with the first "capital" designated at Charles Fort. The first colonial governor, Charles Baley (various spellings exist, including but not limited to "Bailey"), was a Quaker , and this is believed to have been a factor in his respectful relations with the company's trading partners, the First Nations .

Significant fur trapping has continued in the region. In general, the east coast or East Main of James Bay was too easily accessed by French and independent traders from the south. The Hudson's Bay Company emphasised from an early period trading relations with tribes in interior trapping grounds, reached from the west coasts of James and Hudson bays. East Main was, nevertheless, the gateway to British settlements in what would become Manitoba ( Winnipeg , for example) and as far west as the Rocky Mountains .

Geography [ edit ] Hannah Bay at the southern end of James Bay James Bay represents the southern extent of the Arctic Archipelago Marine ecozone . While the coastal areas are primarily in the Hudson Plains , the northeastern coast bordering Quebec is in the Taiga Shield ecozone. This rocky and hilly eastern shore forms the western edge of the Canadian Shield in Quebec and as such, the main habitat is boreal forest of the Eastern Canadian Shield taiga ecoregion . The western shore, however, is characterised by broad tundra lowlands that are an extension of the Hudson Bay Lowlands , and the vegetation is mostly muskeg bog. A large portion of this area is part of the Polar Bear Provincial Park .

Ringed seals are common elsewhere along James Bay and polar bears can be seen hunting the seals as prey.

[ 4 ] Beluga whales within James Bay basin could be distinct from those found in Hudson Bay.

[ 5 ] Hundreds of rivers flow into James Bay. The geography of the region gives many of them similar characteristics. They tend to be wide and shallow near the Bay (in the James Bay Lowlands), whereas they are steeper and narrower farther upstream (as they pour off the Canadian Shield ). For a larger list of waterways in the region, see list of Hudson Bay rivers .

Hannah Bay [ edit ] Hannah Bay is the southernmost bay of James Bay. Here the Kesagami and Harricana Rivers flow into James Bay. About 238 km 2 is protected under the Migratory Birds Convention Act of Canada as the Hannah Bay Bird Sanctuary . This sanctuary has also been designated as a Wetland of International Importance under the Ramsar Convention since May 1987.

The shores in this area are a mixture of intertidal mud , sand, and salt flats , estuarine waters , intertidal marshes , freshwater ponds, swamps , and forested peatlands .

[ 6 ] These elements make an abundance of wildlife.

Islands [ edit ] James Bay contains numerous islands. The largest of the islands is Akimiski Island , which covers 3,002 square kilometres (1,159 sq mi).

[ 2 ] All of northern Ontario and northern Quebec were part of the Hudson Bay Company 's proprietary colony of Rupert's Land , and after Rupert's Land was purchased by Canada in 1869, the area became part of the North-West Territories (NWT). In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Canada transferred much of the NWT to Ontario and Quebec, thus forming modern northern Ontario and northern Quebec. However, all of the islands in Hudson Bay and James Bay remained part of the NWT.

[ 2 ] Following the partition of the NWT in 1999, the islands in Hudson Bay and James Bay were transferred to the new territory of Nunavut .

Human development [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) James Bay, near Chisasibi , Quebec Coastal communities [ edit ] The shores of James Bay are sparsely populated. On the eastern shore in Quebec there are four coastal communities belonging to the Cree , the indigenous people of the region (from south to north): Waskaganish Eastmain Wemindji Chisasibi On the western shore in Ontario there are five coastal communities (from south to north): Moose Factory Moosonee Fort Albany Kashechewan Attawapiskat Economic development [ edit ] Possible scenario of the GRAND Canal scheme, showing the initial water capture and diversion into Lake Huron.

Since 1971, the government of Quebec has built hydroelectric dams on rivers in the James Bay watershed, notably La Grande and Eastmain rivers. Built between 1974 and 1996, the James Bay Project now has a combined generating capacity of 16,021 MW and produces about 83 billion kWh of electricity each year, about half of Quebec's consumption. Power is also exported to the United States via a direct transmission high voltage line. The James Bay Project continues to expand, with work that began in 2010 on a new phase that involves the diversion of the Rupert River .

A proposed development project, the Great Recycling and Northern Development Canal (GRAND Canal), centred on constructing a large dike to separate southern James Bay from Hudson Bay. This would turn the bay into a freshwater lake, due to the numerous rivers that empty into it. The main benefit expected from this would be to redirect this freshwater for human use. Water would be pumped south from the newly formed James Lake into the Harricana River , crossing into the Great Lakes watershed near Amos , into Lake Timiskaming and the Ottawa River , crossing near Mattawa into Lake Nipissing and the French River to Lake Huron (Georgian Bay).

Recreation [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Canoeing [ edit ] Many of the rivers flowing into James Bay are popular destinations for wilderness canoe-trippers. Among the more popular rivers are: Albany River (Ontario) Moose River (Ontario) Missinaibi River (Ontario)—recognised as a Canadian Heritage River Broadback River (Quebec) Rupert River (Quebec)—diverted in 2009 for hydroelectric development and no longer a popular destination Two less-travelled rivers are the Groundhog River and the Harricana . The Groundhog is less travelled in modern times due to a series of seven dams that are about a day or two up-river from the Moose. Canoeists can contact the dam company and arrange to be portaged around the dams on company trucks, but they must make arrangements specific to the hour, and they cannot be late. The Groundhog flows into the Mattagami . The Mattagami then flows into the Moose; it is at the meeting of the Missinaibi and Mattagami rivers that the Moose river begins, marked by an island known as Portage Island. This point is about two or three days travel by canoe to Moosonee. Though the Missinaibi and the Groundhog are both fairly high in the summer, the Moose is often quite low. Depending on the tides, groups have had to walk long stretches of the river. Rapids on the Groundhog tend to be bigger and more technical than those on the Missinaibi, but the campsites are few and poor, because the volume of travel is so much less.

The Harricana River is wild, powerful, dangerous river that flows into James Bay 40 miles (64 km) east of Moosonee after two infamous sections of river known as 1-mile and 7-mile island. Consistent whitewater and waterfalls make these sections of river extremely dangerous. Anyone wishing to take this route must allow about two days to cross the bay, an extremely dangerous proposition if the tides and the weather are unfavourable.

The most common access point for paddlers to this area is Moosonee, at the southern end of James Bay. A campsite at Tidewater Provincial Park provides large campgrounds with firepits and outhouses on an island across the river from the town. Water taxis will ferry people back and forth for about C$ 20 each. Many of these rivers finish near Moosonee, and paddlers can take the Polar Bear Express train south to Cochrane at the end of a trip. This train regularly features a 'canoe car' enabling paddlers to travel with their canoes.

Waskaganish , Quebec , is a town farther to the north and east on James Bay. It is accessible via the James Bay Road , and is the most common end point for trips on the Broadback, Pontax, and Rupert rivers (the town itself is situated at the mouth of the Rupert).

References [ edit ] ^ "James Bay" .

Geographical Names Data Base .

Natural Resources Canada .

^ a b c d e Tikkanen, Amy.

"James Bay" .

Encyclopedia Britannia . University of Chicago . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ "Baie James" .

Geographical Names Data Base .

Natural Resources Canada .

^ "Sustainable Development in the Hudson Bay / James Bay Bioregion" . Archived from the original on 2016-07-14 . Retrieved 2016-10-24 .

^ Beluga whales in James Bay: a separate entity from eastern Hudson Bay belugas?

^ Southern James Bay Migratory Bird Sanctuary fact sheet [ permanent dead link ] Further reading [ edit ] Dignard, N.

Habitats of the Northeast Coast of James Bay . [Canada]: Environment Canada, Canada Wildlife Service, 1991.

ISBN 0-662-18947-7 Francis, Daniel, and Toby Elaine Morantz.

Partners in Furs A History of the Fur Trade in Eastern James Bay, 1600-1870 . Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1983.

ISBN 0-7735-0385-4 Kenyon, Walter Andrew.

The History of James Bay, 1610-1686 A Study in Historical Archaeology . Archaeology monograph, 10. Toronto, Ontario, Canada: Royal Ontario Museum , 1986.

ISBN 0-88854-316-6 McCutcheon, Sean.

Electric Rivers The Story of the James Bay Project . Montréal: Black Rose Books, 1991.

ISBN 1-895431-18-2 Niezen, Ronald.

Defending the Land Sovereignty and Forest Life in James Bay Cree Society . Cultural Survival studies in ethnicity and change. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1998.

ISBN 0-205-27580-X Reed, Austin.

Goose use of the coastal habitats of northeastern James Bay . Ottawa, Ont: Canadian Wildlife Service, 1996.

ISBN 0-662-25033-8 Salisbury, Richard Frank.

A Homeland for the Cree Regional Development in James Bay, 1971-1981 . Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 1986.

ISBN 0-7735-0550-4 Siy, Alexandra.

The Eeyou People of Eastern James Bay . New York: Dillon Press, 1993.

ISBN 0-87518-549-5 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to James Bay .

" James Bay Road website " Extensive and detailed information on the James Bay region of Quebec, as well as the James Bay and Trans-Taiga Roads.

" The Rupert River website " Read about and see this endangered river soon to be diverted by Hydro-Québec.

" Dammed river " special feature on James Bay from Canadian Geographic .

CBC Digital Archives - James Bay Project and the Cree v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Bays of Nunavut Kitikmeot Region Albert Edward Austin Bernard Harbour Brentford Campbell Chester Committee Denmark Foggy Fredrikshald Gernon Grays Hadley Homan Labyrinth Lord Mayor McLoughlin Ogden Pelly Shepherd Terror Wellington Wilmot and Crampton Wynniatt Kivalliq Region East Gods Mercy Hudson Mistake Native Nevill Pistol South Wager Wilson Qikiqtaaluk Region Allman Aston Augusta Bay Baffin Baillarge Baring Bartlett Batty Bere Bernier Birmingham Boatswain Bowman Brae Buchanan Cameron Committee Copes Cory Creswell Croker Cumberland Sound Dampier De la Beche Dobbin Dorchester Duke of York Dyke Acland Eden Eetookashoo Eldridge Elwin Eqe Evans Finnie Flagler Four Rivers Foxe Basin Frobisher Garnet Gibson Graham Moore Half Moon Hall Basin Harkin Hecla and Griper Herschel Hudson Irene James Kane Kew Lady Franklin M'Clure Macormick Maxwell May Inlet Nabukjuak Napier Norwegian Okse Ommanney Paquet Peary Piling Pioneer (Cornwallis Island) Pioneer (Devon Island) Prince Alfred Princess Marie Purcell Radstock Reid Resolute Rosse Rupert Rutherford Sabine (Baffin Island) Sabine (Melville Island) Sawyer Scoresby Shamrock Sherard Skene Stuart (Bathurst Island) Stuart (Cornwallis Island) Tasiujaq (Foxe Basin) Tasiujaq (Inugsuin Fiord) Triton Ungava Weatherall Woodward Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xlmcq
Cached time: 20250817043836
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.756 seconds
Real time usage: 0.958 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3006/1000000
Revision size: 17061/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 133354/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15208/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81392/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.512/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20667393/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  813.810      1 -total
 31.80%  258.781      1 Template:Infobox_body_of_water
 30.54%  248.520      1 Template:Infobox
 15.08%  122.703      1 Template:Reflist
 13.83%  112.533      3 Template:Navbox
 12.84%  104.530      1 Template:Native_name_checker
 12.10%   98.500      1 Template:List_of_seas
 10.62%   86.386      2 Template:Cite_cgndb
  8.96%   72.949      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  8.81%   71.694      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58642:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043836 and revision id 1298805625. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Bay&oldid=1298805625 " Categories : James Bay Landforms of Nord-du-Québec Bays of Ontario Bays of Qikiqtaaluk Region Bays of Quebec Bays of the Atlantic Ocean Landforms of Cochrane District Bays of the Arctic Ocean Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA Articles containing Cree-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James Bay 51 languages Add topic

