Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Principles 2 Rules for satyagraha campaigns 3 Origin and meaning of name 4 Contrast to "passive resistance" 5 Ahimsa and satyagraha Toggle Ahimsa and satyagraha subsection 5.1 Defining success 5.2 Means and ends 5.3 Satyagraha versus duragraha 6 Large-scale usage of satyagraha 7 American Civil Rights Movement 8 Satyagraha in relation to genocide 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Satyagraha 55 languages አማርኛ العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা भोजपुरी Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of nonviolent resistance For other uses, see Satyagraha (disambiguation) .

Mahatma Gandhi leading the famous 1930 Salt March , a notable example of satyagraha .

Satyāgraha (from Sanskrit : सत्याग्रह ; satya : "truth", āgraha : "insistence" or "holding firmly to"), or "holding firmly to truth", [ 1 ] or "truth force", is a particular form of nonviolent resistance or civil resistance . Someone who practises satyagraha is a satyagrahi .

The term satyagraha was coined and developed by Mahatma Gandhi (1869–1948) [ 2 ] as early as 1919.

[ 3 ] Gandhi practised satyagraha as part of the Indian independence movement and also during his earlier struggles in South Africa for Indian rights . Satyagraha theory influenced Martin Luther King Jr.'s and James Bevel 's campaigns during the Civil Rights Movement in the United States, as well as Nelson Mandela's struggle against apartheid in South Africa and many other social-justice and similar movements.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Principles [ edit ] Gandhi envisioned satyagraha as not only a tactic to be used in acute political struggle but as a universal solvent for injustice and harm.

He founded the Sabarmati Ashram to teach satyagraha . He asked satyagrahis to follow the following principles Nonviolence ( ahimsa ) Truth – this includes honesty, but goes beyond it to mean living fully in accord with and in devotion to that which is true Not stealing Non-possession (not the same as poverty) Body-labour or bread-labour Control of desires (gluttony) Fearlessness Equal respect for all religions Economic strategy such as boycotts of imported goods ( swadeshi ) On another occasion, he listed these rules as "essential for every Satyagrahi in India": Must have a living faith in God Must be leading a chaste life and be willing to die or lose all his possessions Must be a habitual khadi weaver and spinner Must abstain from alcohol and other intoxicants Rules for satyagraha campaigns [ edit ] Gandhi proposed a series of rules for satyagrahi s to follow in a resistance campaign: [ 6 ] Harbour no anger.

Suffer the anger of the opponent.

Never retaliate to assaults or punishment, but do not submit, out of fear of punishment or assault, to an order given in anger.

Voluntarily submit to arrest or confiscation of your own property.

If you are a trustee of property, defend that property (non-violently) from confiscation with your life.

Do not curse or swear.

Do not insult the opponent.

Neither salute nor insult the flag of your opponent or your opponent's leaders.

If anyone attempts to insult or assault your opponent, defend your opponent (non-violently) with your life.

As a prisoner, behave courteously and obey prison regulations (except any that are contrary to self-respect).

As a prisoner, do not ask for special favourable treatment.

As a prisoner, do not fast in an attempt to gain conveniences whose deprivation does not involve any injury to your self-respect.

Joyfully obey the orders of the leaders of the civil disobedience action.

Origin and meaning of name [ edit ] The terms originated in a competition in the news-sheet Indian Opinion in South Africa in 1906.

[ 2 ] Mr.

Maganlal Gandhi ,  grandson of an uncle of Mahatma Gandhi, came up with the word "Sadagraha" and won the prize. Subsequently, to make it clearer, Gandhi changed it to Satyagraha . "Satyagraha" is a tatpuruṣa compound of the Sanskrit words satya (meaning "truth") and āgraha ("polite insistence", or "holding firmly to"). Satya is derived from the word "sat", which means "being". Nothing is or exists in reality except Truth. In the context of satyagraha, Truth, therefore, includes a) Truth in speech, as opposed to falsehood, b) knowledge of what is real, as opposed to nonexistent (asat), and c) good as opposed to evil or bad. This was critical to Gandhi's understanding of and faith in nonviolence: "The world rests upon the bedrock of satya or truth.

Asatya , meaning untruth, also means nonexistent, and satya or truth, also means that which is. If untruth does not so much as exist, its victory is out of the question. And truth being that which is, can never be destroyed. This is the doctrine of satyagraha in a nutshell." [ 7 ] For Gandhi, satyagraha went far beyond mere "passive resistance" and became strength in practising non-violent methods.

[ 8 ] In his words: Truth ( satya ) implies love, and firmness ( agraha ) engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for force. I thus began to call the Indian movement Satyagraha , that is to say, the Force which is born of Truth and Love or non-violence, and gave up the use of the phrase "passive resistance", in connection with it, so much so that even in English writing we often avoided it and used instead the word " satyagraha " itself or some other equivalent English phrase.

[ 9 ] In September 1935, in a letter to P. Kodanda Rao , Servants of India Society, Gandhi disputed the proposition that his idea of civil disobedience was adapted from the writings of Henry David Thoreau , especially the essay Civil Disobedience published in 1849.

The statement that I had derived my idea of civil disobedience from the writings of Thoreau is wrong. The resistance to authority in South Africa was well advanced before I got the essay of Thoreau on civil disobedience. But the movement was then known as passive resistance. As it was incomplete, I had coined the word satyagraha for the Gujarati readers. When I saw the title of Thoreau’s great essay, I began the use of his phrase to explain our struggle to the English readers. But I found that even civil disobedience failed to convey the full meaning of the struggle. I therefore adopted the phrase civil resistance. Non-violence was always an integral part of our struggle." [ 10 ] Gandhi described it as follows: Its root meaning is holding on to truth, hence truth-force. I have also called it love-force or soul-force. In the application of satyagraha, I discovered in the earliest stages that pursuit of truth did not admit of violence being inflicted on one’s opponent but that he must be weaned from error by patience and compassion. For what appears to be truth to the one may appear to be error to the other. And patience means self-suffering. So the doctrine came to mean vindication of truth, not by infliction of suffering on the opponent, but on oneself.

[ 11 ] Contrast to "passive resistance" [ edit ] Gandhi distinguished between satyagraha and passive resistance in the following letter: I have drawn the distinction between passive resistance as understood and practised in the West and satyagraha before I had evolved the doctrine of the latter to its full logical and spiritual extent. I often used “passive resistance” and “satyagraha” as synonymous terms: but as the doctrine of satyagraha developed, the expression “passive resistance” ceases even to be synonymous, as passive resistance has admitted of violence as in the case of the suffragettes and has been universally acknowledged to be a weapon of the weak. Moreover, passive resistance does not necessarily involve complete adherence to truth under every circumstance. Therefore it is different from satyagraha in three essentials: Satyagraha is a weapon of the strong; it admits of no violence under any circumstance whatsoever; and it ever insists upon truth.

[ 12 ] Ahimsa and satyagraha [ edit ] There is a connection between ahimsa and satyagraha. Satyagraha is sometimes used to refer to the whole principle of nonviolence, where it is essentially the same as ahimsa, and sometimes used in a "marked" meaning to refer specifically to direct action that is largely obstructive, for example in the form of civil disobedience.

Gandhi says: It is perhaps clear from the foregoing, that without ahimsa it is not possible to seek and find Truth. Ahimsa and Truth are so intertwined that it is practically impossible to disentangle and separate them. They are like the two sides of a coin, or rather of a smooth unstamped metallic disk. Nevertheless, ahimsa is the means; Truth is the end. Means to be means must always be within our reach, and so ahimsa is our supreme duty.

[ 13 ] Defining success [ edit ] Assessing the extent to which Gandhi's ideas of satyagraha were or were not successful in the Indian independence struggle is a complex task. Judith Brown has suggested that "this is a political strategy and technique which, for its outcomes, depends greatly on historical specificities." [ 14 ] The view taken by Gandhi differs from the idea that the goal in any conflict is necessarily to defeat the opponent or frustrate the opponent's objectives, or to meet one's own objectives despite the efforts of the opponent to obstruct these. In satyagraha, by contrast, "The Satyagrahi's object is to convert, not to coerce, the wrong-doer." [ 15 ] The opponent must be converted, at least as far as to stop obstructing the just end, for this cooperation to take place. There are cases, to be sure, when an opponent, e.g. a dictator, has to be unseated and one cannot wait to convert him. The satyagrahi would count this a partial success.

Means and ends [ edit ] The theory of satyagraha sees means and ends as inseparable obtain an end are wrapped up in and attached to that end. Therefore, it is contradictory to try to use unjust means to obtain justice or to try to use violence to obtain peace. As Gandhi wrote: "They say, 'means are, after all, means'. I would say, 'means are, after all, everything'. As the means so the end.

[ 16 ] Separating means and ends would ultimately amount to introducing a form of duality and inconsistency at the core of Gandhi's non-dual (Advaitic) conception.

[ 17 ] Gandhi used an example to explain this: "If I want to deprive you of your watch, I shall certainly have to fight for it; if I want to buy your watch, I shall have to pay for it; and if I want a gift, I shall have to plead for it; and, according to the means I employ, the watch is stolen property, my own property, or a donation." [ 18 ] Gandhi rejected the idea that injustice should, or even could, be fought against "by any means necessary"—if you use violent, coercive, unjust means, whatever ends you produce will necessarily embed that injustice.

[ 19 ] However, in Hind Swaraj Gandhi admits that even though his book argues that machinery is bad, it was produced by machinery, which he says can do nothing good. Thus, he says, "sometimes poison is used to kill poison" and for that reason as long as machinery is viewed as bad it can be used to undo itself.

[ 20 ] This implies that sometimes, bad means can achieve positive ends.

Satyagraha versus duragraha [ edit ] The essence of satyagraha is that it seeks to eliminate antagonisms without harming the antagonists themselves, as opposed to violent resistance, which is meant to cause harm to the antagonist. A satyagrahi therefore does not seek to end or destroy the relationship with the antagonist, but instead seeks to transform or "purify" it to a higher level. A euphemism sometimes used for satyagraha is that it is a "silent force" or a "soul force" (a term also used by Martin Luther King Jr. during his famous " I Have a Dream " speech). It arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power. Satyagraha is also termed a "universal force," as it essentially "makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe." [ 6 ] Gandhi contrasted satyagraha (holding on to truth) with "duragraha" (holding on by force), as in protest meant more to harass than enlighten opponents. He wrote: "There must be no impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause." [ 21 ] Civil disobedience and non-cooperation as practised under satyagraha are based on the "law of suffering", [ 22 ] a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end. This end usually implies a moral uplift or progress of an individual or society. Therefore, the non-cooperation of satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the cooperation of the opponent that is consistent with truth and justice.

Large-scale usage of satyagraha [ edit ] Main articles: Bardoli Satyagraha , Champaran Satyagraha , Kheda Satyagraha , Dharasana Satyagraha , Flag Satyagraha , Guruvayur Satyagraha , Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922) , Quit India Movement , Salt Satyagraha , and Vaikom Satyagraha When using satyagraha in a large-scale political conflict involving civil disobedience, Gandhi believed that the satyagrahis must undergo training to ensure discipline. He wrote that it is "only when people have proved their active loyalty by obeying the many laws of the State that they acquire the right of Civil Disobedience." [ 23 ] He therefore made part of the discipline that satyagrahis: Appreciate the other laws of the State and obey them voluntarily Tolerate these laws, even when they are inconvenient Be willing to undergo suffering, loss of property, and to endure the suffering that might be inflicted on family and friends [ 23 ] This obedience has to be not merely grudging but extraordinary: ...an honest, respectable man will not suddenly take to stealing whether there is a law against stealing or not, but this very man will not feel any remorse for failure to observe the rule about carrying headlights on bicycles after dark.... But he would observe any obligatory rule of this kind, if only to escape the inconvenience of facing a prosecution for a breach of the rule. Such compliance is not, however, the willing and spontaneous obedience that is required of a Satyagrahi.

[ 24 ] American Civil Rights Movement [ edit ] Satyagraha theory also influenced many other movements of nonviolence and civil resistance. For example, Martin Luther King Jr.

wrote about Gandhi's influence on his developing ideas regarding the Civil Rights Movement in the United States: Like most people, I had heard of Gandhi, but I had never studied him seriously. As I read I became deeply fascinated by his campaigns of nonviolent resistance. I was particularly moved by his Salt March to the Sea and his numerous fasts. The whole concept of Satyagraha ( Satya is truth which equals love, and agraha is force; Satyagraha , therefore, means truth force or love force) was profoundly significant to me. As I delved deeper into the philosophy of Gandhi, my skepticism concerning the power of love gradually diminished, and I came to see for the first time its potency in the area of social reform. ... It was in this Gandhian emphasis on love and nonviolence that I discovered the method for social reform that I had been seeking.

[ 25 ] Satyagraha in relation to genocide [ edit ] In view of the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany , Gandhi offered satyagraha as a method of combating oppression and genocide, stating: If I were a Jew and were born in Germany and earned my livelihood there, I would claim Germany as my home even as the tallest Gentile German might, and challenge him to shoot me or cast me in the dungeon; I would refuse to be expelled or to submit to discriminating treatment. And for doing this I should not wait for the fellow Jews to join me in civil resistance, but would have confidence that in the end the rest were bound to follow my example. If one Jew or all the Jews were to accept the prescription here offered, he or they cannot be worse off than now. And suffering voluntarily undergone will bring them an inner strength and joy [...] the calculated violence of Hitler may even result in a general massacre of the Jews by way of his first answer to the declaration of such hostilities. But if the Jewish mind could be prepared for voluntary suffering, even the massacre I have imagined could be turned into a day of thanksgiving and joy that Jehovah had wrought deliverance of the race even at the hands of the tyrant. For to the God-fearing, death has no terror.

[ 26 ] When Gandhi was criticized for these statements, he responded in another article entitled "Some Questions Answered": Friends have sent me two newspaper cuttings criticizing my appeal to the Jews. The two critics suggest that in presenting non-violence to the Jews as a remedy against the wrong done to them, I have suggested nothing new... What I have pleaded for is renunciation of violence of the heart and consequent active exercise of the force generated by the great renunciation.” [ 27 ] In a similar vein, anticipating a possible attack on India by Japan during World War II , Gandhi recommended satyagraha as a means of national defense (what is now sometimes called "Civilian Based Defense" (CBD) or " social defence "): ...there should be unadulterated non-violent non-cooperation, and if the whole of India responded and unanimously offered it, I should show that, without shedding a single drop of blood, Japanese arms—or any combination of arms—can be sterilized. That involves the determination of India not to give quarter on any point whatsoever and to be ready to risk loss of several million lives. But I would consider that cost very cheap and victory won at that cost glorious. That India may not be ready to pay that price may be true. I hope it is not true, but some such price must be paid by any country that wants to retain its independence. After all, the sacrifice made by the Russians and the Chinese is enormous, and they are ready to risk all. The same could be said of the other countries also, whether aggressors or defenders. The cost is enormous. Therefore, in the non-violent technique I am asking India to risk no more than other countries are risking and which India would have to risk even if she offered armed resistance.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Peace portal History portal India portal Ahimsa in Jainism Civil disobedience Constructive Program Gandhi Heritage Portal Nonviolence Nonviolent revolution People Power Revolution Resistance movement Salt March Sit-in References [ edit ] ^ http://www.gandhifoundation.net/about%20gandhi6.htm "Truth (satya) implies love, and firmness (agraha) engenders and therefore serves as a synonym for force. I thus began to call the Indian movement Satyagraha, that the is to say, the Force which is born of Truth and Love or nonviolence, peace, and gave up the use of the phrase 'passive resistance', in connection with it, so much so that even in English writing we often avoided it and used instead the word 'satyagraha' itself or some other equivalent English phrase." ^ a b Uma Majmudar (2005).

Gandhi's pilgrimage of faith: from darkness to light . SUNY Press. p. 138.

ISBN 9780791464052 .

^ "satyagraha" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/525247/satyagraha "Gandhi’s satyagraha became a major tool in the Indian struggle against British imperialism and has since been adopted by protest groups in other countries." Date accessed: 14 September 2010.

^ [1] Archived 5 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine "In this respect Satyagraha or non-violent resistance, as conceived by Gandhi, has an important lesson for pacifists and war-resisters of the West. Western pacifists have so far proved ineffective because they have thought that war can be resisted by mere propaganda, conscientious objection, and organization for settling disputes." Date accessed: 14 September 2010.

^ a b Gandhi, M.K. “Some Rules of Satyagraha” Young India (Navajivan) 23 February 1930 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 48, p. 340) ^ Nagler, Michael N. The Nonviolence Handbook: A Guide for Practical Action. Print.

^ Gross, David M. (2014).

99 Tactics of Successful Tax Resistance Campaigns . Picket Line Press. pp.

15– 17.

ISBN 978-1490572741 .

^ M.K. Gandhi, Satyagraha in South Africa , Navajivan, Ahmedabad, 1111, pp. 109–10.

^ Mohandas K. Gandhi, letter to P. Kodanda Rao , 10 September 1935; in Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi , electronic edition, vol. 67, p. 400.

[2] ^ Gandhi, M.K.

Statement to Disorders Inquiry Committee January 5, 1920 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 19, p. 206) ^ Gandhi, M.K. “Letter to Mr. – ” 25 January 1920 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 19, p. 350) ^ Gandhi, Mahatma. Non-violent Resistance (Satyagraha). Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 2001. Print.

^ Brown, Judith M., "Gandhi and Civil Resistance in India, 1917–47: Key Issues", in Adam Roberts and Timothy Garton Ash (eds.), Civil Resistance and Power Politics: The Experience of Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present , Oxford University Press, 2009 p. 57 ^ Gandhi, M.K. “Requisite Qualifications” Harijan 25 March 1939 ^ Gandhi, Mahatma (2005) [1960].

All men are brothers : life and thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words . Navajivan Publishing House.

ISBN 9789812454249 . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ Cristina Ciucu, "Being Truthful to Reality. Grounds of Nonviolence in Ascetic and Mystical Traditions" in  Sudhir Chandra (dir.), Violence and Non-violence across Time. History, Religion and Culture , Routledge / Taylor & Francis, Londres & New York, 2018, pp. 247-314.

^ M.K., Gandhi (1938). "16".

Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule (1 ed.). Navajivan Publishing House . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

^ Gandhi, M. K. (1927). "12".

Voice of Truth (Selected Works of Mahatma Gandhi: Volume V) . Navajivan Trust.

ISBN 81-7229-008-X . Retrieved 11 December 2020 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Gandhi, Mohandas (12 November 1938).

Hind Swaraj (PDF) . Navajivan Publishing House. p. 85.

^ R. K. Prabhu & U. R. Rao, editors; from section “Power of Satyagraha,” of the book The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi Archived 20 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine , Ahemadabad, India, Revised Edition, 1967.

^ Gandhi, M.K. “The Law of Suffering” Young India 16 June 1920 ^ a b Gandhi, M. K. “Pre-requisites for Satyagraha” Young India 1 August 1925 ^ Gandhi, M.K. “A Himalayan Miscalculation” in The Story of My Experiments with Truth Chapter 33 ^ King, Martin Luther Jr.

(1998). Carson, Clayborne (ed.).

The Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr . Intellectual Properties Management. pp.

23 –24.

ISBN 0-446-52412-3 .

^ Gandhi, M.K. "The Jews" Harijan 26 November 1938 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 74, p. 240) ^ Gandhi, M.K. “Some Questions Answered” Harijan 17 December 1938 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 74, pp. 297–98) ^ Gandhi, M.K. "Non-violent Non-cooperation" Harijan 24 May 1942, p. 167 ( The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 82, p. 286; interview conducted 16 May 1942) External links [ edit ] 'Satyagraha 100 Years Later' – a retrospective with Arun Gandhi from Democracy Now!

The Story of Satyagraha by Dr. Jyotsna Kamat GandhiPoetics.com – a site that analyzes and previews the poetry associated with Gandhi's Satyagraha movement.

Satyagraha in South Africa v t e Mahatma Gandhi Life events and movements Indian Ambulance Corps Tolstoy Farm Bardoli Satyagraha Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Indian independence movement Non-cooperation movement Chauri Chaura incident Purna Swaraj flag Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vaikom Satyagraha Aundh Experiment Gandhi–Irwin Pact Second Round Table Conference Padayatra Poona Pact Natal Indian Congress Quit India speech Gujarat Vidyapith University Harijan Sevak Sangh India ashrams (Kochrab Sabarmati Sodepur Khadi Sevagram) List of fasts Assassination Philosophy Practices and beliefs Composite nationalism Gandhism Economics trusteeship Education Sarvodaya Satyagraha Swadeshi Swaraj Eleven vows Gandhi cap Publications Harijan Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule) Indian Opinion The Story of My Experiments with Truth Mangal Prabhat Young India Seven Social Sins Navajivan Trust Gandhi Heritage Portal Influences " A Letter to a Hindu " Ahimsa ( nonviolence ) Bhagavad Gita Henry David Thoreau ( Civil Disobedience (essay) ) Civil disobedience Fasting Hinduism Khadi John Ruskin Parsee Rustomjee Leo Tolstoy ( The Kingdom of God Is Within You ) The Masque of Anarchy Narmad Pacifism Sermon on the Mount Shravan Shrimad Rajchandra Henry Stephens Salt Tirukkuṛaḷ Unto This Last Gandhi's translation " Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram " " Ekla Chalo Re " " Hari Tuma Haro " " Vaishnava Jana To " Vegetarianism Associates Swami Anand C. F. Andrews Jamnalal Bajaj Shankarlal Banker Sarla Behn Vinoba Bhave Brij Krishna Chandiwala Sudhakar Chaturvedi Jugatram Dave Mahadev Desai Dada Dharmadhikari Kanu Gandhi Shiv Prasad Gupta Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri J. C. Kumarappa Hermann Kallenbach Abdul Ghaffar Khan Acharya Kripalani Mirabehn Mohanlal Pandya Vallabhbhai Patel Narhari Parikh Mithuben Petit Chakravarti Rajagopalachari Bibi Amtus Salam Sonja Schlesin Anugrah Narayan Sinha Shri Krishna Sinha Rettamalai Srinivasan V. A. Sundaram Abbas Tyabji Ravishankar Vyas Kishorlal Mashruwala Legacy Artistic depictions Gandhigiri Gandhi Peace Award Gandhi Peace Foundation Gandhi Peace Prize Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith Indian currency (Gandhi Series, Gandhi New Series, Indian rupee ) Indian 10 Rupee postage stamp Family Karamchand Gandhi (father) Kasturba (wife) Harilal (son) Manilal (son) Ramdas (son) Devdas (son) Maganlal (cousin) Samaldas (nephew) Arun (grandson) Ela (granddaughter) Rajmohan (grandson) Gopalkrishna (grandson) Ramchandra (grandson) Kanu (grandson) Kanu (grandnephew) Tushar (great-grandson) Leela (great-granddaughter) Influenced 14th Dalai Lama Aung San Suu Kyi Abhay Bang Abdul Ghaffar Khan Brajkishore Prasad C. Rajagopalachari Eknath Easwaran Droupadi Murmu François Bayrou Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Govind Ballabh Pant Ho Chi Minh James Bevel James Lawson Jawaharlal Nehru Joan Bondurant Lal Bahadur Shastri Lanza del Vasto Maulana Azad Martin Luther King Jr.

Maria Lacerda de Moura Mehdi Bazargan Morarji Desai Narendra Modi Nelson Mandela Rajendra Prasad Ramjee Singh Steve Biko Sane Guruji Vinoba Bhave Vallabhbhai Patel Memorials Statues Ghana India Patna National Salt Satyagraha Memorial New Delhi South Africa Johannesburg Pietermaritzburg UK Parliament Square Tavistock Square U.S.

Davis Denver Houston Milwaukee New York San Francisco San Jose Washington, D.C.

Observances Gandhi Jayanti International Day of Non-Violence Martyrs' Day Season for Nonviolence Other Aga Khan Palace Gandhi Bhawan Gandhi Mandapam Gandhi Market Bookstores Gandhi Promenade Gandhi Smriti Gandhi Memorial Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya Gandhi Teerth Gandhi Temple, Bhatara Kaba Gandhi No Delo Kirti Mandir Mahatma Gandhi College Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre, Matale Mani Bhavan Mahatma Gandhi Museum, Rajkot National Gandhi Museum Raj Ghat Roads named after Gandhi Sabarmati Ashram Satyagraha House v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category v t e Bengal Renaissance People Sri Aurobindo Atul Prasad Sen Rajnarayan Basu Debendra Mohan Bose Jagadish Chandra Bose Subhash Chandra Bose Satyendra Nath Bose Madhusudan Gupta Bethune Upendranath Brahmachari Bankim Chandra Chatterjee Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay Akshay Kumar Datta Henry Derozio Alexander Duff Michael Madhusudan Dutt Romesh Chunder Dutt Anil Kumar Gain Kadambini Ganguly Monomohun Ghose Ramgopal Ghosh David Hare Kazi Nazrul Islam Eugène Lafont Mahanambrata Brahmachari Ashutosh Mukherjee Kalikrishna Mitra Harish Chandra Mukherjee Ramakrishna Paramahamsa Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury Raja Ram Mohan Roy Meghnad Saha Akshay Chandra Sarkar Mahendralal Sarkar Brajendra Nath Seal Girish Chandra Sen Keshub Chandra Sen Haraprasad Shastri Debendranath Tagore Rabindranath Tagore Satyendranath Tagore Jnanadanandini Devi Fanindra Nath Gooptu Sitanath Tattwabhushan Brahmabandhav Upadhyay Ram Chandra Vidyabagish Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Begum Rokeya Culture Bengali literature Bengali poetry Bengali music Bangiya Sahitya Parishad Bhadralok Brahmoism Brahmo Samaj Gaudiya Math Mahanam Sampraday Nazrul geeti Rabindra Nritya Natya Rabindra Sangeet Sambad Prabhakar Satyagraha Self-Realization Fellowship Yogoda Satsanga Swadeshi Tattwabodhini Patrika Young Bengal Education Chittagong College Indian Statistical Institute Hindu School Jadavpur University Presidency University University of Calcutta Bethune College University of Dhaka Visva-Bharati University Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine v t e Civil rights movement (1954–1968) Events ( timeline ) Prior to 1954 Journey of Reconciliation Executive Order 9981 Murders of Harry and Harriette Moore Sweatt v. Painter (1950) McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950) Baton Rouge bus boycott 1954–1959 Brown v. Board of Education Bolling v. Sharpe Briggs v. Elliott Davis v. Prince Edward County Gebhart v. Belton Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company Read's Drug Store sit-in Emmett Till Montgomery bus boycott Browder v. Gayle Tallahassee bus boycott Mansfield school desegregation 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom " Give Us the Ballot " Royal Ice Cream sit-in Little Rock Nine Cooper v. Aaron Civil Rights Act of 1957 Ministers' Manifesto Dockum Drug Store sit-in Katz Drug Store sit-in Kissing Case Biloxi wade-ins 1960–1963 New Year's Day March Sit-in movement Greensboro sit-ins Nashville sit-ins Sibley Commission Atlanta sit-ins Savannah Protest Movement Greenville Eight Civil Rights Act of 1960 Ax Handle Saturday New Orleans school desegregation Gomillion v. Lightfoot Boynton v. Virginia University of Georgia desegregation riot Rock Hill sit-ins Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address Freedom Rides Anniston and Birmingham bus attacks Garner v. Louisiana Albany Movement Cambridge movement University of Chicago sit-ins " Second Emancipation Proclamation " Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot Atlanta's Berlin Wall "Segregation now, segregation forever" Stand in the Schoolhouse Door 1963 Birmingham campaign Letter from Birmingham Jail Children's Crusade Birmingham riot 16th Street Baptist Church bombing John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights Detroit Walk to Freedom March on Washington "I Have a Dream" Big Six St. Augustine movement 1964–1968 Twenty-fourth Amendment Chester school protests Bloody Tuesday 1964 Monson Motor Lodge protests Freedom Summer workers' murders Civil Rights Act of 1964 Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States Katzenbach v. McClung 1964–1965 Scripto strike 1965 Selma to Montgomery marches " How Long, Not Long " SCOPE Project Voting Rights Act of 1965 Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections March Against Fear White House Conference on Civil Rights Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement Loving v. Virginia Memphis sanitation strike King assassination funeral riots Civil Rights Act of 1968 Poor People's Campaign Green v. County School Board of New Kent County Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co.

1968 Olympics Black Power salute Activist groups Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights American Friends Service Committee Atlanta Negro Voters League Atlanta Student Movement Black Panther Party Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) Committee for Freedom Now Committee on Appeal for Human Rights An Appeal for Human Rights Council for United Civil Rights Leadership Council of Federated Organizations Dallas County Voters League Deacons for Defense and Justice Georgia Council on Human Relations Highlander Folk School Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights Lowndes County Freedom Organization Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Montgomery Improvement Association NAACP Youth Council Nashville Student Movement Nation of Islam Northern Student Movement National Council of Negro Women National Urban League Operation Breadbasket Regional Council of Negro Leadership Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) Southern Regional Council Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) The Freedom Singers United Auto Workers (UAW) Wednesdays in Mississippi Women's Political Council Activists Juanita Abernathy Ralph Abernathy Victoria Gray Adams Zev Aelony Mathew Ahmann Muhammad Ali William G. Anderson Gwendolyn Armstrong Arnold Aronson Ella Baker James Baldwin Marion Barry Daisy Bates Harry Belafonte James Bevel Claude Black Gloria Blackwell Randolph Blackwell Unita Blackwell Ezell Blair Jr.

Joanne Bland Julian Bond Joseph E. Boone William Holmes Borders Amelia Boynton Bruce Boynton Raylawni Branch Stanley Branche Ruby Bridges Aurelia Browder H. Rap Brown Ralph Bunche John H. Calhoun Guy Carawan Stokely Carmichael Johnnie Carr James Chaney J. L. Chestnut Shirley Chisholm Colia Lafayette Clark Ramsey Clark Septima Clark Xernona Clayton Eldridge Cleaver Kathleen Cleaver Josephine Dobbs Clement Charles E. Cobb Jr.

Annie Lee Cooper Dorothy Cotton Claudette Colvin Vernon Dahmer Jonathan Daniels Abraham Lincoln Davis Angela Davis Joseph DeLaine Dave Dennis Annie Bell Robinson Devine John Wesley Dobbs Patricia Stephens Due Joseph Ellwanger Charles Evers Medgar Evers Myrlie Evers-Williams Chuck Fager James Farmer Walter Fauntroy James Forman Marie Foster Golden Frinks Andrew Goodman Robert Graetz Fred Gray Jack Greenberg Dick Gregory Lawrence Guyot Prathia Hall Fannie Lou Hamer Fred Hampton William E. Harbour Vincent Harding Dorothy Height Audrey Faye Hendricks Lola Hendricks Aaron Henry Oliver Hill Donald L. Hollowell James Hood Myles Horton Zilphia Horton T. R. M. Howard Ruby Hurley Cecil Ivory Jesse Jackson Jimmie Lee Jackson Richie Jean Jackson T. J. Jemison Esau Jenkins Barbara Rose Johns Vernon Johns Frank Minis Johnson Clarence Jones J. Charles Jones Matthew Jones Vernon Jordan Tom Kahn Clyde Kennard A. D. King C.B. King Coretta Scott King Martin Luther King Jr.

Martin Luther King Sr.

Bernard Lafayette James Lawson Bernard Lee Sanford R. Leigh Jim Letherer Stanley Levison John Lewis Viola Liuzzo Z. Alexander Looby Joseph Lowery Clara Luper Danny Lyon Malcolm X Mae Mallory Vivian Malone Bob Mants Thurgood Marshall Benjamin Mays Franklin McCain Charles McDew Ralph McGill Floyd McKissick Joseph McNeil James Meredith William Ming Jack Minnis Amzie Moore Cecil B. Moore Douglas E. Moore Harriette Moore Harry T. Moore Queen Mother Moore William Lewis Moore Irene Morgan Bob Moses William Moyer Elijah Muhammad Diane Nash Charles Neblett Huey P. Newton Edgar Nixon Jack O'Dell James Orange Rosa Parks James Peck Charles Person Homer Plessy Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Fay Bellamy Powell Rodney N. Powell Al Raby Lincoln Ragsdale A. Philip Randolph George Raymond George Raymond Jr.

Bernice Johnson Reagon Cordell Reagon James Reeb Frederick D. Reese Walter Reuther Gloria Richardson David Richmond Bernice Robinson Jo Ann Robinson Angela Russell Bayard Rustin Bernie Sanders Michael Schwerner Bobby Seale Pete Seeger Cleveland Sellers Charles Sherrod Alexander D. Shimkin Fred Shuttlesworth Modjeska Monteith Simkins Glenn E. Smiley A. Maceo Smith Kelly Miller Smith Mary Louise Smith Maxine Smith Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson Charles Kenzie Steele Hank Thomas Dorothy Tillman A. P. Tureaud Hartman Turnbow Albert Turner C. T. Vivian A. T. Walden Wyatt Tee Walker Hollis Watkins Walter Francis White Roy Wilkins Hosea Williams Kale Williams Robert F. Williams Q. V. Williamson Andrew Young Whitney Young Sammy Younge Jr.

Bob Zellner James Zwerg By region Omaha, Nebraska South Carolina Movement songs "Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me 'Round" "If You Miss Me at the Back of the Bus" "Kumbaya" "Keep Your Eyes on the Prize" "Oh, Freedom" "This Little Light of Mine" "We Shall Not Be Moved" "We Shall Overcome" "Woke Up This Morning (With My Mind Stayed On Freedom)" Influences Nonviolence Padayatra Sermon on the Mount Mahatma Gandhi Ahimsa Satyagraha The Kingdom of God Is Within You Frederick Douglass W. E. B. Du Bois Mary McLeod Bethune Related Lyndon B. Johnson Jim Crow laws Lynching in the United States Plessy v. Ferguson Separate but equal Buchanan v. Warley Hocutt v. Wilson Powell v. Alabama Smith v. Allwright Hernandez v. Texas Loving v. Virginia African-American women in the movement Jews in the civil rights movement Fifth Circuit Four 16th Street Baptist Church Kelly Ingram Park A.G. Gaston Motel Bethel Baptist Church Brown Chapel Dexter Avenue Baptist Church Holt Street Baptist Church Edmund Pettus Bridge March on Washington Movement African-American churches attacked List of lynching victims in the United States Freedom Schools Freedom songs Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence " Voter Education Project 1960s counterculture African American founding fathers of the United States Eyes on the Prize Legacy In popular culture Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument Civil Rights Memorial Civil Rights Movement Archive Emmett Till and Mamie Till-Mobley National Monument Medgar and Myrlie Evers Home National Monument Freedom Rides Museum Freedom Riders National Monument King Center for Nonviolent Social Change Martin Luther King Jr. Day Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial other King memorials Mississippi Civil Rights Museum National Civil Rights Museum National Voting Rights Museum St. Augustine Foot Soldiers Monument Olympic Black Power Statue Noted historians Taylor Branch Clayborne Carson John Dittmer Michael Eric Dyson Jonathan Eig Chuck Fager Adam Fairclough David Garrow David Halberstam Vincent Harding Steven F. Lawson Doug McAdam Diane McWhorter Charles M. Payne Thomas E. Ricks Timothy Tyson Akinyele Umoja Movement photographers Civil rights movement portal v t e Indian independence movement History Colonisation Porto Grande de Bengala Dutch Bengal East India Company British Raj French India Portuguese India Battle of Plassey Battle of Buxar Anglo-Mysore Wars First Second Third Fourth Anglo-Maratha Wars First Second Third Gwalior Polygar Wars Vellore Mutiny First Anglo-Sikh War Second Anglo-Sikh War Sannyasi rebellion Rebellion of 1857 Radcliffe Line more Philosophies and ideologies Ambedkarism Gandhism Hindu nationalism Indian nationalism Khilafat Movement Muslim nationalism in South Asia Satyagraha Socialism Swadeshi movement Swaraj Events and movements Partition of Bengal (1905) Partition of Bengal (1947) Revolutionaries Direct Action Day Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy The Indian Sociologist Singapore Mutiny Hindu–German Conspiracy Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Rowlatt Committee Rowlatt Bills Jallianwala Bagh massacre Noakhali riots Non-cooperation movement Christmas Day Plot Coolie-Begar movement Chauri Chaura incident, 1922 Kakori conspiracy Qissa Khwani massacre Flag Satyagraha Bardoli 1928 Protests Nehru Report Fourteen Points of Jinnah Purna Swaraj Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vedaranyam March Chittagong armoury raid Gandhi–Irwin Pact Round table conferences Act of 1935 Aundh Experiment Indian Legion Cripps Mission Quit India Bombay Mutiny Royal Air Force strikes Coup d'état of Yanaon Provisional Government of India Independence Day Praja Mandala movement Lucknow Pact Organisations All India Kisan Sabha All-India Muslim League Anushilan Samiti Arya Samaj Azad Hind Berlin Committee Ghadar Movement Hindustan Socialist Republican Association Indian National Congress India House Indian Home Rule movement Indian Independence League Indian National Army Jugantar Khaksar movement Khudai Khidmatgar Swaraj Party more Social reformers Ashfaqulla Khan A. Vaidyanatha Iyer Ayya Vaikundar Ayyankali B. R. Ambedkar Baba Amte Bal Gangadhar Tilak Dayananda Saraswati Dhondo Keshav Karve G. Subramania Iyer Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty Gopal Ganesh Agarkar Gopal Hari Deshmukh Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar J. B. Kripalani Jyotirao Phule Kandukuri Veeresalingam Mahadev Govind Ranade Mahatma Gandhi Muthulakshmi Reddy Narayana Guru Niralamba Swami Pandita Ramabai Periyar Ram Mohan Roy Rettamalai Srinivasan Sahajanand Saraswati Savitribai Phule Shahu Sister Nivedita Sri Aurobindo Syed Ahmad Khan Vakkom Moulavi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Vinoba Bhave Vitthal Ramji Shinde Vivekananda Independence activists Abul Kalam Azad Accamma Cherian Achyut Patwardhan A. K. Fazlul Huq Alluri Sitarama Raju Annapurna Maharana Annie Besant Ashfaqulla Khan Babu Kunwar Singh Bagha Jatin Bahadur Shah II Bakht Khan Bal Gangadhar Tilak Basawon Singh Begum Hazrat Mahal Bhagat Singh Bharathidasan Bhavabhushan Mitra Bhikaiji Cama Bhupendra Kumar Datta Bidhan Chandra Roy Bipin Chandra Pal C. Rajagopalachari Chandra Shekhar Azad Chetram Jatav Chittaranjan Das Dadabhai Naoroji Dayananda Saraswati Dhan Singh Dukkipati Nageswara Rao Gopal Krishna Gokhale Govind Ballabh Pant Har Dayal Hemu Kalani Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi Jatindra Mohan Sengupta Jatindra Nath Das Jawaharlal Nehru K. Kamaraj Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Khudiram Bose Shri Krishna Singh Lala Lajpat Rai M. Bhaktavatsalam M. N. Roy Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi Mahadaji Shinde Mahatma Gandhi Mangal Pandey Mir Qasim Mithuben Petit Mohammad Ali Jauhar Muhammad Ali Jinnah Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari Nagnath Naikwadi Nana Fadnavis Nana Saheb P. Kakkan Prafulla Chaki Pritilata Waddedar Purushottam Das Tandon Rafi Ahmed Kidwai R. Venkataraman Rahul Sankrityayan Rajendra Prasad Ram Prasad Bismil Rani Lakshmibai Rash Behari Bose Sahajanand Saraswati Sangolli Rayanna Sarojini Naidu Satyapal Dang Shuja-ud-Daula Shyamji Krishna Varma Sibghatullah Shah Rashidi Siraj ud-Daulah Subhas Chandra Bose Subramania Bharati Subramaniya Siva Surya Sen Syama Prasad Mukherjee Tara Rani Srivastava Tarak Nath Das Tatya Tope Tiruppur Kumaran Ubaidullah Sindhi V. O. Chidamabaram V. K. Krishna Menon Vallabhbhai Patel Vanchinathan Veeran Sundaralingam Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Virendranath Chattopadhyaya Yashwantrao Holkar Yogendra Shukla more British leaders Wavell Canning Cornwallis Irwin Chelmsford Curzon Ripon Minto Dalhousie Bentinck Mountbatten Wellesley Lytton Clive Outram Cripps Linlithgow Hastings Independence Cabinet Mission Constitution Republic of India Indian annexation of Goa Indian Independence Act Partition of India Political integration Simla Conference NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐djgh9
Cached time: 20250814214948
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.620 seconds
Real time usage: 0.763 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2815/1000000
Revision size: 25760/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 218493/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9263/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87049/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.324/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13220024/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  521.823      1 -total
 26.01%  135.702      1 Template:Reflist
 20.96%  109.396      1 Template:Langx
 18.20%   94.963      7 Template:Cite_book
 17.94%   93.618      5 Template:Navbox
 14.92%   77.872      1 Template:Mohandas_K._Gandhi
 10.77%   56.194      1 Template:Short_description
  5.73%   29.879      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.24%   27.333     10 Template:Quote
  3.81%   19.876     15 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:167148:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214948 and revision id 1286075600. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Satyagraha&oldid=1286075600 " Categories : Activism by type Ethical schools and movements Gandhism Nonviolence Pacifism in India Truth Nonviolent resistance movements Nonviolent revolutions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from December 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from December 2015 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 15:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Satyagraha 55 languages Add topic

