Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Formation 1.2 Voter guides 1.3 Political involvement 1.4 2000s 2 Controversy 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Christian Coalition of America 8 languages Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 32°58′2″N 80°2′47″W ﻿ / ﻿ 32.96722°N 80.04639°W ﻿ / 32.96722; -80.04639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian organization This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( April 2015 ) Christian Coalition of America Abbreviation CCA Founded 30 April 1987 (38 years ago) ( 1987-04-30 ) [ 2 ] Founder Marion Gordon "Pat" Robertson Type nonprofit Tax ID no.

75-2372537 Legal status 501(c)(4) [ 1 ] Location North Charleston, SC , US [ 1 ] President Roberta Combs [ 3 ] Secretary Drew McKissick [ 1 ] Finance director Neal Meyer [ 1 ] Revenue $766,799 [ 1 ] (2018) Expenses $730,918 [ 1 ] (2018) Employees 0 [ 1 ] (2018) Website cc .org This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Christian Coalition of America ( CCA ), a 501(c)(4) organization, is the successor to the original Christian Coalition created in 1987 by religious broadcaster and former presidential candidate Marion Gordon "Pat" Robertson .

[ 4 ] This US Christian advocacy group includes members of various Christian denominations , including Baptists (50%), mainline Protestants (25%), Roman Catholics (16%), and Pentecostals (10% to 12%) among communicants of other churches.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Formation [ edit ] On April 30, 1987, the Christian Coalition was incorporated in Richmond, Virginia .

[ 2 ] The following year, after a well-funded but unsuccessful campaign for President , Pat Robertson , a religious broadcaster and political commentator, used the remainder of his campaign resources to jump-start the formation of the Christian Coalition's voter-mobilization effort.

Americans for Robertson accumulated a mailing list of several million conservative Christians interested in politics. This mailing provided the basis of the new organization.

The coalition had four original directors: Robertson, his son Gordon Robertson, Dick Weinhold, head of the Texas organization, and, Billy McCormack , pastor of the University Worship Center in Shreveport , Louisiana . McCormack had headed the Louisiana division of Americans for Robertson in 1988 [ 7 ] and was also the vice president of the coalition.

[ 8 ] After its founding, the Christian Coalition applied to become a tax-exempt charitable organization with the Internal Revenue Service .

[ 9 ] Forty-nine state chapters formed as independent corporations within their states, including the Christian Coalition of Texas. A handful, including the Christian Coalition of Texas, successfully obtained tax-exempt status as social-welfare organizations . After ten years, the Internal Revenue Service declined the Christian Coalition's application for charitable status because it engaged in political activities.

[ 9 ] In response, the Christian Coalition of Texas was renamed the Christian Coalition of America, and the organization relocated in order to work nationwide.

[ 9 ] Voter guides [ edit ] In 1990, the national Christian Coalition, Inc., headquartered in Chesapeake, Virginia , began producing non-partisan voter guides which it distributed to conservative Christian churches. Complaints that the voter guides were partisan led to the denial by the IRS of the Christian Coalition, Inc.'s tax-exempt status in 1999.

[ 10 ] Later that same year, the coalition prevailed in its five-year defense of a lawsuit brought by the Federal Election Commission .

[ 11 ] Ralph Reed , an Emory University Ph.D. candidate, whom Robertson had met when the younger man was working as a waiter at an inaugural dinner for George H. W. Bush in January 1989, took control of day-to-day operations of the coalition in 1989 as its founding executive director. He remained in the post until August 1997 when he left to enter partisan political consulting, founding his new firm Century Strategies, based near Atlanta, Georgia.

[ 12 ] Political involvement [ edit ] Robertson served as the organization's president from its founding until June 1997, when President Reagan 's Cabinet Secretary Donald P. Hodel was named president of the CCA, and former U.S. Representative Randy Tate (R-WA) was named executive director.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Upon announcement of Hodel becoming president of the CCA, Robertson expressed a desire to serve the grassroots activists that made up the coalition.

[ citation needed ] Grover Norquist , Washington insider, president of Americans for Tax Reform , and an old Reed ally, said of the appointments: "What you've got is Reagan and Gingrich . Hodel is a Reagan Republican and Tate is a Gingrich Republican." [ 15 ] Late in 1997 the CCA was ranked by Fortune magazine as the 7th most powerful political organization in America.

[ 16 ] After a disagreement with Robertson, Hodel left in January 1999 [ 17 ] and Tate soon followed. Robertson took over the presidency. Later in 2001 he turned it and the chairmanship over to Roberta Combs, the group's executive vice president and former state chairman of South Carolina, when he officially left the coalition.

[ 18 ] 2000s [ edit ] In 2000, the coalition moved from Chesapeake, Virginia , to a large office on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C.

Combs is the current president and CEO of the Christian Coalition of America. She is a founding state director and has been the only woman on the board of directors in the history of the Christian Coalition of America. Since moving to the capital, Combs installed members of her family as high-ranking officials in the group, including her daughter Michele Ammons and son-in-law Tracy Ammons. Michele and Tracy Ammons later divorced. Combs fired her former son-in-law Tracy Ammons after her daughter received a judgement against him for alimony and child support. Combs had filed an affidavit on her behalf on Coalition letterhead.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Combs canceled a direct-mail fund-raising campaign run by fund-raiser Bill Sidebottom of Interact Response Communications aimed at fighting child pornography after a U.S. Supreme Court ruling. The cancellation of the campaign in the middle of its run led to nearly a dozen lawsuits by creditors and the bankruptcy of its fund-raising company. Without a fund-raising company supporting it, the Christian Coalition went into sharp decline financially.

[ 21 ] In March 2001, the Christian Coalition of America was sued by its African-American employees, who alleged racial discrimination.

[ 22 ] The District Court issued an injunction against the Christian Coalition. The case was settled and the African-American plaintiffs received a payment.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] In November 2002, Combs downsized the staff and moved the organization's offices from Washington, D.C., to a suburb of Charleston, South Carolina . The coalition reduced its lobbyists in Washington from a dozen to one.

[ 27 ] The Christian Coalition was later sued for $1,890 by Reese & Sons Enterprises of Maryland, the moving company it used for transporting its goods to South Carolina, because of failure to pay the wrapping and packing fee. The coalition lost in court in Richmond, Virginia, and finally paid the movers.

[ 25 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Other reported debts have been $69,729 owed to its longtime law firm, Huff, Poole & Mahoney PC of Virginia Beach, and Global Direct, a fundraising firm in Oklahoma, sued for $87,000 in expenses.

[ 20 ] From the time Robertson left the group in 2001 until 2006, the coalition's influence greatly declined. Revenue declined from a high of $26.5 million in 1996 to $1.3 million in 2004. The organization's 2004 income tax return showed the Christian Coalition to be technically bankrupt, with debts exceeding assets by more than $2 million.

[ 28 ] In 2005, the coalition finally concluded a settlement agreement with the Internal Revenue Service , ending its long-running battle with that agency regarding its tax exempt status .

[ 30 ] As a result, the IRS has recognized the coalition as a 501(c)(4) tax-exempt organization, the first time in the agency's history that it has granted a letter of exemption to a group that stated in its application that it would distribute voter guides directly in churches. The consent decree enforces limitations on the terminology that may be used in the coalition's voter guides.

[ 30 ] In late 2005, The Washington Post reported that the Christian Coalition was unable to pay its office postage bill to Pitney Bowes . In addition, it had not paid new lawyers in Virginia Beach; the law firm sued the coalition.

[ 25 ] In March 2006, the Christian Coalition of Iowa renamed itself the Iowa Christian Alliance. In splitting from the national group, the Iowa Christian Alliance cited "the current problems facing the Christian Coalition of America". In August 2006, the Christian Coalition of Alabama split from the national group. It later renamed itself Christian Action Alabama.

[ 28 ] [ 31 ] In November 2006, the president-elect of the Christian Coalition of America resigned his post, citing a difference in philosophy over which issues the organization should embrace. Reverend Joel Hunter , currently the senior pastor of the Northland Church in Longwood, Florida , was to assume the presidency in January. However, Hunter stated the coalition's leaders resisted his calls to expand their issue base, saying it would not expand the agenda beyond opposing abortion and same-sex marriage. Hunter also said he wanted to focus on rebuilding the coalition's once powerful grassroots, an appeal he says board members rejected. "After initial willingness to consider these changes, the board of the CCA decided, 'that is fine, but that is not who we are'", Hunter said. Combs continues as the coalition's president.

[ 32 ] As of December 31, 2018, the Christian Coalition reported that it had $274,920 of cash on hand, and that it owed $39,367.

[ 1 ] During 2018, it received $766,799 of contributions, and it had spent $133,000 on management; $7,500 on advertisement and promotion; $162,000 on conferences, conventions, and meetings; $29,500 on affiliate payments; and $133,418 on other expenses.

[ 1 ] Controversy [ edit ] Unsurprisingly, many members of the coalition have been subject to criminal and sexual controversy. Notably members include: Beverly C. Russell Jr.

- Serially molested his daughter See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Conservatism portal Family Research Council Focus on the Family Secular Coalition for America References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i " Form 990: Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax ".

Christian Coalition . December 31, 2018.

^ a b " Christian Coalition ".

Clerk's Information System . Virginia State Corporation Commission. Retrieved November 9, 2020.

^ " About Us ".

Christian Coalition of America . Retrieved November 9, 2020.

^ Vaughan, Joel D. (2009-06-15).

The Rise and Fall of the Christian Coalition: The Inside Story . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-60608-580-6 .

^ Smidt, Corwin E.; Penning, James M. (1997).

Sojourners in the Wilderness: The Christian Right in Comparative Perspective . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 49.

ISBN 9780847686452 .

Thus far, this ecumenical appeal appears to be working. The limited evidence available suggests that the Christian Coalition has attracted members from across denominational lines. Ralph Reed revealed that an internal poll of Christian Coalition members indicated that 25 percent belonged to mainline Protestant churches, 10 to 15 percent attended Pentecostal services, half were Baptists, and 5 to 10 percent attended "other" churches, including the Catholic church (Rozell and Wilcox 1995). More recently, the Christian Coalition has reported that Catholics comprise 16 percent of its total membership.

^ Young, Neil J. (1 October 2015).

We Gather Together: The Religious Right and the Problem of Interfaith Politics . Oxford University Press. p. 247.

ISBN 9780199908868 .

In 1995, an internal survey of the Christian Coalition found that 16 percent of its 1.7 million members were Catholics.

^ "Pulpits and Politics: The Role of Religion in Elections, September 27, 2004" . justicetalking.org. Archived from the original on September 23, 2013 . Retrieved June 6, 2012 .

^ "We've Come a Long Way, Baby, in Race Relations, March 16, 2008" . demo.openlogicsys.com . Retrieved June 6, 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c Edsall, Thomas B.; Rosin, Hanna (June 11, 1999). "Christian Coalition, Denied Tax-Exempt Status, Will Reorganize".

The Washington Post . p. A4.

ProQuest 408482611 .

^ "IRS Denies Christian Coalition Tax-Exempt Status" .

The Washington Post . June 12, 1999.

^ Vaughan, Joel D. (2009-06-15).

The Rise and Fall of the Christian Coalition: The Inside Story . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 177.

ISBN 978-1-60608-580-6 .

^ E. J. Dionne, "The Religious Right Loses Its Most Skilled Tactician", (Norfolk) Virginian Pilot , 24 April 1997.

^ Vaughan, Joel D. (2009-06-15).

The Rise and Fall of the Christian Coalition: The Inside Story . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 125.

ISBN 978-1-60608-580-6 .

^ Peter Baker and Laurie Goodstein, "Christian Coalition Rearranges Top Posts", The Washington Post , June 12, 1997.

^ Baker and Goodstein.

^ Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, "Washington's Power 25", Fortune , 8 December 1997, pp. 144-158.

^ Ralph Z. Hallow, "Christian Coalition President Resigns", Washington Times , 10 February 1999.

^ Vaughan, Joel D. (2009-06-15).

The Rise and Fall of the Christian Coalition: The Inside Story . Wipf and Stock Publishers. pp.

151– 163.

ISBN 978-1-60608-580-6 .

^ "Christian Coalition fights bitter lawsuit after divorce" .

The Washington Times . December 2, 2004 . Retrieved February 21, 2013 .

^ a b Cooperman, Alan; Edsall, Thomas B. (April 10, 2006).

"Christian Coalition Shrinks as Debt Grows" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 21, 2013 .

^ Sizemore, Bill (October 8, 2005).

"Once-powerful group teeters on insolvency" .

The Virginian-Pilot . Archived from the original on October 11, 2013 . Retrieved February 21, 2013 .

^ "10 Blacks Allege Bias at Christian Coalition," Washington Post, 31 March 2001.

^ "Worldscan" . Thelutheran.org. 1980-01-01 . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ "Bishop Eddie Long and His Church Align with Others to Promote Anti-Gay Agenda | Southern Poverty Law Center" . Splcenter.org . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ a b c "Christian Coalition falls on lean days" .

The Washington Times . 2005-10-13 . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ [1] Archived 2001-03-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ Crowley, Michael (2011-03-08).

"Religion, the Economy and 'Weird and Kinky' Lifestyles at a GOP 2012 Forum in Iowa" .

Time . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ a b c Cooperman, Alan; Edsall, Thomas B. (April 10, 2006).

"Christian Coalition Shrinks as Debt Grows" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Christian Coalition sued for unpaid bill" .

The Washington Times . 2006-01-19 . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ a b Cooperman, Alan; Thomas B. Edsall (2006-04-10).

"Christian Coalition Shrinks as Debt Grows" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2007-03-10 .

^ Kornhaber, Spencer (2007-11-08).

"A Rebuke Of Robertson From Iowa's Powerful Christian Alliance" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2015-04-07 .

^ Banerjee, Neela (November 28, 2006).

"Pastor Chosen to Lead Christian Coalition Steps Down in Dispute Over Agenda" .

The New York Times .

External links [ edit ] Official website "Christian Coalition of America" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal 32°58′2″N 80°2′47″W ﻿ / ﻿ 32.96722°N 80.04639°W ﻿ / 32.96722; -80.04639 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_Coalition_of_America&oldid=1304077689 " Categories : Political advocacy groups in the United States Political party factions in the United States Political organizations based in the United States Christian organizations based in the United States 501(c)(4) nonprofit organizations Organizations established in 1989 1987 establishments in the United States Organizations based in South Carolina Conservative organizations in the United States Pat Robertson Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2015 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2012 Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 20:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian Coalition of America 8 languages Add topic

