Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Quran 2 Birth Toggle Birth subsection 2.1 Annunciation 2.2 Birth narratives 3 Childhood Toggle Childhood subsection 3.1 In Egypt 4 Adulthood Toggle Adulthood subsection 4.1 Mission 4.2 Preaching 5 Miracles Toggle Miracles subsection 5.1 Speaking from the cradle 5.2 Creating birds from clay 5.3 Healing the blind and the lepers 5.4 Raising the dead 5.5 Prescience 5.6 Table of food from Heaven 5.7 Other miracles 5.7.1 Healing a royal official's son 5.7.2 Greed and truth-telling 5.7.3 Inherent wisdom 5.7.4 Food in children's homes 6 Revelation 7 Disciples 8 Ascension Toggle Ascension subsection 8.1 Substitution 8.2 Symbolic interpretations 9 Apocalyptic literature Toggle Apocalyptic literature subsection 9.1 Sources 10 Islamic theology Toggle Islamic theology subsection 10.1 Similitude with Adam 10.2 Precursor to Muhammad 10.3 Messianism 11 Islamic literature Toggle Islamic literature subsection 11.1 Hadith 11.2 Sunni Islam 11.3 Shia Islam 11.4 Sufism 11.4.1 Ascetic literature 12 Ahmadiyya literature 13 Appearance 14 See also 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Notes 15.2 Citations 15.3 Sources 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Jesus in Islam 68 languages Acèh Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية অসমীয়া Авар Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Latviešu Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Penultimate prophet in Islam In Islam, Isa refers to Jesus. For other uses, see Isa (disambiguation) and Isa (name) .

Prophet ʿĪsā عِيسَىٰ Jesus Isa feeding his disciples with food from heaven.

Born c.

4 BCE Herodian Kingdom or Judea , Roman Empire Disappeared c.

33 CE Gethsemane , Jerusalem , Judea, Roman Empire Known for Being the Messiah , prophet Predecessor Yahya ( John the Baptist ) Successor Muhammad Opponent Al-Masih ad-Dajjal Parent Maryam bint Imran (mother) Relatives Zakariyyā (adoptive maternal grandfather) Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā (maternal cousin) In Islam , Jesus ( Arabic : عِيسَىٰ ٱبْنُ مَرْيَمَ ‎ , romanized : ʿĪsā ibn Maryam , lit.

'Jesus, son of Mary '), referred to by the Arabic rendering of his name Isa , is believed to be the penultimate prophet and messenger of God ( Allāh ) and the Messiah being the last of the messengers sent to the Israelites ( Banī Isra'īl ) with a revelation called the Injīl (Evangel or Gospel). In Quran , Jesus is described as the Messiah ( Arabic : المسيح , romanized : al-Masīḥ ), born of a virgin , performing miracles, accompanied by his disciples, and rejected by the Jewish establishment; in contrast to the traditional Christian narrative, however, he is stated neither to have been crucified, nor to have been resurrected , rather, he is depicted as having been miraculously saved by God and as having ascended into heaven. The Quran places Jesus among the greatest prophets and mentions him with various titles . The prophethood of Jesus is preceded by that of Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā ( John the Baptist ) and succeeded by Muhammad , the coming of latter of whom Jesus is reported in the Quran to have foretold under the name Ahmad .

Most Christians view Jesus as God incarnate , the Son of God in human flesh, but the Quran denies the divinity of Jesus and his status as Son of God in several verses, and also says that Jesus did not claim to be personally God nor the Son of God. Islam teaches that Jesus' original message was altered ( taḥrīf ) after his being raised alive. The monotheism ( tawḥīd ) of Jesus is emphasized in the Quran. Like all prophets in Islam, Jesus is also called a Muslim ( lit. submitter [to God ] ), as he preached that his followers should adopt the ' straight path ' ( Ṣirāṭ al-Mustaqīm ). Jesus is attributed with a vast number of miracles in Islamic tradition.

In their views of Islamic eschatology , most accounts state that Jesus will return in the Second Coming to kill the Al-Masih ad-Dajjal ('The False Messiah'), after which the ancient tribe of Gog and Magog ( Yaʾjūj Maʾjūj ) will disperse. After God has gotten rid of them, Jesus will assume rulership of the world, establish peace and justice, and finally die a natural death and be buried alongside Muhammad in
the fourth reserved tomb of the Green Dome in Medina .

The place where Jesus is believed to return, the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus , is highly esteemed by Muslims as the fourth holiest site of Islam . Jesus is widely venerated in Sufism , with numerous ascetic and mystic literature written and recited about him where he is often portrayed as the paragon of asceticism, divine love, and inner purity.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Quran [ edit ] Part of a series on Islam Islamic prophets Prophets in the Quran Listed by Islamic name and Biblical name.

ʾĀdam ( Adam ) ʾIdrīs ( Enoch ) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Hūd ( Eber ) Ṣāliḥ ( Selah ) ʾIbrāhīm ( Abraham ) Lūṭ ( Lot ) ʾIsmāʿīl ( Ishmael ) ʾIsḥāq ( Isaac ) Yaʿqūb ( Jacob ) Yūsuf ( Joseph ) Ayūb ( Job ) Shuʿayb ( Jethro ) Mūsā ( Moses ) Hārūn ( Aaron ) Dhu al-Kifl ( Ezekiel ) Dāūd ( David ) Sulaymān ( Solomon ) Yūnus ( Jonah ) ʾIlyās ( Elijah ) Alyasaʿ ( Elisha ) Zakarīya ( Zechariah ) Yaḥyā ( John ) ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Muḥammad ( Muhammad ) Main events Stories of the Prophets The Three Messengers Views Jews, Christians, and Muslims prophets Abrahamic prophets Islam portal v t e Jesus is referred to in the Quran throughout 15 Surahs .

[ 3 ] The Quran emphasizes Jesus as a prophet, unique in creation, born out of a virgin, and messenger from God.

[ 4 ] He is usually referred to as "ʿĪsā ibn Maryam" (Jesus son of Mary), "al-Masih ibn Maryam" (The Christ son of Mary), al-Masīḥ and few times in 23:50 and 43:57 as Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Jesus is described as God’s word ( kalima ), which appears to be the equivalent of the Greek logos , imparted to Mary and to be his spirit.

[ 7 ] Yet, the Quran rejects the identification of Jesus and God (Surah 5:73, 116) in order to protect God's absolute unity ( tawhid ).

[ 8 ] Jesus is understood to have preached salvation through submission to God's will and worshipping God alone. The Quran states that Jesus will ultimately deny claiming divinity in 5:116 . Thus, he is considered to have been a Muslim by the religious definition of the term (i.e., one who submits to God's will).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Quran only denied Jewish crucifixion of Jesus rather than stating that Jesus was not crucified(4:157).

[ 11 ] Birth [ edit ] Main article: Nativity of Jesus See also: Maryam (surah) and Mary in Islam Islam's account of Jesus begins with a prologue narrated several times in the Quran which first describes the birth of his mother, Mary, and her service in the Jerusalem temple while under the care of the prophet Zechariah , who would become the father of Yahya ( John the Baptist ). The Quran's birth narrative of Jesus begins at Quran 19:16-34 and 3:45-53 .

[ 12 ] This birth narrative has been recounted with certain variations and detailed additions by Islamic historians over the centuries. In the matter of the virgin birth of Jesus , while Islamic theology affirms Mary as a pure vessel, it does not follow the concept of Immaculate Conception as related to Mary's birth in some Christian traditions.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Annunciation [ edit ] See also: Annunciation The Annunciation , from The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries , copied in 1307 Islamic exegesis affirms the virginal birth of Jesus – similarly to the Gospel account and occurring in Bethlehem .

[ 16 ] The narrative of the virgin birth opens with an announcement to Mary by the angel Gabriel while Mary is being raised in the Temple after having been pledged to God by her mother. Gabriel states she is honored over all women of all nations and has brought her glad tidings of a pure son.

[ 17 ] Gabriel declares the son is to be named Jesus, the Messiah, proclaiming he will be called a great prophet. Mary, asking how she could conceive and have a child when no man had touched her, was answered by the angel that God can decree what he wills, and that it shall come to pass.

[ 18 ] The narrative from the Quran continues with Mary, overcome by the pains of childbirth, being provided with a stream of water under her feet from which she could drink, and with a palm tree which she could shake so ripe dates would fall and be enjoyed. After giving birth, Mary carries the baby Jesus back to the temple and is asked by the temple elders about the child. Having been commanded by Gabriel to a vow of silence, she points to the infant Jesus and the infant proclaims: ˹Jesus˺ declared, “I am truly a servant of Allah. He has destined me to be given the Scripture and to be a prophet.

He has made me a blessing wherever I go, and bid me to establish prayer and give alms-tax as long as I live, and to be kind to my mother. He has not made me arrogant or defiant.

Peace be upon me the day I was born, the day I die, and the day I will be raised back to life!” — Surah Maryam 19:30-33 [ 19 ] Jesus speaking from the cradle is one of six miracles attributed to him in the Quran, an account which is also found in the Syriac Infancy Gospel , a sixth-century work.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] According to various hadiths , Jesus and Mary did not cry at birth.

[ 22 ] Birth narratives [ edit ] Maryam (left) the palm tree under which the nativity occurred according to the Quran with baby Isa (left).

The Islamic faith echoed some strands within the Christian tradition that Mary (or Maryam) was a literal virgin when Jesus was conceived. The most detailed account of the annunciation and birth of Jesus is provided in Surah 3 ( Al Imran ) and 19 ( Maryam ) of the Quran, where the story is narrated that God (Allah) sent an angel to announce that Maryam could shortly expect to bear a son, despite being a virgin.

[ 23 ] Some academics have noted that the account in Surah 19 is particularly close to that in the Christian Gospel of Luke .

[ 24 ] The Annunciation to Mary is mentioned twice in the Quran, and in both instances Mary/Maryam is told that she was chosen by God to deliver a son. In the first instance, the bearer of the news (who is believed by most Muslims to be the archangel Gabriel), delivered the news in ( 3:42-47 ) as he takes the form of a man ( 19:16-22 ).

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The details of the conception according to 66:12 and 21:89 , Mary conceives Jesus by being blown into her womb through the spirit (i.e. archangel Gabriel), Mary asks how she can bear a son in view of her chastity, she is told that God creates what he wills and that these things are easy for God.

[ 25 ] The 8th-century Muslim historian Ibn Ishaq (704–767), wrote the account entitled Kitab al-Mubtada ('In the Beginning'), reporting that Zechariah is Mary's guardian briefly, and after being incapable of maintaining her, he entrusts her to a carpenter named George. Secluded in a church, she is joined by a young man named Joseph, and they help one another fetching water and other tasks. The account of the birth of Jesus follows the Quran's narrative, adding that the birth occurred in Bethlehem beside a palm tree with a manger.

[ 27 ] Maryam holding the baby Isa.

The 10th-century Persian scholar al-Tabari (839–923) mentions envoys arriving from the king of Persia with gifts (similar to the Magi from the east ) for the Messiah; the command to a man called Joseph (not specifically Mary's husband) to take her and the child to Egypt and later return to Nazareth .

[ 28 ] The Fatimid Ismaili jurist Qadi al-Nu'man also contributed to the narrative, explaining that the virgin birth of Jesus is meant to be interpreted symbolically. In his interpretation, Mary was the follower ( lāḥiq ), of the Imam Joachim ('Imran). However, when Joachim realized that she was not suited for the Imamah , he passed it to Zechariah, who then passed it to John the Baptist. Meanwhile, Mary received spiritual inspiration ( mādda ) from God, revealing that he would invite a man (to the faith) who would become an exalted Speaker ( nāṭiq ) of a revealed religion ( sharīʿa ). According to al-Nu'man, the verses "She said: Lord! How can I have a child when no man has touched me?" ( 3:47 ) and "neither have I been unchaste" ( 19:20 ) are symbolic of Mary's saying, "How can I conduct the invitation ( daʿwa ) when the Imam of the Time has not given me permission to do so?" and "Nor shall I be unfaithful by acting against his command", respectively. To this, a celestial hierarch replies "Such is God. He creates [i.e., causes to pass] what he wills" ( Quran 3:47 ).

[ 29 ] Childhood [ edit ] Main article: Finding in the Temple See also: Flight into Egypt and Infancy Gospel of Thomas The Quran does not include the tradition of the Flight into Egypt , though sūrah 23:50 could conceivably allude to it: "And we made the son of Maryam and his mother a sign; and we made them abide in an elevated place, full of quiet and watered with springs." [ 30 ] However, narratives similar to the narrative found in the Gospels and non-canonical sources circulated in later Islamic tradition, with some details and elaborations added over the centuries by Islamic writers and historians. Some narratives have Jesus and family staying in Egypt up to 12 years.

[ 31 ] Many moral stories and miraculous events of Jesus' youth are mentioned in Qisas al-anbiya ('Stories of the Prophets'), books composed over the centuries about pre-Islamic prophets and heroes.

[ 18 ] Al-Masudi wrote that Jesus as a boy studied the Jewish religion reading from the Psalms and found "traced in characters of light": You are my son and my beloved; I have chosen you for myself with Jesus then claiming: Today the word of God is fulfilled in the son of man.

[ 28 ] In Egypt [ edit ] See also: Infancy Gospel of Thomas Several narratives show some disparity and similarity in Islamic writings about Jesus' early childhood, specifically his time in Egypt with regard to duration and events. Most of the narratives are found in non-canonical Christian sources like, for example, the pre-Islamic Gospel of Thomas. One such disparity is from al-Athir in his The Perfection of History which contains a birth narrative stating Jesus was born in Egypt instead of Bethlehem.

[ 32 ] Some other narratives of Jesus' childhood are popular Middle Eastern lore as highlighted by professor of interfaith studies Mahmoud M. Ayoub .

[ 33 ] Many miracles are attributed to a young Jesus while in Egypt [ 31 ] (see the sections Miracles and Other miracles ).

Adulthood [ edit ] The Jordan River , where Jesus was baptized by Yahya ibn Zakariya ( John the Baptist ) [ 34 ] Mission [ edit ] See also: Ministry of Jesus and Apostle (Islam) It is generally agreed that Jesus spoke Galilean Aramaic , a dialect of the common language of Judea in the first century and the region at-large.

[ 35 ] The first and earliest view of Jesus formulated in Islamic thought is that of a prophet – a human being chosen by God to present both a judgment upon humanity and challenge to turn to the one true God. From this basis, reflected upon all previous prophets through the lens of Muslim identity, Jesus is considered no more than repeating a message of the ages. The miracles of Jesus and the Quranic titles attributed to him demonstrate the power of God rather than the divinity of Jesus – the same power behind the message of all prophets. Some Islamic traditions believe Jesus' mission was only to the children of Israel and his status as a prophet being confirmed by numerous miracles.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] A second early high image of Jesus is an end-time figure. This concept arises mostly from the Hadith. Muslim tradition constructs a narrative similarly found in Christian theology, seeing Jesus arriving at the end of time and descending upon earth to fight the Antichrist. This narrative is understood to champion the cause of Islam, with some traditions narrating Jesus pointing to the primacy of Muhammad. Most traditions state Jesus will then die a natural death.

[ 38 ] A third and distinctive image is of Jesus representing an ascetic figure – a prophet of the heart. Although the Quran refers to the 'gospel' of Jesus, those specific teachings of his are not mentioned in the Quran or later religious texts. They are largely absent. The Sufi tradition is where Jesus became revered, acknowledged as a spiritual teacher with a distinctive voice from other prophets, including Muhammad. Sufism tends to explore the dimensions of union with God through many approaches, including asceticism, poetry, philosophy, speculative suggestion, and mystical methods. Although Sufism to the Western mind may seem to share similar origins or elements of Neoplatonism, Gnosticism, and Buddhism, the ideology is distinctly Islamic since they adhere to the words of the Quran and pursue imitation of Muhammad as the perfect man.

[ 39 ] Preaching [ edit ] The Islamic concepts of Jesus' preaching is believed to have originated in Kufa , Iraq, under the Rashidun Caliphate where the earliest writers of Muslim tradition and scholarship was formulated. The concepts of Jesus and his preaching ministry developed in Kufa was adopted from the early ascetic Christians of Egypt who opposed official church bishopric appointments from Rome.

[ 40 ] The earliest stories, numbering about 85, are found in two major collections of ascetic literature entitled Kitab al-Zuhd wa'l Raqa'iq ('The Book of the Asceticism and Tender Mercies') by Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak ( d.

797), and Kitab al-Zuhd ('The Book of Asceticism') by Ibn Hanbal ( d.

855). These sayings fall into four basic groups: eschatological sayings; quasi-Gospel sayings; ascetic sayings and stories; sayings echoing intra-Muslim polemics.

[ 41 ] The first group of sayings expands Jesus' archetype as portrayed in the Quran. The second group of stories, although containing a Gospel core, are expanded with a "distinctly Islamic stamp". The third group, being the largest of the four, portrays Jesus as a patron saint of Muslim asceticism. The last group builds upon the Islamic archetype and Muslim-centric definition of Jesus and his attributes, furthering esoteric ideas regarding terms such as "Spirit of God" and "Word of God" describing Jesus Christ, attributes given to the Islamic view of Jesus Christ as a holy angelic messenger divinely sent from heaven by God to his fleshly incarnation, like an Angel of the Lord in some other Messianic Christian traditions.

[ 42 ] Miracles [ edit ] Main article: Miracles of Jesus See also: Infancy Gospel of Thomas The Quran attributes at least six miracles to Jesus, with many more being added over the centuries by writers and historians. Miracles were attributed to Jesus as signs of his prophethood and his authority, according to educator and professor Musa Al-Husayni ( d.

1990), an author most known for Mudhakkirat Dajaja ('Memoirs of a Hen') (Cairo: Dar al-Maarif, 1943; 2nd ed. 1967). In Christ in the Quran and Modern Arabic Literature (1960), Al-Husayni said it is noteworthy Muhammad attributes no miracles to himself.

[ 43 ] These six miracles in the Quran are without detail unlike the Gospel and their non-canonical Gnostic sources, which include details and mention other attributed miracles.

[ 43 ] Over the centuries, these six miracle narratives have been elaborated through Hadith and poetry, with religious writings including some of the other miracles mentioned in the Gospel, non-canonical sources, and from lore.

[ 31 ] [ 33 ] Speaking from the cradle [ edit ] Speaking from the cradle is mentioned in three places in the Quran: 3:46 , 5:109-110 and 19:29-30 . Part of the narrative has the infant Jesus defending his mother Mary from the accusation of having given birth without a known husband.

[ 44 ] Early Islam was unclear about Joseph and his role. Jesus speaks as the angel Gabriel had mentioned at the annunciation: Jesus proclaims he is a servant of God, has been given a book, is a prophet, is blessed wherever he will go, blesses the day he was born, the day he will die, and the day he is raised alive.

[ 45 ] Although this particular narrative is not found in the Bible , the theme of speaking from the cradle is found in the non-canonical pre-Islamic Syriac Infancy Gospel . The Syriac Infancy Gospel has Jesus declaring himself the Son of God, the Word , and affirming what the angel Gabriel had previously announced to Mary as detailed in the Gospel.

[ 44 ] Creating birds from clay [ edit ] The miracle story of creating birds from clay and breathing life into them when a child is mentioned in 3:43-49 , 5:109-110 . Although this miracle is also not mentioned in the canonical Gospels, the same narrative is found in at least two pre-Islamic sources: the Infancy Gospel of Thomas and the Jewish Toledot Yeshu , with few variant details between the Quran and these two sources.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Healing the blind and the lepers [ edit ] See also: Healing the two blind men in Galilee and Cleansing ten lepers Similar to the New Testament , the Quran mentions Jesus healing the blind and the lepers in 3:49 . Muslim scholar and judge Al-Baydawi ( d.

1286) wrote how it was recorded that many thousands of people came to Jesus to be healed and that Jesus healed these diseases through prayer only.

[ 48 ] Medieval scholar Al-Tha'labi wrote about how these two particular diseases were beyond medical help, and Jesus' miracles were meant to be witnessed by others as clear signs of his message.

[ 46 ] Raising the dead [ edit ] Jesus is believed to have raised people from the dead, as mentioned in al-Imran 3:49 . Although no detail is given as to who was raised or the circumstance, at least three people are mentioned in detail in the Christian Gospel (a daughter of Jairus , a widow's son at Nain, and Lazarus ).

[ 49 ] Prescience [ edit ] Jesus was able to predict , or had foreknowledge , [ 50 ] of what was hidden or unknown to others. One example is Jesus would answer correctly any and every question anyone asked him. Another example is Jesus knew what people had just eaten, as well as what they had stored in their homes.

[ 31 ] Table of food from Heaven [ edit ] Main article: Feeding the multitude See also: Last Supper In the fifth chapter of the Quran, Surah Al-Ma'idah 5:112-115 , a narration mentions the disciples of Jesus requesting a table laden with food, and for it to be a special day of commemoration for them in the future. This may be a possible reference to the Eucharist according to professor of Islamic and Arabic studies W. Montgomery Watt ( d.

2006).

[ 51 ] According to professor of comparative religions Geoffrey Parrinder ( d.

2005), it is unclear if this story parallels the Gospel's Last Supper or the feeding the multitude , but may be tied to the Arabic word ʿīd (Muslim festival): [ 52 ] 5:112 ˹Remember˺ when the disciples asked, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Would your Lord be willing to send down to us a table spread with food from heaven?” Jesus answered, “Fear Allah if you are ˹truly˺ believers.” 5:113 They said, “We ˹only˺ wish to eat from it to reassure our hearts, to verify you are indeed truthful to us, and to become its witnesses.” 5:114 Jesus, son of Mary, prayed, “O Allah, our Lord! Send us from heaven a table spread with food as a feast for us—the first and last of us—and as a sign from You. Provide for us! You are indeed the Best Provider.” 5:115 Allah answered, “I am sending it down to you. But whoever among you denies afterwards will be subjected to a torment I have never inflicted on anyone of My creation.” — Surah Al-Ma'idah 5:112-115 [ 51 ] In a record by the Sunni exegete Tabari , before the last supper, the threat of death made him anxious. Therefore, Jesus invited his disciples for the last supper. After the meal, he washed their hands and performed their ablutions to wipe their hands on his clothing. Afterwards Jesus replied to them: "As for that I have done to you tonight, in that I served you the meal and washed your hands in person, let it be an example for you. Since you indeed consider me to be better than you, do not be haughty in relation to each other but rather expand yourselves for each other as I have expanded myself for you." After instructing the disciples in his teachings, Jesus foretells that one of them would deny him and another betray him. However, in accordance with Islamic views on Jesus' death , just a corpse in semblance of Jesus was crucified and Jesus himself was raised to God.

[ 53 ] Other miracles [ edit ] Many stories and narratives have been developed over the years about Jesus, containing certain inherent lessons or providing meaning due to the lack of detail in the Quran regarding Jesus. Some of these narratives are similar in nature to the New Testament , while some portray Jesus in a very human manner.

Besides some detailed summaries of miracles of Jesus mentioned by Muslim writers over the centuries, from adulthood (like walking on water – also found in the Gospel – and causing loaves of bread to come from the ground), [ 44 ] some other miracles from childhood include: explaining the Muslim creed fundamentals to a schoolmaster, revealing who the thieves were to a wealthy chief, filling empty jars of something to drink, providing food and wine for a tyrannical king while also proving to this king his power in raising a man from the dead, raising a child accidentally killed, and causing the garments from a single-colored vat to come out with various colors.

[ 31 ] Healing a royal official's son [ edit ] Main article: Healing the royal official's son Al-Tabari ( d.

923) reports a story of an adult Jesus' encounter with a certain king in the region and the healing of his son. The identity of the king is not mentioned while legend suggests Philip the Tetrarch . The corresponding Bible reference is "the royal official's son".

[ 54 ] Greed and truth-telling [ edit ] A legendary story of a miracle by a young Jesus, used as a hard-learned lesson popularly found in Middle Eastern lore according to professor Ayoub, has to do with a Jewish man and loaves of bread. Although carrying a polemic tone, the lesson centers on greed with truth-telling woven into the narration. It is a story found often in children's books.

[ 55 ] Inherent wisdom [ edit ] See also: Logos (Christianity) Another legendary miracle story is one regarding Jesus' childhood wisdom. This legend, reported through al-Tabari from ibn Ishaq, talks about Mary sending Jesus to a religious school and the teacher being astonished to find Jesus already knowing the information being taught / discussed.

[ 31 ] Food in children's homes [ edit ] Another story from al-Tabari tells of a young Jesus playing with the youths of his village and telling them what food their parents were preparing for them at home.

[ 31 ] According to the details of the narrative, some parents became annoyed and forbade their children to play with Jesus, suspecting he was a magician. As a result, the parents kept their children away from Jesus and gathered their children into a single house. One day, feeling lonely, Jesus went out looking for his friends, and coming upon this house he asked the parents where their children were. The parents lied, responding that the children were not there. After Jesus asks who, then, is in the house, the parents replied that there were swine inside. Jesus then says "Let them be swine!", with the parents then discovering that all the children had turned into swine.

[ 33 ] Over the centuries, Muslim writers have also referenced other miracles like casting out demons, having borrowed from some heretical pre-Islamic sources, and from canonical sources as legends about Jesus were expanded.

[ 31 ] Revelation [ edit ] Main article: Gospel in Islam See also: Ministry of Jesus Muslims believe that God revealed a new scripture to Jesus, called the al-Injil (the Gospel), while also declaring the truth of the previous revelations: al-Tawrat (the Torah ) and al-Zabur (the Psalms ).

[ 56 ] The Quran speaks favorably of al-Injīl , which it describes as a scripture that fills the hearts of its followers with meekness and piety. Traditional Islamic exegesis claims the biblical message to have been distorted ( tahrif ), is termed ta'yin al-mubham ("resolution of ambiguity").

[ 57 ] This polemic effort has its origins in the medieval period with Abd al-Jabbar ibn Ahmad 's writings.

[ 58 ] Regarding the Law of Moses , the Quran indicates that Jesus never abolished Jewish laws but rather confirmed them, while making partial abrogations only.

[ 59 ] Muslims have long believed that Paul purposefully corrupted the original teachings of Jesus.

[ 60 ] The 9th-century historian Sayf ibn Umar asserted that certain rabbis persuaded Paul to deliberately misguide early Christians by introducing what Ibn Hazm viewed as objectionable doctrines into Christianity.

[ 61 ] According to Yusuf al-Qaradawi in his book The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam , the legal restrictions Jesus abrogated for Jews were those initially legislated by God as a punishment.

[ 62 ] Classical commentaries such as Tafsir al-Jalalayn specify they pertained to the consumption of fish and bird meat without spikes, or in general.

[ 63 ] Disciples [ edit ] Main article: Disciples of Jesus in Islam The Quran states that Jesus was aided by a group of disciples ( Ḥawāriyyūn ) who believed in his message. While not naming the disciples, the Quran does give a few instances of Jesus preaching the message to them. Muslims view the disciples of Jesus as identical to the companions ( Ṣaḥāba ) of Muhammad.

[ 64 ] According to Christianity, the names of the twelve disciples were Peter , Andrew , James , John , Philip , Bartholomew , Thomas , Matthew , James , Jude , Simon , and Judas .

The Quran mentions in chapter 3, verses 52–53, that the disciples submitted to the faith of Islam: [ 65 ] When Jesus sensed disbelief from his people, he asked, “Who will stand up with me for Allah?” The disciples replied, “We will stand up for Allah. We believe in Allah, so bear witness that we have submitted.” ˹They prayed to Allah,˺ “Our Lord! We believe in Your revelations and follow the messenger, so count us among those who bear witness.” — Surah Al Imran 3:52-53 The longest narrative involving Jesus' disciples is when Jesus performs the miracle of bringing a table of food from heaven at their request, for further proof that his preaching is the true message.

Ascension [ edit ] Main article: Islamic view of Jesus' death Surah An-Nisa 4:157 is the primary verse of the Quran to refer to the event of Jesus' crucifixion.

[ 66 ] It says that Jesus was not killed and neither crucified, but "it was made to appear to them": [ 67 ] An-Nisa's verse 157 and for boasting, “We killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the messenger of Allah.” But they neither killed nor crucified him—it was only made to appear so. Even those who argue for this ˹crucifixion˺ are in doubt. They have no knowledge whatsoever—only making assumptions. They certainly did not kill him.

Most Islamic traditions categorically deny that Jesus physically died on the cross or otherwise.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] According to the Quran, he was not crucified , but was rather saved by God. (Although the earliest Islamic traditions and exegesis quote somewhat conflicting reports regarding a death and its length, Muslims believe that Jesus did not die on the cross, but believe that he was saved by being raised alive to heaven .) A minority, especially among the falāsifa , and some Ismāʿīlī interpreted walākin s̲h̲ubbiha lahum as meaning that the Jews intended to annihilate Jesus completely; but in fact, they crucified only his nāsūt (form), yet his lāhūt remained alive.

[ 70 ] The view is also recalled by some Sufis .

[ 71 ] Islamic illustration of a man outwardly appearing as Isa to the Jews, being hanged by them.

Substitution [ edit ] It is unclear exactly where the substitution interpretation originated, but some scholars consider the theory originating among certain Gnostic groups of the second century.

[ 21 ] Some disagreement and discord can be seen beginning with Ibn Ishaq's ( d.

761) report of a brief accounting of events leading up to the crucifixion, firstly stating that Jesus was replaced by someone named Sergius, while secondly reporting an account of Jesus' tomb being located at Medina, and thirdly citing the places in the Quran ( 3:55 , 4:158 ) that God took Jesus up to himself.

[ 72 ] Islamic depiction of Isa's Ascension.

Michael Cook notes that denial that Jesus died follows the Christian heresy of docetism , who were "disturbed by that God should have died", but that this concern conflicts with another Islamic doctrine, that Jesus was a man, not God.

[ 73 ] According to Todd Lawson , Quranic commentators seem to have concluded the denial of the crucifixion of Jesus by following material interpreted in Tafsir that relied upon extra-biblical Judeo-Christian sources , [ 74 ] with the earliest textual evidence having originated from a non-Muslim source – a misreading of the Christian writings of John of Damascus regarding the literal understandings of docetism (exegetical doctrine describing spiritual and physical realities of Jesus as understood by men in logical terms) as opposed to their figurative explanations.

[ 75 ] John of Damascus highlighted the Quran's assertion that the Jews did not crucify Jesus being very different from saying that Jesus was not crucified, explaining that it is the varied Quranic exegetes in Tafsir, and not the Quran itself, that denies the crucifixion, further stating that the message in the 4:157 verse simply affirms the historicity of the event.

[ 74 ] Symbolic interpretations [ edit ] Ja'far ibn Mansur al-Yaman ( d.

958), Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Razi ( d.

935), Abu Yaqub al-Sijistani ( d.

971), Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi ( d.

1078) and the group Ikhwan al-Safa also affirm the historicity of the Crucifixion, reporting Jesus was crucified and not substituted by another man as maintained by many other popular Quranic commentators and Tafsir. More recently, Mahmoud M. Ayoub , a professor and scholar, provided a more symbolic interpretation for Surah 4 Verse 157: The Quran, as we have already argued, does not deny the death of Christ. Rather, it challenges human beings who in their folly have deluded themselves into believing that they would vanquish the divine Word, Jesus Christ the Messenger of God. The death of Jesus is asserted several times and in various contexts. ( 3:55 , 5:117 , 19:33 ) [ 76 ] Ayoub, instead of interpreting the passage as a denial of the death of Jesus, instead believes the passage is about God denying men the power to vanquish and destroy God's message. The words "but they killed him not, nor crucified him" are meant to show that any power humans believe that they have against God is illusory.

[ 77 ] Some Sunni Islamic exegesists , such as the anti-Christian polemicist Muhammad Rashid Rida , held an ambiguous stance on the matter, namely that the crucifixion and ascension of Jesus were allegorical, but with extreme precaution, in order to rebut Christian doctrines on crucifixion and salvation .

[ 78 ] Comprehensively denouncing Christian doctrines on salvation, atonement and crucifixion as irrational and kufr (disbelief) in his Tafsir al-Manar , Rida also denounced the Jews for their killings of the Prophets of God , writing: The actual fact of the crucifixion is not itself a matter which the Book of God seeks to affirm or deny, except for the purpose of asserting the killing of prophets by the Jews unjustly, and reproaching them for that act;... that the Creator of the universe could be incarnated in the womb of a woman in this earth which, in comparison to the rest of His creation, is like an atom, and then be a human being eating and drinking, experiencing fatigue and suffering other hardships like the rest of mankind. Then His enemies would level at Him insults and pain, and finally crucify Him with thieves and declare Him cursed according to the Book He revealed to one of His apostles, exalted be He over all this! ... We say rather no one believes it because belief ( iman ) is the affirmation ( tasdiq ) by reason of something that it can apprehend;... The claim of the people of the Cross , therefore, that clemency and forgiveness are opposed to justice, is unacceptable.

— Imam Muhammad Rashid Rida , in Tafsir al-Manar Vol. VI pp. 23, 26-27, [ 78 ] An early interpretation of verse 3:55 (specifically "I will cause you to die and raise you to myself"), Al-Tabari ( d.

923), records an interpretation attributed to Ibn 'Abbas , who used the literal "I will cause you to die" ( mumayyitu-ka ) in place of the metaphorical mutawaffi-ka ('Jesus died'), while Wahb ibn Munabbih , an early Jewish convert, is reported to have said "God caused Jesus, son of Mary, to die for three hours during the day, then took him up to himself." Tabari further transmits from Ibn Ishaq: "God caused Jesus to die for seven hours", [ 79 ] while at another place reported that a person called Sergius was crucified in place of Jesus. Ibn-al-Athir forwarded the report that it was Judas , the betrayer, while also mentioning the possibility it was a man named Natlianus.

[ 80 ] In reference to the Quranic quote "We have surely killed Jesus the Christ, son of Mary, the apostle of God", Muslim scholar Mahmoud Ayoub asserts this boast not as the repeating of a historical lie or the perpetuating of a false report, but an example of human arrogance and folly with an attitude of contempt towards God and his messenger(s). Ayoub furthers what modern scholars of Islam interpret regarding the historical death of Jesus, the man, as man's inability to kill off God's Word and the Spirit of God, which the Quran testifies were embodied in Jesus Christ. Ayoub continues highlighting the denial of the killing of Jesus as God denying men such power to vanquish and destroy the divine Word. The words, "they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him" speaks to the profound events of ephemeral human history, exposing mankind's heart and conscience towards God's will. The claim of humanity to have this power against God is illusory. "They did not slay him ... but it seemed so to them" speaks to the imaginations of mankind, not the denial of the actual event of Jesus dying physically on the cross.

[ 77 ] Another report from Ibn Kathir quotes Ishaq Ibn Bishr, on authority of Idris, on authority of Wahb ibn Munabbih, that "God caused him to die for three days, then resurrected him, then raised him." [ 81 ] [ 82 ] Al-Masudi ( d.

956) reported the death of Christ under Tiberius .

[ 80 ] Ibn Kathir ( d.

1373) follows traditions which suggest that a crucifixion did occur, but not with Jesus.

[ 83 ] After the event, Ibn Kathir reports the people were divided into three groups following three different narratives; The Jacobites believing "God remained with us as long as He willed and then He ascended to Heaven"; the Nestorians believing "The son of God was with us as long as he willed until God raised him to heaven"; and the Muslims believing "The servant and messenger of God, Jesus, remained with us as long as God willed until God raised him to Himself." [ 84 ] Islamic reformer Muhammad Rashid Rida agrees with contemporary commentators interpreting the physical killing of Christ's apostleship as a metaphorical interpretation.

[ 85 ] Modern Islamic scholars like Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i interpret the ascension of Jesus as spiritual, not physical. This interpretation is in accord with Muʿtazila and Shia metaphorical explanations regarding anthropomorphic references to God in the Quran. Although not popular with traditional Sunni interpretations of the depiction of crucifixion, there has been much speculation and discussion in the effort of logically reconciling this topic.

[ 86 ] In ascetic Shia writings, Jesus is depicted having "ascended to heaven wearing a woolen shirt, spun and sewed by Mary, his mother. As he reached the heavenly regions, he was addressed, 'O Jesus, cast away from you the adornment of the world.

' " [ 87 ] After his ascension, his word is believed to have been altered.

[ 88 ] Apocalyptic literature [ edit ] See also: Second Coming § Islam , Islamic eschatology , and Hadith of Jesus praying behind Mahdi Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e According to Islamic apocalyptics, having ascended to heaven and dwelled there for 2000+ years, Jesus will descend to earth shortly before Judgement Day, in the midst of wars fought against al-Masih ad-Dajjal ('The False Messiah") and his followers, to come to the aid of the Mahdi and his Muslim followers.

[ 89 ] Dressed in saffron robes with his head anointed, Jesus will descend at the point of a white minaret, in eastern Damascus , which is believed to be the Minaret of Isa in the Umayyad Mosque .

[ 90 ] He will then greet the Mahdi and (being a Muslim) pray beside him. Eventually, Jesus will slay the Dajjal at Lod .

[ 91 ] Afterwards, he will "break the cross, kill the pigs, and abolish the Jizya tax", according to a well-known Sahih al-Bukhari hadith.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] "The usual interpretation" of this prophecy is that, being a Muslim, Jesus will put a stop to Christian worship of himself and in belief in his divinity, "symbolized by the cross". He will re-establish the Kosher / Halal dietary laws abandoned by Christianity; [ 94 ] and because Jews and Christians will now all reject their former faith and accept Islam, there will be no more need for the jizya tax on unbelievers.

[ 95 ] (According to one hadith, Jesus will "destroy the churches and temples and kill the Christians unless they believe in him.") [ 96 ] [ note 1 ] Islamic texts also allude to the reappearance of the ancient menace Gog and Magog ( Yaʾjūj Maʾjūj ), which will break out of its underground confinement and cause havoc around the world.

[ 98 ] God, in response to Jesus' prayers, will kill them by sending a type of worm in the napes of their necks, and send large birds to carry and clear their corpses from the land.

[ 89 ] After the death of the Mahdi, Jesus will assume world leadership and peace and justice will be universal.

Also according to tradition, Jesus will then marry, have children, and rule the world for forty years (traditions give many different time periods) after which he will die.

[ 99 ] Some Muslims believe that the Muslims will then perform the funeral prayer for him and then bury him at the Green Dome in the city of Medina in a grave left vacant beside Muhammad , Abu Bakr , and Umar respectively.

[ 100 ] According to Ibn Khaldun 's legend, the two caliphs will rise from the dead between the two prophets.

[ 101 ] Timeline of the arrival of Jesus before Judgement Day Minaret of Isa in the Umayyad Mosque , Damascus , Syria Sources [ edit ] While the Quran does not describe any of the above narrative of Jesus' return, [ 102 ] many Muslims believe that two Quranic verses refer to his second coming during the end times.

[ 93 ] (1) The verse mentioned above stating he is never died on earth: "And [for] their saying, 'Indeed, we have killed Christ, Jesus, the son of Mary, the messenger of God.' And they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him; but [another] was made to resemble him to them. And indeed, those who differ over it are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it except the following of assumption. And they did not kill him, for certain." (Q.4:157:) A second verse interpreted to indicate a connection between Jesus and "the Hour" (end times): "And lo! verily there is knowledge of the Hour. So doubt ye not concerning it, but follow Me. This is the right path." (Q.43:61 trans Pickthall).

[ 93 ] Hadiths on Jesus's return are traced back to Abu Hurairah , one of the sahaba , but might actually have been introduced later during civil wars in the early Abbasid Caliphate , when a savior was expected. While for Shias, the Mahdi will be the savior, some Sunnis tended to expect Jesus' return. During the early Abbasid Caliphate , wearing crucifixes in processions and holding pigs in public, was forbidden. Otherwise, the breaking of the cross, might reflect general disapproval of this symbol by Muslims, and slaying pigs a reference to Jesus exorcism of Legion .

[ 103 ] Islamic theology [ edit ] Part of a series on Jesus in Christianity Christology Names and titles Christ Life of Jesus Gospels Gospel harmony Places Holy Family Virgin birth Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Miracles Parables Humiliation Crucifixion Instrument used True Cross Burial Resurrection Ascension Obedience Heavenly Session Intercession Apparitions and visions of Jesus Second Coming Jesus in Islam Masih Gospel Names and titles Mary Disciples Death Mahdi End times Background Background to the New Testament Language spoken by Jesus Jesus's race / genealogy Mental health of Jesus Historical Jesus Chronology Quest for the historical Jesus Historicity Sources for the historicity of Jesus Reliability of the Gospels Mythology Jesus myth theory Criticism Unknown years Relics Perspectives on Jesus Christian Jewish Talmud Islamic Ahmadi Manichaean Mandaean Josephus Tacitus Bar-Serapion Jesus in culture Life in art Life of Christ Museum Depiction Jesuism Christianity portal Islam portal v t e Muslims do not worship Jesus, who is known as Isa in Arabic, nor do they consider him divine, but they do believe that he was a prophet or messenger of God and he is called the Messiah in the Quran. However, by affirming Jesus as Messiah they are attesting to his messianic message, not his mission as a heavenly Christ .

[...] Islam insists that neither Jesus nor Mohammed brought a new religion. Both sought to call people back to what might be called " Abrahamic faith ." This is precisely what we find emphasized in the book of James . Like Islam, the book of James, and the teaching of Jesus in Q , emphasize doing the will of God as a demonstration of one's faith.

[...] Since Muslims reject all of the Pauline affirmations about Jesus, and thus the central claims of orthodox Christianity , the gulf between Islam and Christianity on Jesus is a wide one.

— Professor James D. Tabor in his book The Jesus Dynasty [ 104 ] Jesus is described in various ways in the Quran. The most common reference to Jesus occurs in the form of Ibn Maryam ('son of Mary'), sometimes preceded with another title. Jesus is also recognized as a nabī ('prophet') and rasūl ('messenger') of God. The terms 'abd-Allāh ('servant of God'), wadjih ('worthy of esteem in this world and the next') and mubārak ('blessed', or 'a source of benefit for others') are all used in reference to him.

[ 100 ] According to Islam, Jesus never claimed to be divine.

[ 68 ] Jesus' role in Muslim theology falls roughly under four types: [ 105 ] a perception based on fragments of the New Testament anti-Jewish, exposing thieves, criminals, and liars (usually identified with Jews) an ascetic, based on monastic tradition; prevalent particularly in Sufi literature an Islamic messenger, exercising polemics against Christians and predicting the coming of Muhammad (as Surah 61:6) Islam sees Jesus as human, sent as the last prophet of Israel to Jews with the Gospel scripture, affirming but modifying the Mosaic Law .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] [ 62 ] Islamic accounts have rejected any divine notions of Jesus being God, or the begotten Son of God, or of the Trinity . Islamic theology teaches such beliefs constitute shirk (the "association" of partners with God) and thereby a rejection of his divine oneness ( tawhid ) as the sole unpardonable sin.

[ 108 ] According to Islamic theology, Jesus received an original message, containing references to Muhammad, but which became distorted later under Jewish and Roman influence.

[ 109 ] Rather than being divine or a savior, Jesus  confirms to the Islamic concept of prophetic mission.

[ 37 ] The strict monotheism of Islam rejects any Christological debate which conflates Jesus in any way with Allah or with God the Father, precluding any divinity in Jesus and avoiding the subtleties of Trinitarianism .

[ 110 ] A frequent title of Jesus mentioned is al-Masīḥ , which translates to 'the Messiah', as well as ' Christ '. Although the Quran is silent on its significance, [ 111 ] Muslim scholars [ who?

] disagree with the Christian concepts of the term "Messiah", and lean towards a Jewish understanding. Muslim exegetes explain the use of the word masīh in the Quran as referring to Jesus' status as the one anointed by means of blessings and honors; or as the one who helped cure the sick, by anointing the eyes of the blind, for example.

[ 100 ] Jesus is also associated both with a word from God and with a spirit.

[ 112 ] The interpretations are collected by the Quran exegete Mahmud al-Alusi : Jesus is the embodiment of God's word uttered at the moment of his conception (9:169, 14:30, 3:42), announced in the "word of God", prophesied preached by preceding prophets; Jesus is the word of God because he speaks on behalf of God; or that Jesus is a word of God because Jesus is, in his own person, “good news”.

[ 113 ] Muhammad described himself as the "nearest of all people to Jesus".

[ 114 ] Similitude with Adam [ edit ] The Quran emphasizes Allah's creation of Jesus: "The case of Jesus in the eyes of God is like that of Adam. He created him from earth and then said to him, 'Be!' And he is." (Q:3:59), [ 111 ] through his similitude with Adam in regards to the absence of human origin. Muhammad often used to compare the births of Adam and Jesus.

[ 115 ] Islamic exegesis extrapolates a logical inconsistency behind the Christian argument of divine intervention, as such implications would have ascribed divinity to Adam who is understood only as creation.

[ 111 ] Precursor to Muhammad [ edit ] Lineage of several prophets according to Islamic tradition Adam Shīth ( Seth ) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Ibrāhīm ( Abraham ) Ismāʿīl ( Ishmael ) Iṣḥāq ( Isaac ) Mūsa ( Moses ) ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Muhammad Dotted lines indicate multiple generations.

v t e In Islam, Jesus is believed to have been the precursor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad . According to the Quran, the coming of Muhammad was predicted by Jesus in 61:6 . Through this verse, early Arab Muslims claimed legitimacy for their new faith in the existing religious traditions and the alleged predictions of Jesus.

[ 116 ] Muslims believe that Jesus was a precursor to Muhammad, and that he prophesied the latter's coming.

[ 117 ] [ 31 ] This perspective is based on a verse of the Quran wherein Jesus speaks of a messenger to appear after him named "Ahmad".

[ 118 ] Islam associates Ahmad with Muhammad, both words deriving from the h-m-d triconsonantal root which refers to praiseworthiness. Muslims assert that evidence of Jesus' pronouncement is present in the New Testament , citing the mention of the Paraclete whose coming is foretold in the Gospel of John .

[ 119 ] Muslim commentators claim that the original Greek word used was periklutos , meaning 'famed', 'illustrious', or 'praiseworthy'—rendered in Arabic as Ahmad ; and that this was replaced by Christians with parakletos .

[ 100 ] [ 120 ] This idea is debated, asking if the traditional understanding is supported by the text of the Quran.

Islamic theology claims Jesus had foretold another prophet succeeding him according to Sura 61 :6, with the mention of the name 'Ahmad'. ( Ahmad is an Arabic name from the same triconsonantal root Ḥ-M-D = [ح – م – د].) In responding to Ibn Ishaq 's biography of Muhammad, the Sirat Rasul Allah , Islamic scholar Alfred Guillaume wrote: Coming back to the term "Ahmad", Muslims have suggested that Ahmad is the translation of periklutos, celebrated or the Praised One, which is a corruption of parakletos, the Paraclete of John XIV, XV and XVI.

[ 121 ] Messianism [ edit ] An alternative, more esoteric, interpretation is expounded by Messianic Muslims [ 122 ] in the Sufi and Isma'ili traditions so as to unite Islam , Christianity and Judaism into a single religious continuum .

[ 123 ] Other Messianic Muslims hold a similar theological view regarding Jesus, without attempting to unite the religions.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] Making use of the New Testament 's distinguishing between Jesus , Son of Man (being the physical human Jesus), and Christ , Son of God (being the Holy Spirit of God residing in the body of Jesus), the Holy Spirit , being immortal and immaterial, is not subject to crucifixion – for it can never die, nor can it be touched by the earthly nails of the crucifixion, for it is a being of pure spirit. Thus, while the spirit of Christ avoided crucifixion by ascending unto God, the body that was Jesus was sacrificed on the cross, thereby bringing the Old Testament to final fulfillment. Thus Quranic passages on the death of Jesus affirm that while the Pharisees intended to destroy Jesus completely, they, in fact, succeeded only in killing the Son of Man , being his nasut ('material being'). Meanwhile, the Son of God , being his lahut ('spiritual being') remained alive and undying – because it is the Holy Spirit .

[ 127 ] Islamic literature [ edit ] Muhammad leads Abraham , Moses , Jesus and others in prayer. Persian miniature, 15th century [ 128 ] The Quran does not convey the specific teachings of Jesus. What has developed over the years was authored by later followers of Islam. What is found in the Quran about Jesus is that his teaching conformed to the prophetic model: a human sent by God to present both a judgment upon humanity for worshipping idols and a challenge to turn to the one true God. In the case of Jesus, Muslims believe that his mission was to the people of Israel and that his status as a prophet was confirmed by numerous miracles.

[ 37 ] The Quran's description of specific events at the end of Jesus' life have continued to be controversial between Christians and Muslims, while the classical commentaries have been interpreted differently to accommodate new information.

[ 37 ] Jesus is written about by some Muslim scholars as the perfect man.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] Hadith [ edit ] See also: Hadith of Jesus Praying Behind Mahdi The Hadiths are reported sayings of Muhammad that developed a canonical status in the third Muslim century as a source of authority for the Muslim community. The Muslim perception of Jesus emerging from the Hadiths is of a miraculous, sinless, and eschatological figure, pointing people, again according to the Muslim's perspective of prophethood, to the Muslim faith ( Muslim ; one who submits to the will of God).

[ 132 ] Jesus is featured as a major figure in two categories of hadiths which can be described as apocalyptic and biblical.

[ 133 ] The eschatological role of Jesus in the hadiths may have been influenced by ideas of the Second coming held by the Eastern Churches , as well as the Quranic Jesus mentioned in 43:61 .

[ 133 ] Many of the hadiths which feature Jesus's sayings were not included in the canonical hadith collections , which became more focused on the sayings of Muhammad, but were instead included in a separate genre known as Qisas al-anbiya ('Stories of the Prophets').

[ 134 ] Sunni Islam [ edit ] Jesus and Muhammad introduced by an angel in paradise. Timurid, 1466.

In Kitab al-Milal wa al-Nihal , al-Shahrastani ( d.

1153), an influential Persian historian, historiographer, scholar, philosopher and theologian, records a portrayal of Jesus very close to the orthodox tenets while continuing the Islamic narrative: The Christians. (They are) the community ( umma ) of the Christ, Jesus, son of Mary (peace upon him). He is who was truly sent (as prophet; mab'uth ) after Moses (peace upon him), and who was announced in the Torah. To him were (granted) manifest signs and notable evidences, such as the reviving of the dead and the curing of the blind and the leper. His very nature and innate disposition ( fitra ) are a perfect sign of his truthfulness; that is, his coming without previous seed and his speaking without prior teaching. For all the (other) prophets the arrival of their revelation was at (the age of) forty years, but revelation came to him when he was made to speak in the cradle, and revelation came to him when he conveyed (the divine message) at (the age of) thirty. The duration of his (prophetic) mission ( da'wa ) was three years and three months and three days.

[ 135 ] Shia Islam [ edit ] In the Nahj al-Balagha , the fourth caliph Ali ( r.

656–661 ) is reported to have talked about the simplicity of Jesus.

[ 136 ] Ali says that "Jesus used a stone for his pillow, put on coarse clothes and ate rough food. His condiment was hunger. His lamp at night was the moon. He had no wife to allure him, nor any son to give grief, neither wealth to deviate. His two feet were his conveyance and his two hands were his servant".

[ 136 ] According to Ja'far al-Sadiq , a great-great-grandson of Ali, the time between David and Jesus was four hundred years.

[ 137 ] Ja'far further says that the religion of Jesus was monotheism ( tawḥīd ) and purity ( ikhlāṣ ).

[ 137 ] The Injil (Gospel) was sent down to him and the pledge that other prophets took was also taken from Jesus: to establish prayer with religion, enjoin the good and forbid the evil, allowing what is allowed and forbidding what has been forbidden. Admonitions and parables were sent down to him in the Injil , but there was no law of retribution in it nor precepts of retribution ( ahkam al-hudud ), and no obligations for inheritance. He was sent what was an alleviation of what was sent down to Moses in the Torah. Jesus commanded of his followers that they believe in the law of the Torah and the Injil .

[ 137 ] According to Qadi al-Nu'man , a famous Muslim jurist of the Fatimid period , Jesus is referred to as the Messiah ( al-Masīḥ ) in the Quran because he was sent to the people who responded to him in order to remove ( masaha ) their impurities, the ailments of their faith; whether apparent ( zahir ) or hidden ( batin ).

Qadi al- Nu'man , in his work Foundation of Symbolic Interpretation ( Asās al-ta'wīl ), talks about the spiritual birth ( milad al-batin ) of Jesus, as an interpretation of his story of physical birth ( milad al-zahir ) mentioned in the Quran. He says that Mary , the mother of Jesus, is a metaphor for someone who nurtured and instructed Jesus ( lāhiq ), rather than physically giving birth to him.

Qadi al-Nu'man explains that Jesus was from the pure progeny of Abraham , just as Ali and his sons were from the pure progeny of Muhammad , through Fatima .

[ 138 ] Sufism [ edit ] Early Sufis adopted the sayings of Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount and an ascetic dimension. The submission and sacrifice Jesus exemplified shows the Muslim is to be set apart from worldly compromises. In poetry and mysticism, Jesus was celebrated as a prophet close to the heart of God achieving an uncommon degree of self-denial.

[ 39 ] Although the writings developed over the centuries embellished Jesus' miracles, the lessons of Jesus can be seen as metaphors of the inner life. These rich and diverse presentations of Jesus in Sufi traditions are the largest body of Jesus-texts in any non-Christian tradition.

[ 139 ] A key issue arises for Muslims with the Sufi picture of Jesus: how universally should the ascetic/esoteric approach be applied? For many Muslim poets and scholars the answer is clear: every Muslim is invited to the path of asceticism and inner realization embodied by Jesus. However, whilst all Muslims revere Jesus, most have reservations about the application of his way of life to society. For Muslims the highest pinnacle of human achievement is, after all, Muhammad. Muhammad is revered in part because he promoted the right blend of justice and mercy. In other words, Muslims need both a path that addresses individual spirituality as well as a path that will address the complex issues of community life, law, justice, etc. Jesus is viewed by many Muslims as having lived out only one side of this equation. As a figure of the heart or individual conscience, Jesus is viewed by some to be a limited figure. In more critical Muslim perspectives the Sermon on the Mount is admired but seen as impractical for human society. Perhaps the greatest division amongst Muslims has to do with the relevance of ascetic and esoteric beliefs in the context of strengthening an Islamic society.

[ 139 ] The miraculous birth and life of Jesus becomes a metaphor for Rumi of the spiritual rebirth that is possible within each human soul. This rebirth is not achieved without effort; one needs to practice silence, poverty, and fasting—themes that were prominent in Jesus' life according to Islamic traditions.

[ 140 ] Ibn Arabi stated Jesus was Al-Insān al-Kāmil , the spirit and simultaneously a servant of God. Jesus is held to be "one with God" in whole coincidence of will, not as a being. Due to the spirit of God dwelling in Jesus, God spoke and acted through him. Yet Jesus is not considered to be God, but a person within God's word and spirit and a manifestation of God's attributes, like a mirror, a view resembling Nestorian traditions.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] The conception of Jesus as described by Ibn Arabi ( d.

1240), an Andalusian scholar, Sufi mystic , poet and philosopher, in the Bezels of Wisdom : From the water of Mary or from the breath of Gabriel, In the form of a mortal fashioned of clay, The Spirit came into existence in an essence Purged of Nature's taint, which is called Sijjin (prison) Because of this, his sojourn was prolonged, Enduring, by decree, more than a thousand years.

A spirit from none other than God, So that he might raise the dead and bring forth birds from clay.

[ 143 ] Ascetic literature [ edit ] Jesus is widely venerated in Muslim ascetic and mystic literature, such as in Muslim mystic Al-Ghazali 's Ihya ʿulum ad-Din ('The revival of the religious sciences'). These works lay stress upon Jesus' poverty, his preoccupation with worship, his detachment from worldly life and his miracles. Such depictions also include advice and sermons which are attributed to him. Later Sufic commentaries adapted material from Christian gospels which were consistent with their ascetic portrayal. Sufi philosopher Ibn Arabi described Jesus as "the seal of universal holiness" due to the quality of his faith and "because he holds in his hands the keys of living breath and because he is at present in a state of deprivation and journeying".

[ 100 ] [ citation needed ] Ahmadiyya literature [ edit ] Main article: Jesus in Ahmadiyya The Ahmadiyya movement considers Jesus was a prophet and a mortal man, who was crucified and remained on the cross for six hours, until darkness fell. Jesus was taken down from the cross alive and unconscious. He was treated for three days and nights by saint physician Necdemus in a cave like tomb (especially built for Joseph of Arimathea ). Thereafter, Jesus recuperated from his wounds, met his trusted disciples on the Mount of Olives, and left Judea towards the sea of Galilee on his way to Damascus. After his dramatic escape from crucifixion, Jesus traveled to the eastern lands in search of the ten lost tribes of Israel . Finally, he died a natural death in Kashmir , India, as opposed to having been raised up alive to Heaven.

[ 144 ] Appearance [ edit ] Based upon several Hadith narrations of Muhammad, Jesus can be physically described thus (with any differences in Jesus' physical description being due to Muhammad describing him when seeing him at different occasions, such as during his ascension to Heaven, or when describing Jesus during Jesus' second coming ): [ 145 ] A well-built man of medium/moderate/average height and stature with a broad chest.

Straight, lank, long, red and white hair that fell between his shoulders. It seems as though water is dribbling from his head, though it is not wet.

A Moderate complexion See also [ edit ] Biblical and Quranic narratives Christianity and Islam Islamic eschatology Izhar ul-Haqq List of legends in the Quran Mary in Islam Peace in Islamic philosophy Qisas Al-Anbiya Saint Mary (film) The Messiah (2007 film) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ see also: "Others, however, understand the second coming of 'Isa ... [is] to kill the Dajjal, to break the cross and decimate all Christians and their places of worship, and to inaugurate the aforementioned period of peace before the actual coming of the Hour".

[ 97 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Cook, David (2021).

Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic . Gerlach Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1b9f5v8 .

ISBN 978-3-95994-120-4 .

^ Leirvik 2010 , pp. 66–71.

^ Anawati, G.C. (2012). ʿĪsā. In P. Bearman (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Islam New Edition Online (EI-2 English). Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0378 ^ Thomas, D. (2006). The encounter of Eastern Christianity with early Islam. In The Encounter of Eastern Christianity with Early Islam. Brill. p. 188 ^ Anawati, G.C. (2012). ʿĪsā. In P. Bearman (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Islam New Edition Online (EI-2 English). Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0378 ^ Thomas, D. (2006). The encounter of Eastern Christianity with early Islam. In The Encounter of Eastern Christianity with Early Islam. Brill. p. 189 ^ Thomas, D. (2006). The encounter of Eastern Christianity with early Islam. In The Encounter of Eastern Christianity with Early Islam. Brill. p. 189 ^ Thomas, D. (2006). The encounter of Eastern Christianity with early Islam. In The Encounter of Eastern Christianity with Early Islam. Brill. p. 189 ^ Khalidi 2001 , p.

75 .

^ Fasching & deChant 2001 , p. 241.

^ Mevorach, Ian. 2017. "Qur’an, Crucifixion, and Talmud: A New Reading of Q 4:157-58." Journal of Religion and Society . 21.

^ Watt 2013 , p. 18.

^ Kearns 2008 , pp. 254–255.

^ McDowell & Walker 2013 , p. 12.

^ Leirvik 2010 , p. 47.

^ Watt 2013 , p.

19 .

^ Khalidi 2001 , p.

51 –94.

^ a b Leirvik 2010 , p.

58 .

^ Watt 2013 , p.

31 .

^ Zebiri, Kate (March 2000). "Contemporary Muslim Understanding of the Miracles of Jesus".

The Muslim World .

90 ( 1– 2): 71– 90.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.2000.tb03682.x .

^ a b Leirvik 2010 , p.

34 .

^ Glassé 2001 , p.

239 .

^ Sarker, Abraham, Understand My Muslim People , 2004, ISBN 1-59498-002-0 , p. 260.

^ Jackson, Montell, Islam Revealed , 2003, ISBN 1-59160-869-4 , p. 73.

^ a b Peters, Francis Edward (2009).

Islam: A Guide for Jews and Christians . Princeton University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2548-6 .

^ Jestice, Phyllis G., Holy people of the world: a cross-cultural encyclopedia, Volume 1 , 2004, ISBN 1-57607-355-6 , pp. 558–559 ^ Watt 1991 , p. 39.

^ a b Watt 2013 , p.

46 .

^ Virani, Shafique (2019).

"Hierohistory in Qāḍī l-Nuʿmān's Foundation of Symbolic Interpretation (Asās al-Taʾwīl): The Birth of Jesus" .

Studies in Islamic Historiography : 147– 169.

doi : 10.1163/9789004415294_007 .

ISBN 9789004415294 .

S2CID 214047322 .

^ A. J. Wensinck and Penelope C. Johnstone, "Maryam", in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition , ed. by P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W. P. Heinrichs. Consulted online on 30 September 2018.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0692 , ISBN 9789004161214 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Leirvik 2010 , pp.

59–60 .

^ Watt 1991 , pp. 48–49.

^ a b c Ayoub 1992 , p.

145 .

^ Leirvik 2010 , p.

64 .

^ Allen C. Myers, ed. (1987). "Aramaic".

The Eerdmans Bible Dictionary . Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans. p. 72.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2402-8 .

It is generally agreed that Aramaic was the common language of Palestine in the first century AD. Jesus and his disciples spoke the Galilean dialect, which was distinguished from that of Jerusalem (Matt. 26:73) ^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 83.

^ a b c d Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 90.

^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 84.

^ a b Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 85.

^ Khalidi 2001 , p.

31 –36.

^ Khalidi 2001 , p.

31 .

^ Khalidi 2001 , p.

32 .

^ a b Parrinder 1965 , p. 83.

^ a b c Parrinder 1965 , p. 78.

^ Parrinder 1965 , pp. 75–76.

^ a b Leirvik 2010 , p.

60 .

^ Parrinder 1965 , pp. 83–84.

^ Parrinder 1965 , p. 85.

^ Parrinder 1965 , p. 86.

^ Fudge, Bruce (7 April 2011).

Qur'anic Hermeneutics: Al-Tabrisi and the Craft of Commentary (Routledge Studies in the Qur'an) . United Kingdom: Routledge. p. 60.

ISBN 978-0415782005 .

^ a b Watt 2013 , p.

24 .

^ Parrinder 1965 , p. 87.

^ Robinson 1991 , p. 129.

^ Ayoub 1992 , p.

154 .

^ Ayoub 1992 , p.

158 .

^ Esposito 2003 , p. 158.

^ Reynolds 2010 , p. 192.

^ Reynolds 2010 , p. 190.

^ Phipps, William (28 May 2018) [2016].

"5 Scriptures" .

Muhammad and Jesus: A Comparison of the Prophets and Their Teachings .

Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 101.

ISBN 978-1-4742-8934-4 .

^ Waardenburg 1999 , p. 276.

^ Adang 1996 , pp. 105–06.

^ a b Al-Qaradawi, Yusuf (30 January 2018) [30 January 1999].

"INTRODUCTION" .

The Lawful and the Prohibited in Islam (Al-Halal Wal Haram Fil Islam) . American Trust Publications. p. 5.

ISBN 9780892590162 .

^ "تفسير Tafsir al-Jalalayn" .

altafsir . Retrieved 2018-01-31 .

^ Ridgeon 2013 , p. 14.

^ Tafsir Ibn Kathir 3:52-54 ^ Parrinder 1965 , p.

61 .

^ Zahniser, Mathias (30 October 2008).

The Mission and Death of Jesus in Islam and Christianity (Faith Meets Faith Series) . New York: Orbis Books. p. 55.

ISBN 978-1570758072 .

^ a b Cook 1983 , pp. 32–33.

^ Bulliet, Richard W.

(2015).

"Islamo-Christian Civilization" . In Silverstein, Adam J.; Stroumsa, Guy G.

; Blidstein, Moshe (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of the Abrahamic Religions . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 111.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199697762.013.6 .

ISBN 978-0-19-969776-2 .

LCCN 2014960132 .

S2CID 170430270 . Retrieved 2020-10-24 .

^ Anawati, G.C. (2012). ʿĪsā. In P. Bearman (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Islam New Edition Online (EI-2 English). Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0378 ^ Todd Lawson The Crucifixion and the Qur'an: A Study in the History of Muslim Thought Oneworld Publications 2014 ISBN 9781780746753 p. 13 ^ Watt 2013 , pp.

39–40 .

^ Cook 1983 , p. 79.

^ a b Lawson 2009 , p. 12.

^ Lawson 2009 , p. 7.

^ Ayoub 1980 .

^ a b Ayoub 1980 , p. 117.

^ a b Ayoub 1980 , p. 113–115.

^ Zahniser 2008 , p. 56.

^ a b Watt 2013 , p.

47 .

^ Robinson 1991 , p.

122 .

^ Ayoub 1980 , p. 108. Muhammad b. 'Ali b. Muhammad al-Shawkani, Fath al-Qadir al-Jami bayn Fannay al-Riwaya wa 'l Diraya min 'Ilm al-Tqfsir (Cairo: Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi, n.d.), I, 346, citing Ibn Asakir, who reports on the authority of Ibn Munabbih.

^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 119.

^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 121.

^ Ayoub 1980 , p. 113.

^ Ayoub 1980 , p. 100.

^ Ayoub 1980 , p. 103.

^ Tieszen 2018 , p. 21.

^ a b Sonn 2004 , p. 209.

^ Mannheim 2001 , p. 91.

^ Cook 2002 , p. 93–104.

^ Al-Bukhari.

"Sahih al-Bukhari » Oppressions – كتاب المظالم » Hadith 2476. 46 Oppressions (31) Chapter: The breaking of the cross and the killing of the pigs" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 2022-05-22 .

^ a b c WARREN LARSON Jesus in Islam and Christianity: Discussing the Similarities and the Differences p. 335 ^ Akyol, Mustafa (3 October 2016).

"The Problem With the Islamic Apocalypse" .

The New York Times . New York Times . Retrieved 2022-01-29 .

^ Evans & Johnston 2015 .

^ 'Umdah, 430; cited in Qaim 2007 , His Second Coming: "...Then he will kill the swine, break the crosses, destroy the churches and temples and kill the Christians unless they believe in him." ^ Smith, Jane I.; Haddad, Yvonne Y. (1981).

The Islamic Understanding of Death and Resurrection . Albany, N Y: SUNY Press. p. 69.

^ Sonn, Tamara (2015).

Islam: History, Religion, and Politics . John Wiley & Sons. p. 209.

ISBN 978-1-118-97230-4 .

^ "Jesus, A Prophet of Allah – Association of Islamic Charitable Projects in USA" .

www.aicp.org . Retrieved 2021-07-28 .

^ a b c d e Anawati, G.C. (2012).

"Īsā" . In P. J. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C. E. Bosworth ; E. van Donzel; W. P. Heinrichs (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam (2nd ed.). Brill Online.

ISBN 9789004161214 . Retrieved 2016-06-06 .

^ Peters 1990 , p. 352.

^ Roberto Tottoli Biblical Prophets in the Qur'an and Muslim Literature Routledge, 11 January 2013 ISBN 978-1-136-12314-6 p. 121 ^ Neal Robinson Christ in Islam and Christianity SUNY Press 1 January 1991 ISBN 9780791405581 p. 104 ^ Tabor, James (28 August 2017) [1st pub. 2006].

"Conclusion: RECOVERING LOST TREASURES" .

The Jesus Dynasty: The Hidden History of Jesus, His Royal Family, and the Birth of Christianity .

Simon & Schuster . pp.

315–316 .

ISBN 978-0-7432-8723-4 .

^ Cook, David (2006). "New Testament Citations in the Hadith Literature and the Question of Early Gospel Translations into Arabic". In Grypeou, Emmanouela; Swanson, Mark N.; Thomas, David Richard (eds.).

The Encounter of Eastern Christianity With Early Islam (Papers from a workshop held in June 2003 in Erfurt). The History of Christian-Muslim Relations, ISSN 1570-7350, volume 5. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV. pp.

190– 191.

ISBN 978-9-0041-4938-0 . Retrieved 2025-02-10 .

^ Sakura, Muham (11 November 2017) [December 2015].

"Preface" .

The Great Tale of Prophet Adam & Prophet Jesus In Islam .

United Submitters International . p. 6.

ISBN 9783739635736 .

^ Akhtar, Shabbir (24 October 2017) [October 2007].

"PART 1: Quranic Islam and the secular mind" .

T he Quran and the Secular Mind: A Philosophy of Islam .

Routledge . p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-203-93531-6 .

^ See: Esposito (2002) , pp. 32, 74 Fasching & deChant (2001) , p. 241 Markham & Ruparell (2001) , p. 348 ^ Thomas, David. "The encounter of Eastern Christianity with early Islam." The Encounter of Eastern Christianity with Early Islam. Brill, 2006. p. 191 ^ Afayori, Robert (11 February 2021). "5.3 Islamic Christology in ther Light of the Tawhid ".

Christology in Christian-Muslim Dialogue: The Hermeneutics of Interreligious Learning for the Promotion of Common Values . Novum Pro Verlag. p. 206.

ISBN 978-3-9910-7294-2 . Retrieved 2025-02-10 .

The Tawhid [...] leaves no room for any Islamic theologizing about God outside the confines of strict monotheism.

^ a b c Akhtar, Shabbir (31 October 2007).

The Quran and the Secular Mind: A Philosophy of Islam . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134072569 – via Google Books.

^ Surah An-Nisa 4:171 - "The Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, was no more than a messenger of Allah and the fulfilment of His Word through Mary and a spirit ˹created by a command˺ from Him." ^ Anawati, G.C. (2012). ʿĪsā. In P. Bearman (ed.), Encyclopaedia of Islam New Edition Online (EI-2 English). Brill.

https://doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0378 ^ Abdullah 2014 , p. 124.

^ Robinson 1991 , p.

12 .

^ Virani, Shafique N. (2011).

"Taqiyya and Identity in a South Asian Community" .

The Journal of Asian Studies .

70 (1): 99– 139.

doi : 10.1017/S0021911810002974 .

ISSN 0021-9118 .

S2CID 143431047 .

p. 128.

^ Klauck, Hans-Josef Klauck (2003).

The Apocryphal Gospels: An Introduction . London: Bloomsbury T&T Clark. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0567083906 .

^ Quran 61:06 ^ "Jesus' Omen about the Paraclete | Supporting Prophet Muhammad website" .

rasoulallah.net . Retrieved 2021-07-28 .

^ Watt 2013 , p.

33 .

^ Liddell and Scott's celebrated Greek-English Lexicon gives this definition for periklutos: "heard of all round, famous, renowned, Latin inclytus: of things, excellent, noble, glorious".  Rev.

James Morris Whiton , ed.

A Lexicon abridged from Liddell and Scott's Greek-English Lexicon . New York: American Book Company, N.D. c.1940s, p.549.

Periklutos occurs in The Iliad and in The Odyssey , and in Hesiod's Theogony .

^ Travis, John (2000).

"Messian Muslim Followers of Isa" (PDF) .

International Journal of Frontier Missions .

17 (Spring): 54.

^ Cumming, Joseph.

"Muslim Followers of Jesus?" . ChristianityToday . Retrieved 2009-11-20 .

^ "Touchstone Archives: Can Jesus Save Islam?" . Retrieved 2016-10-17 .

^ Medearis, Carl (9 January 2013).

"Muslims Who Follow Jesus" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 2016-10-17 .

^ "Why Evangelicals Should Be Thankful for Muslim Insiders" . 15 January 2013 . Retrieved 2016-10-17 .

^ Encyclopedia of Islam , "Jesus" article. cf. L. Massignon, Le Christ dans les Évangiles selon Ghazali , in REI, 1932, 523–36, who cites texts of the Rasa'il Ikhwan al-Safa , a passage of Abu Hatim al-Razi (about 934), and another of the Isma'ili da'i Mu'ayyad fid-din al-Shirazi (1077).

^ "BnF. Département des Manuscrits. Supplément turc 190" .

Bibliothèque nationale de France . Retrieved 2023-09-07 .

^ Little, John T. (3 April 2007). "Al-Insan Al-Kamil: The Perfect Man According to Ibn Al-Arabi".

The Muslim World .

77 (1): 43– 54.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1987.tb02785.x .

Ibn al-'Arabi uses no less than 22 different terms to describe the various aspects under which this single Logos may be viewed.

^ Schumann 2002 , p. 13.

^ Parrinder 1965 , p.

6 .

^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 97.

^ a b Khalidi 2001 , p. 25.

^ Khalidi 2001 , p. 26.

^ Watt 2013 , p.

68 .

^ a b Leirvik 2010 , p. 75.

^ a b c Qaim 2007 , p. 36–37.

^ Virani, Shafique N. (6 November 2019), "Hierohistory in Qāḍī l-Nuʿmān's Foundation of Symbolic Interpretation (Asās al-Taʾwīl): the Birth of Jesus" , Studies in Islamic Historiography , BRILL: 147– 169, doi : 10.1163/9789004415294_007 , ISBN 978-90-04-41529-4 , S2CID 214047322 , retrieved 2020-11-21 ^ a b Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 86.

^ Barker & Gregg 2010 , p. 112.

^ Leirvik 2010 , p.

89 .

^ Clinton Bennett Understanding Christian-Muslim Relations: Past and Present A&C Black 2008 ISBN 978-0-826-48782-7 page 155 ^ ibn ʻArabī al-Ḥātimī aṭ-Ṭāʾī, Abū ʻAbd Allāh Muḥammad ibn ʻAlī ibn Muḥammad ; Austin, R. W.

(1980).

Ibn al-ʻArabi . Paulist Press. p. 174.

ISBN 978-0-8091-2331-5 .

^ "Death of Jesus – WikiAhmadiyya, Islam & Ahmadiyya encyclopedia free online" .

www.wikiahmadiyya.org .

^ Sahih al-Bukhari , 4:54:462 , 4:55:607–608 , 4:55:647–650 , 4:55:649–650 , Sahih Muslim , 1:316 , 1:321 , 1:325 , 1:328 , 41:7023 Sources [ edit ] Abdullah, Arif Kemil (2014).

The Qur'an and Normative Religious Pluralism: A Thematic Study of the Qur'an . IIIT.

ISBN 9781565646575 .

Adang, Camilla (1996).

Muslim Writers on Judaism and the Hebrew Bible: From Ibn Rabban to Ibn Hazm . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-10034-3 .

Ayoub, Mahmoud M.

(April 1980). "Towards an Islamic Christology II: The Death of Jesus, Reality or Delusion (A Study of the Death of Jesus in Tafsir Literature)".

The Muslim World .

70 (2): 91– 121.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1980.tb03405.x .

Ayoub, Mahmoud M.

(1992).

The Qur'an and Its Interpreters, Volume II: The House of 'Imran . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-0994-7 .

Barker, Gregory A.; Gregg, Stephen E. (2010).

Jesus Beyond Christianity: The Classic Texts . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cook, Michael (1983).

Muhammad . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0192876058 .

Esposito, J. L.

(2002).

What Everyone Needs to Know About Islam . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-515713-0 .

Esposito, J. L.

(2003).

The Oxford Dictionary of Islam . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512558-0 .

Evans, Craig A.; Johnston, Jeremiah J. (20 October 2015).

Jesus and the Jihadis: Confronting the Rage of ISIS: The Theology Driving the Ideology . Destiny Image Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-76-840900-0 .

Fasching, D. J.; deChant, D. (2001).

Comparative Religious Ethics: A Narrative Approach . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-631-20125-0 .

Glassé, Cyril (2001).

The New Encyclopedia of Islam, with introduction by Huston Smith (révisée ed.). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.

ISBN 9780759101906 .

Kearns, Cleo McNelly (2008).

The Virgin Mary, Monotheism and Sacrifice, New York . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-47223-4 .

Khalidi, Tarif (2001).

The Muslim Jesus: Sayings and Stories in Islamic Literature . Cambridge, MA & London: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-00477-1 .

Google books site Lawson, Todd (2009).

The Crucifixion and the Qur'an: A Study in the History of Muslim Thought . Oxford: Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-1851686360 . Retrieved 2012-07-28 .

Leirvik, Oddbjørn (2010).

Images of Jesus Christ in Islam (2nd ed.).

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-4411-8662-1 .

Mannheim, Ivan (2001).

Syria & Lebanon Handbook: The Travel Guide . Footprint Travel Guides.

ISBN 1-900949-90-3 .

Markham, I. S.; Ruparell, T. (2001).

Encountering Religion: An Introduction to the Religions of the World . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-631-20674-3 .

McDowell, Josh; Walker, Jim (2013).

Understanding Islam and Christianity: Beliefs That Separate Us and How to Talk About Them . Euguen, Oregon: Harvest House Publishers.

ISBN 9780736949910 .

Parrinder, Geoffrey (1965).

Jesus in the Qur'an . London: Oxford Oneworld Publications .

ISBN 978-1-85168-999-6 .

Peters, Francis E. (1990).

Judaism, Christianity, and Islam: The Classical Texts and Their Interpretation, Volume 3 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691020556 .

Parrinder, Geoffrey (2013).

Jesus in the Qur'an . Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-0-41573-463-9 .

Qaim, Mahdi Muntazir (2007).

Jesus Through the Qur'an and Shi'ite Narrations . Queens, New York: Tahrike Tarsile Qur'an Inc.

ISBN 978-1879402140 .

Reynolds, Gabriel Said (2010).

"On the Qur'anic Accusation of Scriptural Falsification (tahrîf) and Christian Anti-Jewish Polemic" (PDF) .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

130 (2): 189– 202 . Retrieved 2018-03-03 .

Ridgeon, Lloyd (2013).

Islamic Interpretations of Christianity . Routledge.

ISBN 9781136840135 .

Cook, David (2002).

Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic . University of Michigan: Darwin Press.

ISBN 9780878501427 .

Robinson, Neal (1991).

Christ in Islam and Christianity . New York: SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-791-40559-8 .

Schumann, Olaf H. (2002).

Jesus the Messiah in Muslim Thought . ISPCK/HIM.

ISBN 978-8172145224 .

Sonn, Tamarra (2004).

A Brief History of Islam . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4051-2174-3 .

Tieszen, Charles (2018).

Theological Issues in Christian-Muslim Dialogue . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781532610585 .

Waardenburg, Jackques (1999).

Muslim Perceptions of Other Religions: A Historical Survey . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-535576-5 .

Watt, W. Montgomery (1991).

Muslim-Christian Encounters: Perceptions and Misperceptions . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-05410-2 .

Watt, W. Montgomery (19 December 2013).

Muslim-Christian Encounters: Perceptions and Misperceptions . Routledge Revivals. Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-82043-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rippin, A. "Yahya b. Zakariya". In P. J. Bearman; Th. Bianquis; C. E. Bosworth; E. van Donzel; W. P. Heinrichs (eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Brill Academic Publishers.

ISSN 1573-3912 .

Saritoprak, Zeki (2014).

Islam's Jesus . Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

ISBN 9780813049403 . Retrieved 2014-05-13 .

Slade, Darren M. (January 2014).

"Arabia Haeresium Ferax (Arabia Bearer of Heresies): Schismatic Christianity's Potential Influence on Muhammad and the Qur'an" (PDF) .

American Theological Inquiry .

7 (1): 43– 53. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-02-02.

Wherry, E. M.

; Sale, G. (2000).

A Comprehensive Commentary on the Qurán: Comprising Sale's Translation and Preliminary Discourse (vol. II) . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-23188-6 .

Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2006). "' Etymythological Othering ' and the Power of 'Lexical Engineering' in Judaism , Islam and Christianity . A Socio-Philo(sopho)logical Perspective", Explorations in the Sociology of Language and Religion , edited by Tope Omoniyi and Joshua A. Fishman, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 237–258.

ISBN 90-272-2710-1 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Jesus in Islam .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jesus in Islam .

Jesus: A Summary of the Points About Which Islam and Christianity Agree and Disagree Dr. Alan Godlas, University of Georgia.

What Do Muslims Think About Jesus – Royal Embassy of Saudi Arabia Jesus Through Muslim Eyes – BBC The Story of Jesus Through Iranian Eyes – ABC News 7 Muslim Beliefs about Jesus Dr. Warren Larson Alim.org Surah 3. Al-i'Imran, Ayah 4 v t e Prophets in the Quran آدَم إِدرِيس نُوح هُود صَالِح إِبْرَاهِيْم لُوط إِسْمَاعِيْل Adam Adam Idris Enoch (?) Nuh Noah Hud Eber (?) Salih Selah (?) Ibrahim Abraham Lut Lot Ismail Ishmael إِسْحَاق يَعْقُوب يُوسُف أَيُّوْب شُعَيْب مُوسَى هَارُون ذُو الكِفْل دَاوُد Is'haq Isaac Yaqub Jacob Yusuf Joseph Ayyub Job Shuayb Jethro (?) Musa Moses Harun Aaron Dhu l-Kifl Ezekiel (?) Gautama Buddha (?) Dawud David سُلَيْمَان إِلْيَاس اليَسَع يُونُس زَكَرِيَّا يَحْيَى عِيسَى مُحَمَّد Sulayman Solomon Ilyas Elijah Al-Yasa Elisha Yunus Jonah Zakariya Zechariah Yahya John Isa Jesus Muhammad Muhammad Note: Muslims believe that there were many prophets sent by God to mankind. The Islamic prophets above are only the ones mentioned by name in the Quran .

v t e People and things in the Quran Characters Non-humans Allāh ('The God ') Names of Allah found in the Quran, such as Karīm (Generous) Animals Related The baqara (cow) of Israelites The dhiʾb (wolf) that Jacob feared could attack Joseph The fīl ( elephant ) of the Abyssinians Ḥimār ( Domesticated donkey ) The hud-hud ( hoopoe ) of Solomon The kalb (dog) of the sleepers of the cave The namlah (female ant) of Solomon The nūn (fish or whale) of Jonah The nāqat (she-camel) of Ṣāliḥ Non-related ʿAnkabūt (Female spider ) Dābbat al-Arḍ ( Beast of the Earth ) Ḥimār ( Wild ass ) Naḥl ( Honey bee ) Qaswarah (' Lion ', 'beast of prey' or 'hunter') Malāʾikah ( Angels ) Angels of Hell Mālik Zabāniyah Bearers of the Throne Harut and Marut Jundallah Kirāman Kātibīn (Honourable Scribes) Raqib Atid Muqarrabun Jibrīl (Gabriel, chief) Ar-Rūḥ ('The Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Amīn ('The Trustworthy Spirit') Ar-Rūḥ al-Qudus ('The Holy Spirit ') Angel of the Trumpet ( Isrāfīl or Raphael ) Malakul-Mawt (Angel of Death, Azrael) Mīkāil (Michael) Jinn (Genies) Jann ʿIfrīt Sakhr (Asmodeus) Qarīn Shayāṭīn ( Demons ) Iblīs ash-Shayṭān (the (chief) Devil ) Mārid ('Rebellious one') Others Ghilmān or Wildān Ḥūr Prophets Mentioned Ādam ( Adam ) Al-Yasa ʿ ( Elisha ) Ayyūb ( Job ) Dāwūd ( David ) Dhūl-Kifl (Ezekiel?) Hārūn (Aaron) Hūd (Eber?) Idrīs ( Enoch ?) Ilyās (Elijah) ʿImrān (Joachim the father of Maryam) Isḥāq ( Isaac ) Ismāʿīl ( Ishmael ) Dhabih Ullah Lūṭ ( Lot ) Ṣāliḥ Shuʿayb (Jethro, Reuel or Hobab ?) Sulaymān ibn Dāwūd ( Solomon son of David) ʿ Uzair ( Ezra ?) Yaḥyā ibn Zakariyyā ( John the Baptist the son of Zechariah) Yaʿqūb ( Jacob ) Isrāʾīl (Israel) Yūnus ( Jonah ) Dhūn-Nūn ('He of the Fish (or Whale )' or 'Owner of the Fish (or Whale)') Ṣāḥib al-Ḥūt ('Companion of the Whale') Yūsuf ibn Ya‘qūb ( Joseph son of Jacob) Zakariyyā ( Zechariah ) Ulul-ʿAzm ('Those of the Perseverance and Strong Will') Muḥammad Aḥmad Other names and titles of Muhammad ʿĪsā ( Jesus ) Al-Masīḥ (The Messiah ) Ibn Maryam (Son of Mary) Mūsā Kalīmullāh ( Moses He who spoke to God) Ibrāhīm Khalīlullāh ( Abraham Friend of God) Nūḥ ( Noah ) Debatable ones Dhūl-Qarnain Luqmān Maryam ( Mary ) Ṭālūt ( Saul or Gideon ?) Implied Irmiyā (Jeremiah) Ṣamūʾīl ( Samuel ) Yūshaʿ ibn Nūn (Joshua, companion and successor of Moses) People of Prophets Good ones Adam's immediate relatives Martyred son Wife Believer of Ya-Sin Family of Noah Father Lamech Mother Shamkhah bint Anush or Betenos Luqman's son People of Abraham Mother Abiona or Amtelai the daughter of Karnebo Ishmael's mother Isaac's mother People of Jesus Disciples (including Peter ) Mary's mother Zechariah's wife People of Solomon Mother Queen of Sheba Vizier Zayd (Muhammad's adopted son) People of Joseph Brothers (including Binyāmin (Benjamin) and Simeon ) Egyptians ʿAzīz ( Potiphar , Qatafir or Qittin) Malik (King Ar-Rayyān ibn Al-Walīd)) Wife of ʿAzīz ( Zulaykhah ) Mother People of Aaron and Moses Egyptians Believer (Hizbil or Hizqil ibn Sabura) Imraʾat Firʿawn ( Āsiyá bint Muzāḥim the Wife of Pharaoh , who adopted Moses) Magicians of the Pharaoh Wise, pious man Moses' wife Moses' sister-in-law Mother Sister Evil ones Āzar (possibly Terah ) Firʿawn ( Pharaoh of Moses' time) Hāmān Jālūt (Goliath) Qārūn (Korah, cousin of Moses) As-Sāmirī Abū Lahab Slayers of Ṣāliḥ's she-camel (Qaddar ibn Salif and Musda' ibn Dahr) Implied or not specified Abraha Abu Bakr Bal'am/Balaam Barṣīṣā Caleb or Kaleb the companion of Joshua Luqman's son Nebuchadnezzar II Nimrod Rahmah the wife of Ayyub Shaddad Groups Mentioned Aṣḥāb al-Jannah People of Paradise People of the Burnt Garden Aṣḥāb as-Sabt (Companions of the Sabbath ) Jesus' apostles Ḥawāriyyūn ( Disciples of Jesus ) Companions of Noah's Ark Aṣḥāb al-Kahf war-Raqīm ( Companions of the Cave and Al-Raqaim?

Companions of the Elephant People of al-Ukhdūd People of a township in Surah Ya-Sin People of Yathrib or Medina Qawm Lūṭ (People of Sodom and Gomorrah) Nation of Noah Tribes, ethnicities or families ‘ Ajam Ar-Rūm (literally 'The Romans') Banī Isrāʾīl (Children of Israel) Muʾtafikāt (Sodom and Gomorrah) People of Ibrahim People of Ilyas People of Nuh People of Shuaib Ahl Madyan People of Madyan ) Aṣḥāb al-Aykah ('Companions of the Wood') Qawm Yūnus (People of Jonah) Ya'juj and Ma'juj/Gog and Magog People of Fir'aun Current Ummah of Islam (Ummah of Muhammad) Aṣḥāb Muḥammad ( Companions of Muhammad ) Anṣār (literally 'Helpers') Muhajirun (Emigrants from Mecca to Medina) People of Mecca Wife of Abu Lahab Children of Ayyub Sons of Adam Wife of Nuh Wife of Lut Yaʾjūj wa Maʾjūj (Gog and Magog) Son of Nuh Aʿrāb ( Arabs or Bedouins ) ʿĀd (people of Hud) Companions of the Rass Qawm Tubbaʿ (People of Tubba ) People of Sabaʾ or Sheba Quraysh Thamūd (people of Ṣāliḥ) Aṣḥāb al-Ḥijr ('Companions of the Stoneland ') Ahl al-Bayt ('People of the Household') Household of Abraham Brothers of Yūsuf Lot's daughters Progeny of Imran Household of Moses Household of Muhammad ibn Abdullah ibn Abdul-Muttalib ibn Hashim Daughters of Muhammad Muhammad's wives Household of Salih Implicitly mentioned Amalek Ahl as-Suffa (People of the Verandah) Banu Nadir Banu Qaynuqa Banu Qurayza Iranian people Umayyad Dynasty Aus and Khazraj People of Quba Religious groups Ahl al-Dhimmah Kāfirūn disbelievers Majūs Zoroastrians Munāfiqūn ( Hypocrites ) Muslims Believers Ahl al-Kitāb ( People of the Book ) Naṣārā ( Christian (s) or People of the Injil) Ruhban (Christian monks) Qissis (Christian priest) Yahūd ( Jews ) Ahbār (Jewish scholars) Rabbani/Rabbi Sabians Polytheists Meccan polytheists at the time of Muhammad Mesopotamian polytheists at the time of Abraham and Lot Locations Mentioned Al-Arḍ Al-Muqaddasah ('The Holy Land') 'Blessed' Land' Al- Jannah ( Paradise , literally 'The Garden') Jahannam ( Hell ) Door of Hittah Madyan ( Midian ) Majmaʿ al-Baḥrayn Miṣr (Mainland Egypt ) Salsabīl (A river in Paradise) In the Arabian Peninsula (excluding Madyan) Al-Aḥqāf ('The Sandy Plains,' or 'the Wind-curved Sand-hills') Iram dhāt al-ʿImād ( Iram of the Pillars ) Al- Madīnah (formerly Yathrib ) ʿArafāt and Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām Al-Ḥijr (Hegra) Badr Ḥunayn Makkah ( Mecca ) Bakkah Ḥaraman Āminan ('Sanctuary (which is) Secure') Kaʿbah ( Kaaba ) Maqām Ibrāhīm (Station of Abraham) Safa and Marwa Sabaʾ ( Sheba ) ʿArim Sabaʾ ( Dam of Sheba ) Rass Sinai Region or Tīh Desert Al- Wād Al-Muqaddas Ṭuwan (The Holy Valley of Tuwa ) Al-Wādil-Ayman (The valley on the 'righthand' side of the Valley of Tuwa and Mount Sinai ) Al-Buqʿah Al-Mubārakah ('The Blessed Place') Mount Sinai or Mount Tabor In Mesopotamia Al-Jūdiyy Munzalanm-Mubārakan ('Place-of-Landing Blessed') Bābil ( Babylon ) Qaryat Yūnus ('Township of Jonah ,' that is Nineveh ) Religious locations Bayʿa (Church) Miḥrāb Monastery Masjid ( Mosque , literally 'Place of Prostration ') Al-Mashʿar Al-Ḥarām ('The Sacred Grove') Al-Masjid Al-Aqṣā ( Al-Aqsa , literally 'The Farthest Place-of-Prostration') Al-Masjid Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred Mosque of Mecca) Masjid al-Dirar A Mosque in the area of Medina, possibly: Masjid Qubāʾ ( Quba Mosque ) The Prophet's Mosque Salat (Synagogue) Implied Antioch Antakya Arabia Al- Ḥijāz (literally 'The Barrier') Al-Ḥajar al-Aswad (Black Stone)  & Al-Hijr of Isma'il Cave of Hira Ghār ath-Thawr (Cave of the Bull) Hudaybiyyah Ta'if Ayla Barrier of Dhul-Qarnayn Bayt al-Muqaddas & 'Ariha Bilād ar-Rāfidayn (Mesopotamia) Canaan Cave of Seven Sleepers Dār an-Nadwa Jordan River Nile River Palestine River Paradise of Shaddad Events, incidents, occasions or times Incident of Ifk Laylat al-Qadr (Night of Decree) Event of Mubahala Sayl al-ʿArim (Flood of the Great Dam of Ma'rib in Sheba) The Farewell Pilgrimage Treaty of Hudaybiyyah Battles or military expeditions Battle of al-Aḥzāb ('the Confederates') Battle of Badr Battle of Hunayn Battle of Khaybar Battle of Uhud Expedition of Tabuk Conquest of Mecca Days Al- Jumuʿah (The Friday) As- Sabt (The Sabbath or Saturday) Days of battles Days of Hajj Doomsday Months of the Islamic calendar 12 months: Four holy months Ash-Shahr Al-Ḥarām (The Sacred or Forbidden Month) Ramaḍān Pilgrimages Al- Ḥajj (literally 'The Pilgrimage', the Greater Pilgrimage) Al-ʿ Umrah (The Lesser Pilgrimage) Times for prayer or remembrance Times for Duʿāʾ (' Invocation '), Ṣalāh and Dhikr ('Remembrance', including Taḥmīd ('Praising'), Takbīr and Tasbīḥ ): Al-ʿAshiyy (The Afternoon or the Night) Al-Ghuduww ('The Mornings') Al-Bukrah ('The Morning') Aṣ-Ṣabāḥ ('The Morning') Al-Layl ('The Night') Al- ʿIshāʾ ('The Late-Night') Aẓ- Ẓuhr ('The Noon') Dulūk ash-Shams ('Decline of the Sun') Al- Masāʾ ('The Evening') Qabl al- Ghurūb ('Before the Setting (of the Sun)') Al-Aṣīl ('The Afternoon') Al- ʿAṣr ('The Afternoon') Qabl ṭulūʿ ash-Shams ('Before the rising of the Sun') Al- Fajr ('The Dawn') Implied Ghadir Khumm Laylat al-Mabit First Pilgrimage Other Holy books Al- Injīl (The Gospel of Jesus) Al- Qurʾān (The Book of Muhammad) Ṣuḥuf-i Ibrāhīm (Scroll(s) of Abraham) At- Tawrāt (The Torah ) Ṣuḥuf-i-Mūsā (Scroll(s) of Moses) Tablets of Stone Az- Zabūr (The Psalms of David) Umm al-Kitāb ('Mother of the Book(s)') Objects of people or beings Heavenly food of Jesus' apostles Noah's Ark Staff of Musa Tābūt as-Sakīnah (Casket of Shekhinah) Throne of Bilqis Trumpet of Israfil Mentioned idols (cult images) 'Ansāb Jibt and Ṭāghūt ( False god ) Of Israelites Baʿal The ʿijl ( golden calf statue) of Israelites Of Noah's people Nasr Suwāʿ Wadd Yaghūth Yaʿūq Of Quraysh Al-Lāt Al-ʿUzzā Manāt Celestial bodies Maṣābīḥ (literally 'lamps'): Al-Qamar (The Moon) Kawākib (Planets) Al-Arḍ (The Earth) Nujūm (Stars) Ash-Shams (The Sun) Plant matter Baṣal (Onion) Fūm (Garlic or wheat) Shaṭʾ (Shoot) Sūq (Plant stem) Zarʿ (Seed) Fruits ʿAdas ( Lentil ) Baql (Herb) Qith-thāʾ ( Cucumber ) Rummān ( Pomegranate ) Tīn ( Fig ) Zaytūn ( Olive ) In Paradise Forbidden fruit of Adam Bushes, trees or plants Plants of Sheba Athl ( Tamarisk ) Sidr ( Lote-tree ) Līnah (Tender Palm tree ) Nakhl ( Date palm ) Sidrat al-Muntahā Zaqqūm Liquids Māʾ (Water or fluid) Nahr (River) Yamm (River or sea) Sharāb (Drink) Note: Names are sorted alphabetically. Standard form: Islamic name / Biblical name (title or relationship) v t e Jesus Outline List of topics Chronology of Jesus's life Annunciation Nativity Virgin birth Date of birth Flight into Egypt Infancy (apocryphal) Christ Child Unknown years Baptism Temptation Apostles Selecting Ministry Disciples Sermon on the Mount / Plain Beatitudes Prayers Lord's Prayer Parables Miracles Transfiguration Homelessness Great Commandment Olivet Discourse Anointing Passion instruments Entry into Jerusalem Last Supper Farewell Discourse Agony in the Garden Betrayal Arrest Trial Crucifixion Sayings on the cross Instrument used True Cross Burial Tomb Resurrection Great Commission Ascension New Testament Gospels Matthew Mark Luke John Five Discourses of Matthew Gospel harmony Oral gospel traditions Historical background of the New Testament New Testament places associated with Jesus Names and titles of Jesus in the New Testament Historical Jesus Quest for the historical Jesus Historicity Sources Josephus Tacitus Mara bar Serapion Gospels Christ myth theory Depictions Bibliography Life of Christ in art Life of Christ Museum Statues Transfiguration Christianity Christ Christianity 1st century Christology Incarnation Person of Christ Pre-existence "I am" Relics Second Coming Session of Christ Son of God Cosmic Christ In other faiths Jesuism In comparative mythology Judaism In the Talmud Islam Ahmadiyya Baháʼí Faith Manichaeism Jesus the Splendour Mandaeism Master Jesus Family Genealogies Mary (mother) Joseph (legal father) Holy Family God the Father (alleged father) Panthera (alleged father) Brothers of Jesus Holy Kinship Anne (traditional maternal grandmother) Joachim (traditional maternal grandfather) Heli (paternal grandfather per Luke) Jacob (paternal grandfather per Matthew) Descendants Clopas (traditional uncle) Related Language of Jesus Interactions with women Mary Magdalene Mary, sister of Martha Christmas Easter Rejection of Jesus Criticism Mental health Race and appearance Sexuality and marital status Church of the Nativity Church of the Holy Sepulchre The Garden Tomb Shroud of Turin Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hjq4t
Cached time: 20250817043652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.427 seconds
Real time usage: 2.736 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22989/1000000
Revision size: 101231/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 740080/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 32172/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 503076/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.457/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19916517/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2287.727      1 -total
 18.98%  434.283      3 Template:Reflist
 18.04%  412.780     49 Template:Cite_book
 14.06%  321.678    105 Template:Sfn
 12.27%  280.615     27 Template:Navbox
 10.27%  234.907      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.12%  231.448      1 Template:Infobox_person
  7.72%  176.593     27 Template:Lang
  5.94%  135.844      2 Template:Ubl
  5.87%  134.219      1 Template:Islamic_prophets Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:173722:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043652 and revision id 1306223224. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jesus_in_Islam&oldid=1306223224 " Categories : Jesus in Islam New Testament people in Islam Entering heaven alive Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Use Oxford spelling from January 2025 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with hCards All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 16:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jesus in Islam 68 languages Add topic

