Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Contributions to psychoanalysis 3 Infant observations 4 Child analysis 5 Object relation theory 6 "Envy and Gratitude" Toggle "Envy and Gratitude" subsection 6.1 Primitive envy 6.2 Relation to the good object 6.3 Capacity for gratitude 6.4 Clinical significance 7 Influence on feminism 8 In popular culture 9 Bibliography 10 See also 11 References 12 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Melanie Klein 46 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lëtzebuergesch മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian-British psychoanalyst (1882–1960) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Melanie Klein" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Melanie Klein Melanie Klein in 1952 Born Melanie Reizes ( 1882-03-30 ) 30 March 1882 Vienna , Austria-Hungary Died 22 September 1960 (1960-09-22) (aged 78) London, England Known for Object relations theory Therapeutic techniques for children Coining the term ' reparation ' Klein's theory of splitting Projective identification Envy and gratitude Unconscious phantasy Children Melitta Schmideberg Scientific career Fields Psychoanalysis Melanie Klein ( / k l aɪ n / ; [ 1 ] German: [klaɪn] ; née Reizes ; 30 March 1882 – 22 September 1960) was an Austrian-British author and psychoanalyst known for her work in child analysis . She was the primary figure in the development of object relations theory . Klein's work primarily focused on the role of ambivalence and moral ambiguity in human development.

[ 2 ] Klein suggested that pre-verbal existential anxiety in infancy catalyzed the formation of the unconscious, which resulted in the unconscious splitting of the world into good and bad idealizations . In her theory, how the child resolves that split depends on the constitution of the child and the character of nurturing the child experiences. The quality of resolution can inform the presence, absence, and/or type of distresses a person experiences later in life.

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Melanie Klein c. 1900 Melanie Klein was born into a Jewish family and spent most of her early life in Vienna . She was the fourth and final child of parents Moriz, a doctor, and Libussa Reizes.

[ 4 ] Educated at the Gymnasium , Klein wanted to go on to university to study medicine.

[ citation needed ] However, her family's loss of wealth – and the pressure on her, as a young woman, to marry and have children – caused her to give up on realizing this wish.

At the age of 21, she married an industrial chemist, Arthur Klein, and soon after gave birth to their first child, Melitta . Klein then had her second child, Hans, in 1907 and her third and final child, Erich, in 1914. After having those two additional children, Klein suffered from clinical depression as these pregnancies took a toll on her. This and her unhappy marriage soon led Klein to seek treatment. Shortly after her family moved to Budapest in 1910, Klein began a course of therapy with psychoanalyst Sándor Ferenczi . It was during their time together that Klein developed an interest in the study of psychoanalysis.

Encouraged by Ferenczi, Klein began her studies by observing her own children.

[ 5 ] During this time, there was little documentation on the topic of psychoanalysis in children. So, Klein took advantage of this by developing her " play technique ". According to Klein, play is symbolic of unconscious material that can be interpreted and analyzed in the same way that dreams and free associations are in adults. Later, her research contributed to the development of play therapy.

During 1921, with her marriage failing, Klein moved to Berlin where she joined the Berlin Psycho-Analytic Society under the tutelage of Karl Abraham . Although Abraham supported her pioneering work with children, neither Klein nor her ideas received much support in Berlin. As a divorced woman whose academic qualifications did not even include a bachelor's degree, Klein was a visible iconoclast within a profession dominated by male physicians. Nevertheless, Klein's early work had a strong influence on the developing theories and techniques of psychoanalysis, particularly in Great Britain.

[ citation needed ] Her theories on human development and defense mechanisms were a source of controversy, as they conflicted with Freud 's theories on development, and caused much discussion in the world of developmental psychology. Around the same time Klein presented her ideas, Anna Freud was doing the very same. The two became unofficial rivals of sorts, amid the protracted debates between the followers of Klein and the followers of Freud. Amid these so-called ' controversial discussions ', the British Psychoanalytical Society split into three separate training divisions: (1) Kleinian, (2) Freudian, and (3) Independent. These debates finally ceased [ when?

] with an agreement on a dual approach to instruction in the field of child analysis.

Contributions to psychoanalysis [ edit ] Melanie Klein c. 1927 A dinner to celebrate Melanie Klein's 70th birthday Klein was one of the first to use traditional psychoanalysis with young children. She was innovative in both her techniques [ 6 ] (such as working with children using toys) and her theories on infant development.

By observing and analyzing the play and interactions of children, Klein built on the work of Freud's unconscious mind . Her dive into the unconscious mind of the infant yielded the findings of the early Oedipus complex , as well as the developmental roots of the superego .

Klein's theoretical work incorporates Freud's belief in the existence of the death drive , reflecting the notion that all living organisms are inherently drawn toward an "inorganic" state, and therefore, somehow, towards death. In psychological terms, Eros (properly, the life drive), the postulated sustaining and uniting principle of life, is thereby presumed to have a companion force, Thanatos (death drive), which seeks to terminate and disintegrate life (although Freud never used the term 'Thanatos' in his own writing [ 7 ] [ 8 ] ). Both Freud and Klein regarded these "bio-mental" forces as the foundations of the psyche. These primary unconscious forces, whose mental matrix is the id , spark the ego —the experiencing self—into activity.

Id, ego, and superego , to be sure, were merely shorthand terms (similar to the instincts ) referring to highly complex and mostly uncharted psychodynamic operations.

[ 9 ] Infant observations [ edit ] Klein's work on the importance of observing infants began in 1935 with a public lecture in London on weaning .

Klein states that mother–infant relationships are built on more than feeding and developing the infant's attachment; the mother's attachment and bond with her baby is just as important, if not more. Klein came to this conclusion by using actual observations of herself and mothers that she knew. She described how infants show interest in their mothers' face, the touch of their mothers' hands, and the infants' pleasure in touching their mothers' breast. The relationship is built on affection that emerges very soon after birth. Klein says that as early as two months, infants show interest in the mother that goes beyond feeding. She observed that the infant will often smile up at the mother and cuddle against her chest. The way the infant reacts and responds to their mother's attitude and feelings, the love and interest which the infant shows, accounts for an object relation .

Klein also goes on to say that infants recognize that their achievements, such as crawling and walking, give their parents joy. In one observation, Klein says that the infant wishes to evoke love and pleasure in their mother with their achievements. Klein says that the infant notices that their smile makes their mother happy and results in the mothers attention. The infant also recognizes that their smile may serve a better purpose than their cry.

Klein also talks about the " apathetic " baby. She says that it is easy to mistake a baby that enjoys their food and cries a little for a happy baby. Development later shows that some of these easy-going babies are not happy. Their lack of crying may be due to some kind of apathy. It is hard to assess a young person's state of mind without allowing for a great complexity of emotions. When these babies are followed up on we see that a great deal of difficulty appears. These children are often shy of people, and their interest in the external world, play, and learning is inhibited. They are often slow at learning to crawl and walk because there seems to be little incentive. They are often showing signs of neurosis as their development goes on.

[ 10 ] Child analysis [ edit ] While Freud's ideas concerning children mostly came from working with adult patients, Klein was innovative in working directly with children, often as young as two years old. Klein saw children's play as their primary mode of emotional communication. While observing children as they played with toys such as dolls, animals, plasticine or pencils and paper, Klein documented their activities and interactions. She then attempted to interpret the unconscious meaning behind their play. Following Freud, she emphasized the significant role that parental figures played in the child's fantasy life and concluded that the timing of Freud's Oedipus complex was incorrect. Contradicting Freud, she proposed that the superego was present from birth.

After exploring ultra-aggressive fantasies of hate, envy , and greed in very young and disturbed children, Melanie Klein proposed a model of the human psyche that linked significant oscillations of state, with the postulated Eros or Thanatos pulsations. She named the state of the mind in which the sustaining principle of life dominates the depressive position . A depressive position is the understanding that good and evil things are one. The fears and worries about the fate of the people destroyed in the child's fantasy are all in the latter. The child tries to repair his mother through phantasm and behavior therapy, overcoming his depression and anxiety. He employs phantasies representing love and restoration to restore the others he destroyed. Morality is based on the standpoint of depression. Klein named it the depressive position because the efforts to restore the integrity of the damaged object are accompanied by depression and despair. After all, the child doubts whether it can fix everything it hurts. Many consider this to be her most significant contribution to psychoanalytic philosophy. She later developed her ideas about an earlier developmental psychological state corresponding to the disintegrating tendency of life, which she called the paranoid-schizoid position .

[ 11 ] Klein coined the term "paranoid-schizoid defense" to emphasize how the child's worries manifest as persecution fantasies and how he defends himself against persecution by separating. The paranoid-schizoid position developed at birth is a common psychotic condition.

Klein's insistence on regarding aggression as an important force in its own right when analyzing children brought her into conflict with Freud's daughter Anna Freud, who was one of the other prominent child psychotherapists in continental Europe but who moved to London in 1938 where Klein had been working for several years. Many controversies arose from this conflict, and these are often referred to as the controversial discussions . Battles were played out between the two sides, each presenting scientific papers, working out their respective positions and where they differed, during war-time Britain. A compromise was eventually reached whereby three distinct training groups were formed within the British Psychoanalytical Society, with Anna Freud's influence remaining largely predominant in the US.

According to Klein, events such as wars affect the course of child development. A shift occurs from a paranoid-schizoid position to a depressive position. The paranoid-schizoid position is characterized by splitting the self and other into dichotomous good and evil with little ability to integrate the two or to recognize the relativity of these terms.

[ 12 ] Object relation theory [ edit ] Melanie Klein and Anna Freud Klein is known to be one of the primary founders of object relations theory .

[ 13 ] This theory of psychoanalysis is based on the assumption that all individuals have within them an internalized, and primarily unconscious, realm of relationships. These relationships refer not only to the world around the individual but more specifically to other individuals surrounding the subject. Object relation theory focuses primarily on the interaction individuals have with others, how those interactions are internalized, and how these now internalized object relations affect one's psychological framework. The term "object" refers to the potential embodiment of fear, desire, envy or other comparable emotions. The object and the subject are separated, [ 14 ] allowing for a more simplistic approach to addressing the deprived areas of need when used in the clinical setting.

Klein's approach differed from Anna Freud's ego-psychology approach. Klein explored the interpersonal aspect of the structural model. In the mid-1920s, she thought differently about the first mode of defense. Klein thought it was expulsion while Freud speculated it was repression (Stein, 1990). Klein suggested that the infant could relate—from birth—to its mother, who was deemed either "good" or "bad" and internalized as archaic part-object, thereby developing a phantasy life in the infant. Because of this supposition, Klein's beliefs required her to proclaim that an ego exists from birth, enabling the infant to relate to others early in life (Likierman & Urban, 1999).

"Envy and Gratitude" [ edit ] Melanie Klein's last major work "Envy and Gratitude" was published in 1957 and is considered the culmination of her theoretical contributions.

[ 15 ] This work represents the maturation of Klein's psychoanalytic thinking and integrates her previous concepts—paranoid-schizoid and depressive positions, death drive, projective identification—into a more comprehensive framework.

Primitive envy [ edit ] Klein defines envy as "the angry feeling that another person possesses and enjoys something desirable—the envious impulse being to take it away or to spoil it." [ 16 ] According to Klein, envy is one of the earliest expressions of the death drive and is an innate emotion. Envy exists even before the infant can fully perceive the external world and the mother, and it affects the first object relation, which is the relation to the breast.

In Klein's theory, there is an important distinction between envy and jealousy: "Jealousy is based on love and aims at the possession of the loved object and the removal of the rival; envy is the angry feeling that another person possesses and enjoys something desirable—the envious impulse being to take it away or to spoil it." [ 17 ] Envy is directed towards the creative capacity of the good object that is both loved and hated. The infant envies the breast (the good object) that feeds and comforts them, and wants to spoil and destroy its goodness. This sadistic impulse arises from a kind of pain stemming from the infant's inability to satisfy its own needs.

[ 18 ] Relation to the good object [ edit ] According to Klein, envy threatens the capacity to establish a relationship with the good object. Excessive envy can prevent the infant from forming a positive relationship with the breast and internalizing it as a good internal object. This undermines the process of establishing a good internal object, which is vital for healthy ego development.

[ 19 ] Klein also distinguishes between envy and greed: "Excessive greed aims at complete scooping out, sucking dry, and devouring the breast; whereas envy aims at poisoning and destroying the good breast so that it cannot be enjoyed." [ 20 ] This distinction is important for understanding the difficulties in moving from the paranoid-schizoid position to the depressive position .

Excessive envy can impede the transition to the depressive position because the individual cannot develop the capacity to feel concern for and repair the damaged good object. Clinically, this manifests in the continued use of splitting and other primitive defense mechanisms.

[ 21 ] Capacity for gratitude [ edit ] Klein argues that the most important emotional force against envy is gratitude. Gratitude is the foundation for internalizing and preserving the good object. The feeling of gratitude enables the infant to recognize and appreciate the love and care received from the mother. "The feeling of gratitude arises from the full satisfaction of a good experience. Gratitude mitigates the feeling of envy because when we are grateful, we understand the value of what we possess rather than focusing on what others have." [ 22 ] According to Klein, the capacity to feel gratitude nurtures trust, love, and generosity, and contributes to the enrichment of the individual's inner world. This capacity plays a central role in the successful resolution of the depressive position.

[ 23 ] Clinical significance [ edit ] The concepts of "Envy and Gratitude" occupy a central place in Klein's clinical work. Klein specifically studied how the feeling of envy affects the therapeutic relationship in severe narcissistic and psychotic disorders.

[ 24 ] According to Klein, excessive envy hinders treatment in two ways: By devaluing the therapist's help and interpretations By undermining the patient's capacity for insight and progress Envy can jeopardize the therapeutic relationship and the healing process because the patient becomes unable to accept the analyst's help. In the therapeutic process, the analysis of envious feelings and the development of the capacity for gratitude are key to successful treatment.

[ 25 ] Klein's concepts still hold great importance in contemporary psychoanalytic practice, especially in the treatment of severe personality disorders and narcissistic structures. Clinicians use Klein's conceptual framework to understand and work with the patient's envious feelings.

[ 26 ] Influence on feminism [ edit ] In Dorothy Dinnerstein 's book The Mermaid and the Minotaur (1976) (also published in the UK as The Rocking of the Cradle and the Ruling of the World ), drawing from elements of Sigmund Freud 's psychoanalysis, particularly as developed by Klein, Dinnerstein argued that sexism and aggression are both inevitable consequences of child-rearing being left exclusively to women.

[ 27 ] Klein concluded that the infant's first and major concern is fear of being annihilated by the anger it feels, for example, when it is frustrated by the mother.

[ 28 ] As a solution, Dinnerstein proposed that men and women equally share infant and childcare responsibilities. She argues that if men shared childcare equally with women, they would be equally involved in the phantasies associated with infancy's paranoid and depressive worries. There would then be no way out of dealing with these anxieties and creating a more realistic attitude toward both men and women [ 29 ] [ 30 ] This book became a classic of U.S.

second-wave feminism and was later translated into seven languages.

[ 31 ] Feminists critical of Klein's work have drawn attention to an unwarranted assumption of a natural causality connecting sex, gender and desire, stereotypical gender descriptions and in general a prescriptive normative privileging of heterosexual dynamics.

[ 32 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Melanie Klein was the subject of a 1988 play by Nicholas Wright , entitled Mrs. Klein . Set in London in 1934, the play involves a conflict between Melanie Klein and her daughter Melitta Schmideberg , after the death of Melanie's son Hans Klein. The depiction of Melanie Klein is quite unfavorable: the play suggests that Hans' death was a suicide and also reveals that Klein had analysed these two children. In the original production at the Cottesloe Theatre in London, Gillian Barge played Melanie Klein, with Zoë Wanamaker and Francesca Annis playing the supporting roles. In the 1995 New York revival of the play, Melanie Klein was played by Uta Hagen , who described Melanie Klein as a role that she was meant to play.

[ 33 ] The play was broadcast on the British radio station BBC 4 in 2008 and revived at the Almeida Theatre in London in October 2009 with Clare Higgins as Melanie Klein.

Melanie Klein in the 1950s The indie band Volcano Suns dedicated their first record "The Bright Orange Years" to Klein for her work on childhood aggression.

Scottish author Alexander McCall Smith makes extensive use of Melanie Klein and her theories in his 44 Scotland Street series. One of the characters, Irene, has an obsession with Kleinian theory, and uses it to "guide" her in the upbringing of her son, Bertie .

Bibliography [ edit ] Melanie Klein's works are collected in four volumes: The Collected Writings of Melanie Klein Volume 1 – Love, Guilt and Reparation: And Other Works 1921–1945 , London: Hogarth Press.

Volume 2 – The Psychoanalysis of Children , London: Hogarth Press.

Volume 3 – Envy and Gratitude , London: Hogarth Press.

Volume 4 – Narrative of a Child Analysis , London: Hogarth Press.

See also [ edit ] Edna O'Shaughnessy Ignacio Matte Blanco Joseph J. Sandler Nina Searl Reparation (psychoanalysis) Object relations theory Symbolic equation References [ edit ] ^ "Klein" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ "The Great Psychoanalysts 2: Melanie Klein" .

Mad In America . 29 December 2017.

^ R. D. Hinshelwood : Clinical Klein , Basic Books, 2003, ISBN 978-0-465-02975-4 ^ "melanie klein trust" .

melanie-klein-trust.org.uk . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ "Biography of Melanie Klein" . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ Horacio Etchegoyen : The Fundamentals of Psychoanalytic Technique , Karnac Books ed., New Ed, 2005, ISBN 1-85575-455-X ^ Jones, Ernest (1957) [1953].

The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud. Volume 3 . New York City: Basic Books . p. 273.

It is a little odd that Freud himself never, except in conversation, used for the death instinct the term Thanatos , one which has become so popular since. At first he used the terms "death instinct" and "destructive instinct" indiscriminately, alternating between them, but in his discussion with Einstein about war he made the distinction that the former is directed against the self and the latter, derived from it, is directed outward. Stekel had in 1909 used the word Thanatos to signify a death-wish, but it was Federn who introduced it in the present context.

^ Laplanche, Jean ; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973].

"Thanatos" .

The Language of Psychoanalysis .

Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-429-92124-7 .

^ Fagan, Abigail (30 March 2024).

"What Is Negative Transference? - Psychology Today" .

www.psychologytoday.com .

^ Sherwin-White, Susan (January 2017). "Melanie Klein and infant observation".

Infant Observation .

20 (1): 5– 26.

doi : 10.1080/13698036.2017.1311235 .

ISSN 1369-8036 .

S2CID 152199987 .

^ Dillon, M. C. (1978). "Merleau-Ponty and the Psychogenesis of the Self".

Journal of Phenomenological Psychology .

9 ( 1– 2): 84– 98.

doi : 10.1163/156916278X00032 .

^ "A dose of Depressive Realism for the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict" .

www.timesofisrael.com . 8 February 2024.

^ "Biography of Melanie Klein" .

apadivisions.org . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ Joan Berzoff; Laura Melano Flanagan; Patricia Hertz (2016).

Inside out and outside in: psychodynamic clinical theory and psychopathology in contemporary multicultural contexts . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-4422-3683-7 .

OCLC 1026414592 .

^ Segal, Hanna (2018).

Introduction to the Work of Melanie Klein . Karnac classics (New, enlarged ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-946439-50-8 .

^ Klein, Melanie (1980), The writings of Melanie Klein. Vol. 3: Envy and gratitude and other works, 1946 - 1963 , The international psycho-analytical Library (2nd impr ed.), London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 978-0-7012-0409-9 ^ Klein, Melanie (1980), The writings of Melanie Klein. Vol. 3: Envy and gratitude and other works, 1946 - 1963 , The international psycho-analytical Library (2nd impr ed.), London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 978-0-7012-0409-9 ^ Grotstein, James S. (2009).

"... But at the same time and on another level ..." . London: Karnac.

ISBN 978-1-85575-786-8 .

^ Klein, Melanie (1987). Mitchell, Juliet (ed.).

The selected Melanie Klein . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-02-921481-7 .

^ Klein, Melanie (1980), The writings of Melanie Klein. Vol. 3: Envy and gratitude and other works, 1946 - 1963 , The international psycho-analytical Library (2nd impr ed.), London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 978-0-7012-0409-9 ^ Segal, Hanna (2018).

Introduction to the Work of Melanie Klein . Karnac classics (New, enlarged ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-946439-50-8 .

^ Klein, Melanie (1980), The writings of Melanie Klein. Vol. 3: Envy and gratitude and other works, 1946 - 1963 , The international psycho-analytical Library (2nd impr ed.), London: Hogarth Press, ISBN 978-0-7012-0409-9 ^ Spillius, Elizabeth Bott (2007).

Encounters with Melanie Klein: selected papers of Elizabeth Spillius . The new library of psychoanalysis. London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-41999-4 .

^ Hinshelwood, Robert D. (1996).

A dictionary of Kleinian thought (2nd, rev. and enlarged ed.). London: Free Association Books.

ISBN 978-0-946960-83-5 .

^ Segal, Hanna; Steiner, John (1997).

Psychoanalysis, literature, and war: papers, 1972-1995 . New library of psychoanalysis. London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-15329-4 .

^ Britton, Ronald (2004).

Sex, death, and the superego: experiences in psychoanalysis (Reprinted ed.). London: Karnac.

ISBN 978-1-85575-948-0 .

^ Dinnerstein, Dorothy (1987).

The Rocking of the Cradle and the Ruling of the World (trade paperback) (Reprint with new introduction ed.). London: The Women's Press . p. 26 and 33–34.

ISBN 0-7043-4027-5 .

^ Sayers, J. (2013). The autobiography of Melanie Klein. Psychoanalysis and History, 15(2), 127–
	163.

https://doi.org/10.3366/pah.2013.0130 ^ Sayers, J. (2013). The autobiography of Melanie Klein. Psychoanalysis and History, 15(2), 127–
	163.

https://doi.org/10.3366/pah.2013.0130 ^ Dinnerstein, Dorothy (1987).

The rocking of the cradle and the ruling of the world . London: Women's Press.

ISBN 0-7043-4027-5 .

^ "Dorothy Dinnerstein; Feminist Writer Was 69"(Obituary).

The New York Times . 19 December 1992. Retrieved 2 April 2011.

^ O'Connor, Noreen and Ryan, Joanna  'Klein: the Phantasy that Anatomy is Destiny' in Shelley Saguaro (ed) Psychoanalysis and Woman: A Reader , London: Macmillan 2000 ^ Ben Brantley, "Theater Review: Uta Hagen returns, tossing Wine," New York Times, 25 October 1995.

Sources [ edit ] Grosskurth, Phyllis (1986).

Melanie Klein: Her World and Her Work . New York: Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 1-56821-445-6 .

Robert Hinshelwood , Susan Robinson, Oscar Zarate, Introducing Melanie Klein , Icon Books UK 2003 Robert Hinshelwood, A Dictionary of Kleinian Thought , Free Association Books UK 1989 Robert Hinshelwood, Clinical Klein , Free Association Books UK 1993 Melanie Klein, 'The autobiography of Melanie Klein' ed. Janet Sayers with John Forrester, Psychoanalysis and History 15.2 (2013) pp. 127–63 Mary L Jacobus, "The Poetics of Psychoanalysis: In the Wake of Klein", Oxford University Press, 2006, ISBN 0-19-924636-X Julia Kristeva , Melanie Klein (European Perspectives: A Series in Social Thought and Cultural Criticism) tr. Ross Guberman, Columbia University Press, 2004 Donald Meltzer (Information in French) "The Kleinian Development (New edition)", Publisher: Karnac Books; Reprint edition 1998, ISBN 1-85575-194-1 Donald Meltzer : "Dream-Life: A Re-Examination of the Psycho-Analytical Theory and Technique" Publisher: Karnac Books, 1983, ISBN 0-902965-17-4 Meira Likierman, "Melanie Klein, Her Work in Context" Continuum International, Paperback, 2002 Hanna Segal (Information in French) : "Klein" Publisher: Karnac Books; Reprint edition (1989) ISBN 0-946439-69-9 "The Work of Hanna Segal: A Kleinian Approach to Clinical Practice (Classical Psychoanalysis and Its Applications) " Publisher: Jason Aronson , 1993), ISBN 0-87668-422-3 "Dream, Phantasy and Art" Publisher: Routledge; 1 edition 1990, ISBN 0-415-01798-X Transcript of a seminar titled "Motivation: the artist and the psychoanalyst" John Steiner (Information in French) : "Psychic Retreats" (...) relative peace and protection from strain when meaningful contact with the analyst is experienced as(...), Publisher: Routledge; 1993, ISBN 0-415-09924-2 C. Fred Alford, Melanie Klein and Critical Social Theory: An Account of Politics, Art, and Reason Based on Her Psychoanalytic Theory , Yale UP 1990 Rose, Jacqueline (1993).

Why war?: psychoanalysis, politics, and the return to Melanie Klein . Oxford, UK Cambridge, Mass., USA: B. Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-18924-4 .

Herbert Rosenfeld : "Impasse and Interpretation: Therapeutic and Anti-Therapeutic Factors in the Psycho-Analytic Treatment of Psychotic, Borderline, and Neurotic Patients", Publisher: Tavistock Publications, 1987, ISBN 0-422-61010-0 Julia Segal: (1992). Melanie Klein. London: Sage.

ISBN 0-8039-8477-4 Ronald Britton: "Sex, Death, and the Superego: Experiences in Psychoanalysis", Publisher: Karnac Books; 2003, ISBN 1-85575-948-9 Ronald Britton: "Belief and Imagination", Publisher: Taylor & Francis LTD; 1998, ISBN 0-415-19438-5 Monique Lauret et Jean-Philippe Raynaud, "Melanie Klein, une pensée vivante", Presses Universitaires de France, 2008, ISBN 978-2-13-057039-4 Klein, Melanie (1987).

Mitchell, Juliet (ed.).

The selected Melanie Klein . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 978-0-02-921481-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Grosskurth, Phyllis (1986).

Melanie Klein: Her World and Her Work.

Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., ISBN 1-56821-445-6 Kristeva, Julia (2000).

Melanie Klein.

Columbia University Press, New York (translated from French by Ross Guberman).

Likierman, Meira (2001) Melanie Klein: Her Work in Context . Continuum Books, London/New York.

Rustin, Margaret; Rustin, Michael (2016).

Reading Klein – New Library of Psychoanalysis Teaching Series . Routledge, London.

ISBN 1-134-83267-2 .

Spillius, Elizabeth et al (2011).

The New Dictionary of Kleinian Thought.

Routledge, London.

Steiner, John (2017).

Lectures on Technique by Melanie Klein: Edited with Critical Review by John Steiner.

Routledge, London.

Sayers, J. (2013). The autobiography of Melanie Klein. Psychoanalysis and History, 15(2), 127–163.

https://doi.org/10.3366/pah.2013.0130 External links [ edit ] Library resources about Melanie Klein Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Melanie Klein Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Melanie Klein at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Melanie Klein at Wikiquote The personal papers of Melanie Klein are available for study at the Wellcome Collection.

Melanie Klein in the Encyclopædia Britannica Biography, psychoanalytic techniques, theory Melanie Klein Trust Biography at FeministVoices.com v t e Attachment theory Theory Affectional bond Attachment in adults Attachment in children Attachment disorder Attachment and health Attachment measures Attachment theory Dynamic-maturational model of attachment and adaptation Fathers as attachment figures Human bonding Maternal deprivation Object relations theory Reactive attachment disorder Notable theorists Mary Ainsworth William E. Blatz John Bowlby Patricia McKinsey Crittenden Erik Erikson Sigmund Freud Harry Harlow Jerome Kagan Melanie Klein Konrad Lorenz Mary Main René Spitz Nikolaas Tinbergen Clinical applications Attachment-based therapy (children) Attachment-based psychotherapy Dyadic developmental psychotherapy Others History of attachment theory v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Melanie_Klein&oldid=1300090575 " Categories : 1882 births 1960 deaths Psychoanalysts from Vienna Jewish scientists Jewish psychoanalysts Austrian Jews Jews from Austria-Hungary Austrian emigrants to the United Kingdom British psychoanalysts Epistemologists Transdisciplinarity 20th-century British psychologists 20th-century Austrian psychologists Motivation theorists Positive psychologists Child development British developmental psychologists Freudians Analysands of Karl Abraham Analysands of Sándor Ferenczi Object relations theorists 20th-century Austrian writers 20th-century Austrian women writers History of mental health in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 06:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Melanie Klein 46 languages Add topic

