Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Reclaiming Marx's Capital 3 Marxian school of economics 4 Selected works 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Andrew Kliman 2 languages Español Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist (born 1955) Andrew Kliman Born 1955 Academic background Alma mater University of Utah Thesis Rising Joblessness Among Black Male Youth, 1950-1980: A Regional Analysis (1988) Influences Karl Marx , G.W.F. Hegel , Raya Dunayevskaya [ 1 ] Academic work Discipline Economist School or tradition Marxism Institutions Pace University Notable ideas Temporal Single System Interpretation Andrew Kliman (born 1955) is an American economist and professor of Economics . He is the author of several publications on Marxian economics . His book Reclaiming Marx's " Capital " defends the Temporal Single System Interpretation of Karl Marx 's value theory against claims of inconsistency from neoclassical , neo-Ricardian , and other economists.

Education [ edit ] Kliman holds a BA cum laude (1978) from the University of Maryland and a PhD (1988) in Economics from the University of Utah .

[ 2 ] Reclaiming Marx's Capital [ edit ] Writing in History of Political Economy, professor Bill Lucarelli has argued that " Reclaiming Marx’s “Capital” stands like a beacon in recent academic controversies over Marx’s theory of value. ... Essentially, the aim of this book is not so much about vindicating and canonizing St. Marx, but rather to debunk the myth of internal inconsistency. In so doing, Professor Kliman succeeds quite admirably. ... It is ... an indictment of the academic profession that the TSSI approach has been neglected for more than a quarter of a century. The specter of Sraffa , it appears, still haunts the ivory towers of academia." [ 3 ] Writing in Nova Economia, professor Eduardo Maldonado Filho writes, "The structure of the book, and the manner and accuracy with which the controversial arguments have been presented by the author, allow the interested reader, even one not versed in Marxist economics or mathematics, to understand the issues in the controversy and, not less important, to form his/her own opinion about the topics that have been debated. ... [T]he effort of reading will ... lead to effective comprehension of why Marx’s critics are wrong in their allegations. In my opinion, Kliman’s book constitutes the most important contribution to political economy of the last three decades and, as such, it is highly recommended for all those interested in Marx’s work." [ 4 ] Writing in Review of Radical Political Economics, professor Ajit Sinha argued for the existence of a "major weakness of this book: a lack of rigor in reasoning".

[ 5 ] His published response was criticized heavily for academic dishonesty and deliberately misrepresenting Kliman's arguments.

[ 6 ] Marxian school of economics [ edit ] Kliman has recently discussed what he calls the "disintegration of the Marxian school" of economics. In this paper, he also proposes measures to halt and reverse this process, namely (1) "the field needs to greatly reduce its dependence on the resources of academia. Intellectual autonomous zones need to be created"; (2) "cooperative behavior and attitudes, not uncooperative ones, need to be fostered and rewarded"; (3) "efforts to solve theoretical problems, not efforts to create and perpetuate them, should be fostered and rewarded"; (4) "run-of-the-mill anomalies such as the 'transformation problem' should not be allowed to become sources of internal crisis"; and (5) "people outside the field need to appreciate how profoundly the myth of Marx’s internal inconsistencies has damaged it. [...] since a false charge of inconsistency issued knowingly is the moral equivalent of defamation, it would not be unreasonable for the public to ask those who have perpetuated the myth of inconsistency to make restitution." [ 7 ] Selected works [ edit ] Reclaiming Marx's "Capital": A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency , Lexington Books, December  2006, ISBN 978-0739118511 The Failure of Capitalist Production: Underlying Causes of the Great Recession , Pluto Press, November 2011, ISBN 978-0745332390 See also [ edit ] Critique of political economy References [ edit ] ^ Kliman, Andrew (2007).

Reclaiming Marx's "Capital:" A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency . Lexington Books. p. xv.

^ Curriculum Vitae ^ Lucarelli, Bill (2008) Review of Reclaiming Marx's "Capital," History of Political Economy, vol. 40, no, 3, 2008, pp. 563-64 ^ Maldonado Filho, Eduardo  (2009) Review of Reclaiming Marx's "Capital," Nova Economia, vol. 19, no, 2, 2009 ^ Sinha, Ajit (2009).

"Book Review: Reclaiming Marx's "Capital" A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency Andrew Kliman; Lanham: Lexington Books; 2007; pp. 230; Paperback" .

Review of Radical Political Economics .

41 (3): 422– 427.

doi : 10.1177/0486613409335813 .

S2CID 154235394 .

^ Freeman, Alan (15 October 2010).

"Letter to the editorial board of RRPE" .

^ Kliman, Andrew (2010) " The Disintegration of the Marxian School ", Capital and Class, vol. 34, no. 1, 2010, pp. 361-368 External links [ edit ] Personal website Association of Heterodox Economics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andrew_Kliman&oldid=1302360285 " Categories : 1955 births 20th-century American economists 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American historians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American economists 21st-century American essayists 21st-century American historians 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers American essayists American male non-fiction writers American Marxist historians American Marxist writers Autonomism Cooperative theorists Critics of capitalism Critics of political economy Living people Marxian economists Marxist humanists Marxist theorists Pace University faculty Socialist economists University of Maryland, College Park alumni University of Utah alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 23:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andrew Kliman 2 languages Add topic

