Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Latin Church Toggle Latin Church subsection 1.1 Role of coadjutor 1.2 Right of succession 2 Eastern Catholic Churches 3 Anglican communion 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Coadjutor bishop 18 languages Čeština Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Kiswahili Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Assistant of the diocesan bishop Not to be confused with the title of auxiliary bishop , a similar position.

Part of a series on the Hierarchy of the Catholic Church Saint Peter Ecclesiastical titles ( order of precedence ) Pope Pope emeritus Cardinal Cardinal Vicar Crown Prince Protector Moderator of the curia Chaplain of His Holiness Papal legate Papal majordomo Apostolic nuncio Apostolic delegate Apostolic Syndic Apostolic visitor Vicar apostolic Apostolic exarch Apostolic prefect Assistant to the papal throne Eparch Metropolitan Patriarch Catholicos Bishop Archbishop Bishop emeritus Diocesan bishop Major archbishop Primate Suffragan bishop Titular bishop Coadjutor bishop Auxiliary bishop Prelate Provost Pontiff Territorial prelate Territorial abbot Liturgical titles Acolyte Consecrator Lector Subdeacon Administrative and pastoral titles Auditor Brother Chancellor Chaplain Military chaplain Military ordinary Coarb Confessor Consultor Curate Deacon Archdeacon Defender of the bond Definitor Devil's advocate Diocesan administrator Ecclesiastical judge Exorcist Laity Lay abbot Abthain Commendatory Lay cardinal Minister Major orders Minor orders Missionary Monsignor Officialis Ostiarius Pastor Assistant pastor Palatinus Personal prelate Preacher Prefect Presbyter Elder Priest Principal Protonotary apostolic Reverend Saint Servant of God Blessed Venerable Seminarian Vicar Judicial vicar Vicar general Vicar forane Sub-dean Consecrated and professed titles Abbess Abbot Consecrated virgin Corrector Custos Friar Dean Grand master Hermit Master of novices Monk Novice Nun Postulant Prior Provincial superior Rector Religious Superior general Additional titles Almoner Altar server Archimandrite Archpriest Archdeacon Canon Captain General of the Church Chorbishop Coarb Commissary Apostolic Conclavist Custos Datarius Gonfalonier of the Church Honorary prelate Minor canon Notarius Ostiarius Peritus Postulator Prebendary Precentor Prince-bishop Prince-abbot Prince-primate Prince-provost Promotor Fidei Protopriest Protodeacon Protosyncellus Regionarius Sacristan Sidewalk counselor Usher Associations and organization titles Third orders Oblates Confraternities Pious Unions Grand master Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Knights Inquisitor Grand Inquisitor Preceptor Catholic Church portal v t e A coadjutor bishop (or bishop coadjutor ) ("co-assister" in Latin) is a bishop in the Latin Catholic , Anglican and (historically) Eastern Orthodox churches whose main role is to assist the diocesan bishop in administering the diocese.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The coadjutor automatically succeeds the diocesan bishop when he retires, dies or leaves office for another reason.  In the Latin Catholic Church, the coadjutor is a priest or bishop appointed by the pope in Rome. He is considered the principal deputy administrator of the diocese.

In the Eastern Catholic churches, the adjutor may be appointed by the pope or by the church itself.  Within the Anglican Communion, a diocesan committee appoints the coadjutor, who can be male or female.

Latin Church [ edit ] Main article: Bishops in the Catholic Church Role of coadjutor [ edit ] In the Latin Church, the pope appoints a coadjutor to help the bishop govern the diocese . A bishop himself, the coadjutor can substitute for the diocesan bishop in his absence (Canon 403§3).

[ 3 ] The coadjutor must be a Catholic priest (all priests are male) and is usually a bishop or auxiliary bishop .

Under canon law , the coadjutor must serve as the vicar general , the principal deputy administrator of the diocese. The diocesan bishop must "entrust to him [coadjutor] before others" in acts that require a special mandate (Canon 406§1)  If the episcopal see is an archdiocese , the coadjutor is appointed as an archbishop .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In modern church practice, the pope can appoint a coadjutor to assist a bishop who needs help due to declining health. The coadjutor can also assist a bishop nearing retirement. The objective is to have continuity of leadership in the diocese and avoid an unexpected vacancy in the position of bishop.

[ 5 ] Pope Benedict XVI named Bishop Dennis Schnurr as coadjutor archbishop of the Archdiocese of Cincinnati in Ohio in the United States in October 2008 to assist Archbishop Daniel Pilarczyk.

When Pilarczyk retired in December 2009, Schnurr automatically became the diocesan archbishop without any ceremony.

[ 6 ] In some situations, the pope may appoint a coadjutor to override the diocesan bishop in certain matters. These might include a public scandal or financial mismanagement of diocese. The problems are serious, but not bad enough for the pope to remove the diocesan bishop.

In 2023, Pope Francis appointed Bishop François Touvet as coadjutor of the Diocese of Fréjus-Toulon in France to assist the elderly Bishop Dominique Rey . The pope gave Touvet special powers to oversee the preparation of seminarians and the financial management in the diocese. The Vatican had suspended the ordination of priests in the diocese in 2022.

[ 7 ] In one instance, the pope appointed a coadjutor to a church that was not a diocese. In 2002, Pope John Paul II named the Reverend Fernando Arêas Rifan as coadjutor of the Personal Apostolic Administration of Saint John Mary Vianney in Brazil. The pope took this action as part of the reconciliation agreement with the former Priestly Union of Saint John Mary Vianney that had broken with the Catholic Church.

[ 8 ] Right of succession [ edit ] The 1983 Code of Canon Law of the Latin Church stipulates that all coadjutors have the right of succession. The code also allows the pope to appoint an auxiliary bishop to a diocese "with special faculties [powers]", but without the right of succession.

[ 9 ] In 1986, Pope John Paul II appointed the Reverend Donald Wuerl as an auxiliary bishop in the Archdiocese of Seattle in Washington State in the United States with "special powers" to override Archbishop Raymond Hunthausen . The pope was unhappy with Hunthausen's handling of LGBTQ relations and other morality issues.

[ 10 ] Under the old 1917 Code of Canon Law , the pope did not have to give an coadjutor cum jure succesionis ("with the right of succession").  In practice, the popes sometimes appointed coadjutors without the right of succession. These coadjutors usually served in large archdioceses.  They might hold other important posts within the Catholic Church, or might be auxiliary bishops that the pope wanted to honor with the title of coadjutor.

[ 11 ] For example, Pope Paul VI in 1965 appointed Auxiliary Bishop John J. Maguire as coadjutor of the Archdiocese of New York , one of the largest archdioceses in the United States, to assist Cardinal Francis Spellman . However, the pope denied Maguire the right to succeed Spellman following his death in 1967.

[ 12 ] Eastern Catholic Churches [ edit ] Some sui juris Eastern Catholic Churches also appoint coadjutors. However, the selection process differs among the churches.

The patriarchal or major archiepiscopal synods of the larger sui juris ritual churches typically elect their coadjutors, with papal assent.

The pope typically appoints the coadjutors in the smaller sui juris ritual churches.

The coadjutor of an eparchy , archeparchy, or metropolis has the respective status of an eparch, archeparch , or metropolitan.

Anglican communion [ edit ] In some provinces of the Anglican Communion , a bishop coadjutor (the form usually used) is a bishop elected or appointed to follow the current diocesan bishop upon the incumbent's death or retirement.

In the Episcopal Church in the United States of America , when a diocesan bishop announces their intent to retire, they normally call for a special diocesan convention to elect a bishop coadjutor.  The bishop coadjutor and diocesan bishop then serve jointly until the diocesan bishop dies or retires. The coadjutor automatically becomes the diocesan bishop.

[ 13 ] A "bishop suffragan" is elected to assist the diocesan bishop under his direction, but without the inherent right of succession.

[ 14 ] There have been bishops coadjutor in the Anglican Church of Australia without the right of succession to the diocesan see.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Titular see References [ edit ] ^ Patrich, Joseph (2001).

The Sabaite Heritage in the Orthodox Church from the Fifth Century to the Present . Peeters Publishers.

ISBN 9789042909762 .

^ Hamilton, Bernard (2016-12-05).

The Latin Church in the Crusader States: The Secular Church . Routledge.

ISBN 9781351887052 .

^ "What is the difference between an ordinary, auxiliary, and coadjutor bishop?" .

Catholic Straight Answers . 2013-05-21 . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ "Appointing Bishops", USCCB ^ a b "What is a coadjutor?" .

Diocese of Camden . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ Price, Bill (October 17, 2008). "Vatican Names Future Replacement For Pilarczyk".

WCPO-TV .

^ "Pope Francis Appoints Coadjutor to French Diocese Where Ordinations Were Halted" .

NCR . 2023-11-21 . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ "Rinunce e Nomine, 28.06.2002" (Press release) (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 28 June 2002 . Retrieved 21 September 2021 .

^ "Code of Canon Law - Book II - The People of God - Part II. (Cann. 368-430)" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ Schilling, Timothy Peter (2003).

Conflict in the Catholic Hierarchy: A Study of Coping Strategies in the Hunthausen Affair, with Preferential Attention to Discursive Strategies (doctoral dissertation). Utrecht, Netherlands: Utrecht University.

hdl : 1874/601 .

^ "THE 1917 OR PIO-BENEDICTINE CODE OF CANON LAW" (PDF) .

Ignatius Press . Retrieved January 27, 2025 .

^ "Archbishop John Joseph Maguire [Catholic-Hierarchy]" .

www.catholic-hierarchy.org . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ "Bishop Coadjutor" .

The Episcopal Church . Retrieved 2022-06-12 .

^ "How many different types of bishops are there?", The Episcopal Diocese of Texas External links [ edit ] "Code of Canon Law - Book II - The People of God - Part II. (Cann. 368-430)" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2021-01-17 .

v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hl722
Cached time: 20250812003107
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.425 seconds
Real time usage: 0.577 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1531/1000000
Revision size: 10389/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100224/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1197/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 67502/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6698281/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  442.740      1 -total
 33.17%  146.878      1 Template:Reflist
 18.69%   82.754      1 Template:Catholic_Church_Hierarchy
 17.96%   79.532      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.27%   72.050      2 Template:Cite_book
 13.79%   61.074      1 Template:Short_description
 13.04%   57.722      1 Template:Catholicism
  8.80%   38.983      8 Template:Cite_web
  8.65%   38.315      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.71%   34.144      1 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1338403:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003107 and revision id 1300763817. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coadjutor_bishop&oldid=1300763817 " Categories : Bishops by type Catholic ecclesiastical titles Ecclesiastical titles Episcopacy in the Catholic Church Anglican episcopal offices Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 07:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coadjutor bishop 18 languages Add topic

