Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Interests 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Books authored 3.2 Books edited 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Robert Bernasconi 3 languages Català Deutsch Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher Robert Bernasconi Born Robert L. Bernasconi 1950 (age 74–75) Academic background Alma mater University of Sussex (B.A., D. Phil.) Thesis Heidegger's History of Being and Language (1982) Academic work Era 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School or tradition Continental philosophy Deconstruction Institutions Pennsylvania State University University of Memphis University of Essex Sussex University Main interests Ontology Political philosophy Critical race theory Robert L. Bernasconi (born 1950) is an American philosopher who is the Edwin Erle Sparks Professor of Philosophy at Pennsylvania State University . He is known as a reader of Martin Heidegger and Emmanuel Levinas , and for his work on the concept of race . He has also written on the history of philosophy.

[ 1 ] Bernasconi was the president of Hegel Society of America from 2012 to 2014.

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Bernasconi received his doctorate from Sussex University . He taught at the University of Essex for thirteen years before taking up a position at the University of Memphis . In the fall of 2009, he moved from Memphis to the philosophy department at Pennsylvania State University . Bernasconi comes from an academic family and was born in Newcastle, United Kingdom. His brother John is the Director of Fine arts at the University of Hull. The family are of Italian background.

Interests [ edit ] In addition to extensive work on Heidegger and Levinas, Bernasconi has written on Immanuel Kant , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Hannah Arendt , Hans-Georg Gadamer , Jean-Paul Sartre , Frantz Fanon , Jacques Derrida , and numerous others.

In the early 1990s Bernasconi began to develop an interest in the concepts of race and racism , particularly in relation to the history of philosophy. In addition to writing many articles on race, racism, slavery , African philosophy and related topics, he has also edited and published primary material relating to these themes.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books authored [ edit ] Critical Philosophy of Race: Essays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2022).

How to Read Sartre (New York: W. W. Norton, 2007).

Heidegger in Question: The Art of Existing (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press, 1993).

The Question of Language in Heidegger's History of Being (Atlantic Highlands: Humanities Press, 1985).

Books edited [ edit ] Race, Hybridity, and Miscegenation (Bristol: Thoemmes, 2005). With Kristie Dotson.

Race and Anthropology (Bristol: Thoemmes, 2003).

Race and Racism in Continental Philosophy (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2003). With Sybol Cook.

American Theories of Polygenesis (Bristol: Thoemmes, 2002).

The Cambridge Companion to Levinas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002). With Simon Critchley .

Concepts of Race in the Eighteenth Century (Bristol: Thoemmes, 2001).

Race (Oxford: Blackwell, 2001).

In Proximity: Emmanuel Levinas and the Eighteenth Century (Lubbock, Texas: Texas Tech University Press, 2001). With Melvin New & Richard A. Cohen.

The Idea of Race (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2000). With Tommy Lee Lott.

Re-Reading Levinas (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991). With Simon Critchley.

The Provocation of Levinas (New York: Routledge, 1988). With David Wood .

Derrida and Différance (Warwick: Parousia Press, 1985; Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1988 [United States]). With David Wood.

Time and Metaphysics (Coventry: Parousia Press, 1982). With David Wood.

See also [ edit ] List of deconstructionists Africana philosophy Other (philosophy) Critical race theory Racism References [ edit ] ^ "Robert Bernasconi – Department of Philosophy" .

^ "Minutes of the HSA Biennial Conferences" .

The Hegel Society of America . Retrieved 3 August 2025 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii PhilPeople People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Bernasconi&oldid=1305838929 " Categories : Living people Post-structuralists 20th-century American philosophers 1950 births Alumni of the University of Sussex Academics of the University of Essex University of Memphis faculty Heidegger scholars Levinas scholars 21st-century American philosophers Alumni of the University of Essex Hegel scholars Presidents of the Hegel Society of America Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 10:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Bernasconi 3 languages Add topic

