Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Management 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Recent threats 2.2 Budget cuts 3 Physical environment Toggle Physical environment subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Topography 3.3 Geology 3.3.1 Soil 3.4 Air quality 3.5 Waterways 4 Wildlife Toggle Wildlife subsection 4.1 Visiting 4.2 Jungle Trail 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge 4 languages Cebuano Esperanto Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 27°48′36″N 80°26′28″W ﻿ / ﻿ 27.81000°N 80.44111°W ﻿ / 27.81000; -80.44111 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia United States National Wildlife Refuge in Florida Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge IUCN category IV (habitat/species management area) View from Centennial Trail, Orchid, Florida Area 5,376 acres (21.76 km 2 ) Established March 14, 1903 Website Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge Ramsar Wetland Designated 14 March 1993 Reference no.

590 [ 1 ] United States historic place Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. National Historic Landmark Aerial view Show map of Florida Show map of the United States Location Indian River County , Florida , United States Nearest city Sebastian, Florida Coordinates 27°48′36″N 80°26′28″W ﻿ / ﻿ 27.81000°N 80.44111°W ﻿ / 27.81000; -80.44111 Area 5,376 acres (2,176 ha) Built 1903 NRHP reference No.

66000265 [ 2 ] Significant dates Added to NRHP October 15, 1966 Designated NHL May 23, 1963 [ 3 ] Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge is a United States National Wildlife Refuge (NWR), and part of the Everglades Headwaters NWR complex, located just off the western coast of Orchid Island, Florida in the Indian River Lagoon east of Sebastian, Florida . The refuge consists of a 3-acre (12,000 m 2 ) island that includes an additional 2.5 acres (10,000 m 2 ) of surrounding water and is located off the east coast of Florida of the Indian River Lagoon.  Established by an executive order of President Theodore Roosevelt on March 14, 1903, Pelican Island was the first National wildlife refuge in the United States.

[ 3 ] It was created to protect egrets and other birds from extinction through plume hunting . The oldest government wildlife refuge of any kind in North America is the Lake Merritt Bird Refuge in Oakland, California. Oakland Mayor Samuel Merritt declared it a wildlife refuge for migrating birds in 1869. In 1870, the state of California designated Lake Merritt a state game refuge.

Management [ edit ] Pelican Island is administered as part of the 8,000-acre (3,200 ha) Everglades Headwaters NWR complex along with Archie Carr NWR , Lake Wales Ridge NWR , and the Everglades Headwaters NWR and Conservation Area , [ 4 ] created in 2012 (556th unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System) with a 10-acre (4.0 ha) donation and other lands covering approximately 150,000 acres (61,000 ha) north of Lake Okeechobee. 100,000 acres (40,000 ha) will be held under " conservation easement "s through the U.S. Department of the Interior and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . This allows landowners the right to retain ownership of the land, with the ability to continue farming or ranching, ensuring that the land can't be subdivided or developed.

[ 5 ] Pelican Island NWR has been placed on the List of Ramsar wetlands of international importance along with other areas of wetlands in the United States .

History [ edit ] In 1860 census listed population of two people and in the 1880 census listed that less than 30 individuals lived in the St. Sebastian River area.

[ 6 ] Pelican Island's bird populations were threatened because of increased American settlement around the area in the mid-19th century. Many of the exotic birds were killed for their feathers, used in the fashion industry. Plumes from the birds were used to adorn ladies' hats of the day and at the time were worth more than their weight in gold.

[ 7 ] Paul Kroegel , a German immigrant , moved to Florida in 1881 and lived on the west bank of Indian River Lagoon . He was fascinated with the pelicans on the island. Being able to see the island from his home, Paul would watch the pelicans and other water birds. He eventually took an interest in the island and its protection. However, there was not any state or federal law to help him so he took control of the situation himself. Kroegel sailed to the island to stand guard and protect the birds and the island.

[ 6 ] A few naturalists visited Kroegel at Pelican Island. A curator at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, Frank Chapman , was one of the naturalists showing interest in the island as well. He discovered that Pelican Island was one of the last rookeries of brown pelicans on the eastern coast of Florida.

The American Ornithologists' Union and the Florida Audubon Society led a campaign to pass legislation for protection of non-game birds in 1901. Knowing that the protection of Pelican Island would require more legislation, Chapman and his fellow advocate, William Dutcher went to President Theodore Roosevelt at his home in New York. The two appealed their case to Roosevelt's conservative ethics. On 14 March 1903, President Roosevelt signed an executive order that established Pelican Island as the first federal bird reservation. This was the first time that the federal government put land aside for the sake of wildlife. The area, however, was open for big game hunters.

[ 7 ] Kroegel was hired as the first national wildlife refuge manager until 1926. He was paid $1 per month by the Audubon Society, as Congress had not made financial provisions for the refuge.

[ 8 ] Recent threats [ edit ] During the 1960s, Pelican Island was threatened by attempts to sell the surrounding wetlands and islands to developers. Local citizens led a fight to protect Pelican Island by stopping the sale of the wetlands. The Indian River Area Preservation League, formed by local citrus growers, commercial fishermen, and sportsmen, joined with Florida Audubon Society to convince the State to include the islands as a part of the refuge.
"Later in 1963, Pelican Island was designated as a National Historic Landmark by the Secretary of the Interior because of its status as the first federal area set aside specifically to protect wildlife." [ 7 ] In 1968, Florida agreed to expand to include nearly 5000 acres (20 km 2 ) of mangrove islands and other submerged lands. In 1970, Pelican Island became the smallest wilderness area in the National Wilderness Preservation System at 3 acres. Since, the refuge has gained over 500 acres (2 km 2 ) through purchases, management agreements, and conservation easements to provide a buffer against encroaching development and also to be a link to the Archie Carr National Wildlife Refuge .

[ 7 ] Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge was added to the list of wetlands of international importance under the Ramsar Convention signed in 1971.

Today, Pelican Island is also threatened by shoreline development.  Shoreline development has many negative impacts associated with it.  Shoreline development can reduce the water quality by increasing the runoff of sediments, fertilizers, and pesticides.  These runoffs will cause decline in water quality, and this can directly affect the food base that sustains the island's nesting bird colonies.  Waterfront development will also lead to more boat traffic.  This extra boat traffic will also negatively affect the birds on the coast.  Not only this, development of the shorelines of Pelican Island will permanently flaw the pristine character of this unique National Historic Landmark.

Budget cuts [ edit ] Pelican Island, along with many other wildlife refuges, has been experiencing budget cuts. Many problems arise from the stagnant budget and lack of maintenance in the wildlife refuges. These are vital to preserve the habitat and the wildlife and to provide public education and recreation. This situation worsened further because of the failure of congress to timely pass federal funding bills.

[ 9 ] Staffing at Pelican Island is made up of U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . The staff members have recently fallen from six to two which has had many negative consequences. The cuts have led to limiting refuge work and restricting public visitation. Another consequence is the end of 14-year tradition of the wildlife festival.

[ 9 ] Pelican Island will be losing its only public-use staff and eliminating all active outreach at the nation's first wildlife refuge.

[ 9 ] Pelican Island Refuge manager and project leader Paul Tritaik said in 2006 that reductions to a full-time staff would lead to the end of some refuge activities and the loss of several trails.

[ 10 ] Physical environment [ edit ] Aerial of Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge The environment of Pelican Island consists of climate, topography, geology, air quality, and waterways.

Climate [ edit ] The climate at Pelican Island NWR is subtropical and temperate and experiences an average temperate of 67 °F (19 °C).  Pelican Island has long, warm, and humid summers and short, mild winters and has an average rainfall of about 55 to 60 inches (140 to 150 cm) annually. Pelican Island may experience tropical storms in the period from May to November.

[ 11 ] Topography [ edit ] The elevation of Pelican Island changes from east to west.  It rises sharply from sea level to about 15 feet (5 m) and then drops back down more slowly to below sea level in the Indian River Lagoon. The land between the Indian River Lagoon and St. Sebastian River is 20 feet (6 m).  Even further west, there is an ancient dune that rises in elevation from 20 feet (6 m) to 30 feet (9 m).

[ 11 ] Geology [ edit ] The landscape of Pelican Island area is made of Pleistocene ( glacial ) and Holocene (recent) origin.  Submerged lands were exposed during the late Pleistocene period, allowing for the spread of flora and fauna from the peninsula.

[ 11 ] Wetlands, salt marshes , mangroves , and other swampy formations make up the uplands and submerged lands.

[ 11 ] Soil [ edit ] "The general soils in the Pelican Island Refuge are Canaveral-Captiva-Palm Beach, which is characterized by the gently sloping, somewhat poorly drained to moderately drained sandy soils with shell fragments, and McKee-Quartzipsamments-St. Augustine, which is characterized by level, somewhat poorly drained soils mixed with sand and shell fragments." [ 11 ] Other soils include Canaveral Fine Sand, Quartzipsamments, Captiva Fine Sand, McKee Mucky Clay Loam, and Kesson Muck.

Air quality [ edit ] Good air quality is vital for the refuge to maintain itself.  A few problems dealing with air pollution are carbon monoxide , lead, nitrogen dioxide , ozone , particulate matter, and sulfur dioxide .  The primary producers of these pollutants are vehicle emissions, power plants, and industrial activities.  The Indian River Lagoon area is said to have good air quality.  Sometimes occasional temperate increases can temporarily degrade the air quality below the accepted levels.

[ 11 ] Waterways [ edit ] The Indian River Lagoon stretches from Ponce de Leon south of Daytona Beach to Jupiter Inlet near West Palm Beach , a distance of about 155 miles (249 km), and contains a number of small rivers, creeks, and canals.  The Intracoastal Waterway is the deepest part of the Lagoon.  St. Sebastian River and Turkey Creek provide freshwater to the Lagoon.  Water quality is also a concern in the refuge: cadmium , lead , mercury , nutrients, selenium , thallium , and dissolved oxygen.  The water circulation is affected by the Intracoastal Waterway, winds, inlets, and causeways.  Within the refuge boundary, the water quality is generally better compared to portions of the Lagoon.

[ 11 ] Wildlife [ edit ] Wood stork ( Mycteria americana ) feeding Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge holds hundreds of species of animals including birds, fish, plants, and mammals.  The wetlands of Pelican Island are a major ecological system supporting the huge biological diversity.  Fifteen federally listed threatened and endangered species live in Pelican Island NWR and around Indian River Lagoon.  Of the endangered species, West Indian manatees and sea turtles occupy parts of the lagoon.  Around the lagoon in the refuge are two wood stork refuges.  These birds along with other wading birds that nest on the island thrive on the tremendous fish population.  Pelican Island is home to many nesting birds including brown pelicans , great egrets , snowy egrets , reddish egrets , great blue heron , little blue heron , tricolored heron , black-crowned night heron , American white ibis , glossy ibis , double-crested cormorant , anhinga , and American oystercatcher .

Visiting [ edit ] Observation tower Pelican Island is only accessible by boat or chartered tours.  Nesting birds are easily disturbed, so people are not allowed to get too close or to disembark.  Visiting during nesting season (late November through late July), one can expect to see brown pelican, wood storks, white ibises, black-crowned night herons, double-crested cormorants, reddish, snowy, and great egrets, and great blue, little blue and tricolored herons.  Traveling in the winter, look for lesser scaup , blue-winged teal , mottled ducks , great northern divers , laughing gulls , American white pelicans , and red-breasted mergansers .  Summer visitors should watch for roseate spoonbills , magnificent frigatebirds and least terns .  Pelican Island also features some marine life in the Indian River including sea turtles, dolphins, and manatees.

[ 12 ] New public facilities were opened and dedicated on March 14, 2003, in ceremonies marking the centennial of Pelican Island and the National Wildlife Refuge System.  A 37¢ US Commemorative Stamp in honor of the NWR Centennial was issued as part of the celebration.  The new facilities include a 1/4 mile boardwalk and 18-foot (5.5 m) observation tower to view Pelican Island, two 2.5-mile (4.0 km) salt marsh impoundment foot trails, interpretive signs, informational kiosks, restrooms and parking areas. The facilities are west of Highway A1A on the north end of Historic Jungle Trail. They were produced through a partnership with Indian River County, St. Johns River Water Management District, Florida Inland Navigation District, Florida Power and Light, ConocoPhillips, Wild Birds Unlimited, the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, and many others. Future plans include additional boardwalks, an overlook, a photo blind and a wildlife drive.

Jungle Trail [ edit ] Jungle Trail The historic Jungle Trail is a 7.8-mile (12.6 km) sandy road with a section that goes through the refuge. Citrus growers originally built this road in the 1920s and it is now on the National Register of Historic Places.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Florida State Parks Indian River County, Florida List of National Wildlife Refuges History of the National Wildlife Refuge System Notes [ edit ] ^ "Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge" .

Ramsar Sites Information Service . Retrieved April 25, 2018 .

^ "FLORIDA - Indian River County" .

National Register of Historic Places . National Park Service. September 23, 2007.

^ a b Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge Archived March 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine at National Historic Landmarks Program Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ Everglades Headwaters NWR complex - Retrieved 2017-12-25 ^ Everglades Headwaters NWR and Conservation Area established - Retrieved 2017-12-25 ^ a b Stanbridge, Ruth (March 16, 2022).

"Local history: The story of Paul Kroegel is a story of America at its best" .

TC Palm . Retrieved April 2, 2022 .

^ a b c d "Pelican Island History" .

Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge . United States Fish and Wildlife Service.

^ Begley, Janet (March 9, 2022).

"Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge celebrates 119 years with festival at park" .

TC Palm . Retrieved April 2, 2022 .

^ a b c Paul McHugh, "Wildlife refuges on life support; Flat budgets imperil future of the system," The San Francisco Chronicle, 21 Dec 2006.

^ Russell J. Dinnage, "WILDLIFE REFUGES: Budgetary downturn for national refuges hits staffers hardest," Land Letter, 16 Nov 2006.

^ a b c d e f g "Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge:  Comprehensive Conservation Plan," U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, Sept 2006, < http://library.fws.gov/CCPs/pelicanisland_final.pdf >.

^ "Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge," - Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission , 2006, < http://myfwc.com/viewing/sites/site-ec12.html >.

Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine References [ edit ] Dinnage, Russell J.  "WILDLIFE REFUGES: Budgetary downturn for national refuges hits staffers hardest." Land Letter .  16 November 2006.

Hem, Brad. "Looking ahead, Pelican Island may be next in line: Port of Houston buys land, could join Galveston in a joint effort." The Houston Chronicle . 4 February 2007.

McHugh, Paul. "Wildlife refuges on life support; Flat budgets imperil future of the system." The San Francisco Chronicle . 21 December 2006.

"Parks: Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge." GORP . 2007. 26 April 2007. < https://web.archive.org/web/20100517055918/http://www.gorp.com/parks-guide/travel-ta-prime-hook-national-wildlife-refuge-pelican-island-national-wildlife-refuge-birdwatching-sidwcmdev_068511.html >.

"Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge: Comprehensive Conservation Plan." U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service .  Sept 2006.  9 May 2007.  < http://library.fws.gov/CCPs/pelicanisland_final.pdf >.

"Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge." U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 2007. 26 April 2007. < http://www.fws.gov/pelicanisland/ >.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge .

Official Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge website Pelican Island Webcam website [1] v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in Florida Lists by county Alachua Baker Bay Bradford Brevard Broward Calhoun Charlotte Citrus Clay Collier Columbia DeSoto Dixie Duval Escambia Flagler Franklin Gadsden Gilchrist Glades Gulf Hamilton Hardee Hendry Hernando Highlands Hillsborough Holmes Indian River Jackson Jefferson Lake Lee Leon Levy Liberty Madison Manatee Marion Martin Miami-Dade Monroe Nassau Okaloosa Okeechobee Orange Osceola Palm Beach Pasco Pinellas Polk Putnam Santa Rosa Sarasota Seminole St. Johns St. Lucie Sumter Suwannee Taylor Union Volusia Wakulla Walton Washington Lists by city Miami Tampa Other lists Black Public Schools Bridges Multiple Property Submissions National Historic Landmarks Woman's clubhouses Keeper of the Register History of the National Register of Historic Places Property types Historic district Contributing property v t e Protected areas of Florida Federal level National Estuarine Research Reserves Apalachicola Guana Tolomato Matanzas Rookery Bay National Fish Hatcheries Welaka National Forests Apalachicola Choctawhatchee Ocala Osceola National Marine Sanctuaries Florida Keys National Memorials De Soto Fort Caroline National Monuments Castillo de San Marcos Fort Matanzas National Parks Biscayne Dry Tortugas Everglades National Preserves Big Cypress Timucuan Ecological National Seashores Canaveral Gulf Islands National Trails Florida National Wild and Scenic Rivers Loxahatchee River Wekiva River National Wildlife Refuges Archie Carr Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee Caloosahatchee Cedar Keys Chassahowitzka Crocodile Lake Crystal River Three Sisters Springs Egmont Key Florida Panther Great White Heron Hobe Sound Island Bay J.N. 'Ding' Darling Key West Lake Wales Ridge Lake Woodruff Lower Suwannee Matlacha Pass Merritt Island National Key Deer Okefenokee Passage Key Pelican Island Pine Island Pinellas St. Johns St. Marks St. Vincent Ten Thousand Islands Other National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State level Parks Amelia Island Anastasia Avalon Bahia Honda Bald Point Big Lagoon Big Shoals Big Talbot Island Bill Baggs Cape Florida Bulow Creek Caladesi Island Camp Helen Cayo Costa Collier–Seminole Colt Creek Curry Hammock Delnor-Wiggins Pass Devil's Millhopper Don Pedro Island Dr. Von D. Mizell-Eula Johnson Eden Gardens Egmont Key Falling Waters Faver-Dykes Florida Caverns Fort Clinch Fort Cooper Fort George Island Fort Pierce Inlet Fred Gannon Rocky Bayou Gasparilla Island George Crady Bridge Fishing Pier Grayton Beach Henderson Beach Highlands Hammock Honeymoon Island Hontoon Island Hugh Taylor Birch John D. MacArthur Beach John Pennekamp Coral Reef Jonathan Dickinson Little Talbot Island Long Key Lovers Key Mike Roess Gold Head Branch North Peninsula O'Leno Oscar Scherer Perdido Key Price's Scrub Sebastian Inlet Skyway Fishing Pier St. Andrews St. George Island St. Marks River St. Joseph Peninsula Stephen Foster Folk Culture Center Stump Pass Beach Tomoka Torreya Windley Key Fossil Reef Botanical garden parks Alfred B. Maclay Gardens Dagny Johnson Key Largo Hammock Lignumvitae Key Ravine Gardens Washington Oaks Lakes, rivers and springs parks Deer Lake Lake Griffin Lake June in Winter Scrub Lake Kissimmee Lake Louisa Lake Manatee Lake Talquin Alafia River Blackwater River Dunns Creek Econfina River Hillsborough River Little Manatee River Myakka River Ochlockonee River Oleta River Suwannee River Three Rivers Blue Spring De Leon Springs Edward Ball Wakulla Springs Fanning Springs Homosassa Springs Wildlife Ichetucknee Springs Lafayette Blue Springs Madison Blue Spring Manatee Springs Ponce de Leon Springs Rainbow Springs Silver Springs Troy Spring Weeki Wachee Springs Wekiwa Springs Werner-Boyce Salt Springs Wes Skiles Peacock Springs Recreation areas Dead Lakes Gamble Rogers Memorial Museums, historic sites, and archaeological sites Addison Blockhouse Cedar Key Museum Constitution Convention Museum Forest Capital Museum John Gorrie Museum Ybor City Museum The Barnacle Bulow Plantation Ruins Dade Battlefield DeSoto Site Dudley Farm Fort Foster Fort Mose Fort Zachary Taylor Gamble Plantation Indian Key Koreshan Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings Homestead Natural Bridge Battlefield Olustee Battlefield Orman House Paynes Creek San Marcos de Apalache Yellow Bluff Fort Yulee Sugar Mill Ruins Crystal River Lake Jackson Mounds Letchworth-Love Mounds Madira Bickel Mound Mound Key San Pedro Underwater Preserves and reserves Allen David Broussard Catfish Creek Anclote Key Cedar Key Scrub Charlotte Harbor Crystal River Disney Wilderness Estero Bay Green Cay Wetlands Fakahatchee Strand Hal Scott Kissimmee Prairie Lower Wekiva River Paynes Prairie Pumpkin Hill Creek River Rise Rock Springs Run San Felasco Hammock Savannas Seabranch St. Lucie Inlet St. Sebastian River Tarkiln Bayou Topsail Hill Tosohatchee Waccasassa Bay Yellow River Marsh State trails Blackwater Heritage Florida Keys Overseas Heritage Gainesville-Hawthorne General James A. Van Fleet Jacksonville-Baldwin Marjorie Harris Carr Cross Florida Greenway Nature Coast Palatka-Lake Butler Palatka-to-St. Augustine Tallahassee-St. Marks Historic Railroad Withlacoochee State forests Belmore Big Shoals Blackwater River Carl Duval Moore Cary Charles H. Bronson Cottage Hill Deep Creek Etoniah Creek Four Creeks Goethe Holopaw Indian Lake Jennings John M. Bethea Lake George Lake Talquin Lake Wales Ridge Little Big Econ Matanzas Myakka Okaloacoochee Slough Picayune Strand Pine Log Point Washington Ralph E. Simmons Memorial Ross Prairie Seminole Tate's Hell Tiger Bay Twin Rivers Wakulla Watson Island Welaka Withlacoochee Local level Preserves and reserves Blowing Rocks Boyd Hill Corkscrew Swamp Gumbo Limbo Moccasin Lake Weedon Island Category Commons v t e National Wildlife Refuges of the United States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Puerto Rico U.S. Minor Outlying Islands U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Theodore Roosevelt 26th President of the United States (1901–1909) 25th Vice President of the United States (1901) 33rd Governor of New York (1899–1900) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (1897–1898) New York City Police Commissioner (1895–1897) Presidency ( timeline ) First inauguration historic site Second inauguration Foreign policy " Square Deal " Booker T. Washington dinner Conservation Newlands Reclamation Act Transfer Act of 1905 Antiquities Act Pelican Island Devils Tower National Monument Muir Woods National Monument United States Forest Service , United States Reclamation Service National Wildlife Refuge System Roosevelt Arch Conference of Governors Northern Securities Company breakup court case Anthracite coal strike of 1902 Pure Food and Drug Act Food and Drug Administration Meat Inspection Act Expediting Act Elkins Act Hepburn Act Aldrich–Vreeland Act Tillman Act of 1907 Federal Employers Liability Act Kinkaid Act Big stick ideology Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty Panama Canal Zone Panama Canal Venezuelan crisis Roosevelt Corollary Occupation of Cuba Russo-Japanese War Treaty of Portsmouth 1906 Nobel Peace Prize Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 Army War College Roosevelt Hall College football meetings Bureau of Investigation Department of Commerce and Labor Bureau of Corporations Keep Commission Inland Waterways Commission Bureau of the Census Great White Fleet Perdicaris affair Cabinet White House West Wing State of the Union Address, 1901 1906 1908 White House desk Federal judiciary appointments Other events Spanish–American War Rough Riders Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Great Rapprochement "Bull Moose" Progressive Party New Nationalism Assassination attempt Boone and Crockett Club Smithsonian–Roosevelt African expedition "River of Doubt" Amazonian expedition Roosevelt's World War I volunteers Life and homes Birthplace, boyhood home replica Sagamore Hill Home and Museum Maltese Cross Cabin Elkhorn Ranch Pine Knot cabin New York State Executive Mansion Gravesite Writings and speeches Theodore Roosevelt bibliography The Naval War of 1812 (1882 book) "The Strenuous Life" (1899 speech) League to Enforce Peace "Citizenship in a Republic" (1910 speech) "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual" (1912 post-assassination-attempt speech) Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography (1913 book) The Forum magazine articles Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia Archival collections Elections 1898 New York state election Republican National Convention: 1900 1904 1912 1916 United States presidential elections: 1900 1904 1912 Legacy Bibliography Mount Rushmore Mount Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Center and Digital Library White House Roosevelt Room Theodore Roosevelt National Park Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness Theodore Roosevelt Island Roosevelt National Forest Roosevelt Park (San Antonio) Roosevelt Study Center Theodore Roosevelt Association Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Statues New York City Portland, Oregon Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park Monument Assemblage Theodore Roosevelt Monument Roosevelt Memorial, Portland, Oregon Proposed presidential library Theodore Roosevelt United States Courthouse Roosevelt River Theodore Roosevelt Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Award SS President Roosevelt USS Theodore Roosevelt (1906 , 1961 , 1984 ) Roosevelt Road U.S. postage stamps Popular culture Teddy bear "Speak softly, and carry a big stick" Books Films Terrible Teddy, the Grizzly King , 1901 film The 'Teddy' Bears , 1907 film Roosevelt in Africa , 1910 documentary The Rough Riders , 1927 film Teddy, the Rough Rider , 1940 film Rough Riders , 1997 miniseries The Roosevelts , 2014 documentary Theodore Roosevelt , 2022 miniseries Elkhorn , 2024 series Related Political positions " Bully pulpit " Ananias Club " Nature fakers " League to Enforce Peace A Guest of Honor " Muckraker " " Roosevelt Republican " Barnes vs. Roosevelt libel trial Family Alice Hathaway Lee (first wife) Edith Kermit Carow (second wife) Alice Lee Roosevelt (daughter) Theodore Roosevelt III (son) Kermit Roosevelt (son) Ethel Carow Roosevelt (daughter) Archibald Roosevelt (son) Quentin Roosevelt (son) Theodore Roosevelt IV (grandson) Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt III (grandson) Quentin Roosevelt II (grandson) Kermit Roosevelt Jr.

(grandson) Joseph Willard Roosevelt (grandson) Edith Roosevelt Derby (granddaughter) Theodora Roosevelt (granddaughter) Theodore Roosevelt Sr.

(father) Martha Bulloch Roosevelt (mother) Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt (sister) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (brother) Corinne Roosevelt (sister) Cornelius Roosevelt (grandfather) James Stephens Bulloch (grandfather) James Alfred Roosevelt (uncle) Robert Barnhill Roosevelt Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (niece) Gracie Hall Roosevelt (nephew) Pete (dog) ← William McKinley William Howard Taft → ← Garret Hobart Category v t e Ramsar sites in the United States Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge Bad River Slough Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge Bolinas Lagoon Cache River National Wildlife Refuge Caddo Lake Cape May National Wildlife Refuge Catahoula Lake Chesapeake Bay Cheyenne Bottoms Congaree National Park Connecticut River Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary Cypress Creek National Wildlife Refuge Delaware Bay Dixon Waterfowl Refuge Elkhorn Slough Emiquon National Wildlife Refuge Everglades National Park Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge Francis Beidler Forest Grasslands Wildlife Management Area Heron Pond – Little Black Slough Nature Preserve Horicon Marsh Humbug Marsh Izembek National Wildlife Refuge Kakagon Sloughs Kawainui Marsh Laguna de Santa Rosa Missisquoi National Wildlife Refuge Niagara River Corridor Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge Olentangy River Wetland Research Park Palmyra Atoll Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge Quivira National Wildlife Refuge San Francisco Bay Sand Lake National Wildlife Refuge Tijuana River National Estuarine Research Reserve Tomales Bay Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge White River National Wildlife Refuge Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pelican_Island_National_Wildlife_Refuge&oldid=1303301686 " Categories : IUCN Category IV National Wildlife Refuges in Florida Indian River Lagoon Wetlands of Florida National Register of Historic Places in Indian River County, Florida National Historic Landmarks in Florida Protected areas established in 1903 Protected areas of Indian River County, Florida Ramsar sites in the United States Landforms of Indian River County, Florida Islands of Florida 1903 establishments in Florida Marshes of the United States Everglades Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2023 Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge 4 languages Add topic

