Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Africa 1.2 Americas 1.3 Europe 1.4 India 1.5 International conventions 2 Relationship to other rights 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 English Civil War 3.2 John Locke and the American and French revolutions 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Right to property 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Eesti Ελληνικά فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo עברית Қазақша മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Property rights ) Human right to own property "Property rights" redirects here. For the concept in economics, see Property rights (economics) .

Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e The right to property , or the right to own property (cf.

ownership ), is often [ how often?

] classified as a human right for natural persons regarding their possessions . A general recognition of a right to private property is found [ citation needed ] more rarely and is typically heavily constrained insofar as property is owned by legal persons (i.e.

corporations ) and where it is used for production rather than consumption .

[ 1 ] [ need quotation to verify ] The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution is credited as a significant precedent for the legal protection of individual property rights.

A right to property is specified in Article 17 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights , [ 2 ] but it is not recognised in the 1966 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or in the 1966 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

[ 3 ] The 1950 European Convention on Human Rights acknowledges a right for a natural or legal person to "peaceful enjoyment of his possessions", subject to the " general interest or to secure the payment of taxes ." [ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] The right to property is one of the most controversial human rights, both in terms of its existence and interpretation. The controversy about the definition of the right meant that it was not included in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

[ 3 ] Controversy centres upon who is deemed to have property rights protected (e.g. human beings or also corporations), the type of property which is protected (property used for the purpose of consumption or production) and the reasons for which property can be restricted (for instance, for regulations, taxation or nationalisation in the public interest). In all human rights instruments, either implicit or express restrictions exist on the extent to which property is protected. Article 17 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) enshrines the right to property as follows: (1) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.
(2) No one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her property.

[ 5 ] The object of the right to property as it is usually understood nowadays consists of property already owned or possessed, or of property acquired or to be acquired by a person through lawful means. Not in opposition but in contrast to this, some proposals also defend a universal right to private property, in the sense of a right of every person to effectively receive a certain amount of property, grounded in a claim to Earth's natural resources or other theories of justice .

[ 6 ] Africa [ edit ] See also: African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights The African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR) protects the right to property most explicitly in Article 14, [ 7 ] stating: The right to property shall be guaranteed. It may only be encroached upon in the interest of public need or in the general interest of the community and in accordance with the provisions of appropriate laws.

[ 8 ] Property rights are furthermore recognised in Article 13 of the ACHPR, which states that every citizen has the right to participate freely in the government of his country, the right to equal access to public services and "the right of access to public property and services in strict equality of all persons before the law". Article 21 of the ACHPR recognises the right of all peoples to freely dispose of their wealth and natural resources and that this right shall be exercised in the exclusive interest of the people, who may not be deprived of this right. Article 21 also provides that "in case of spoliation the dispossessed people shall have the right to the lawful recovery of its property as well as to adequate compensation".

[ 9 ] Americas [ edit ] See also: American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man and American Convention on Human Rights When the text of the UDHR was negotiated, other states in the Americas argued that the right to property should be limited to the protection of private property necessary for subsistence . Their suggestion was opposed, but was enshrined in the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man , which was negotiated at the same time and adopted one year before the UDHR in 1948.

[ 10 ] Article 23 of the declaration states: Every Person has the right to own such private property as meets the essential needs of decent living and helps to maintain the dignity of the individual and of the home.

[ 11 ] The definition of the right to property is heavily influenced by Western concepts of property rights, but because property rights vary considerably in different legal systems it has not been possible to establish international standards on property rights.

[ 12 ] The regional human rights instruments of Europe, Africa and the Americas recognise the right to protection of property to varying degrees.

[ 13 ] The American Convention on Human Rights (ACHR) recognises the right to protection of property, including the right to "just compensation". The ACHR also prohibits usury and other exploitation, which is unique amongst human rights instruments.

[ 10 ] Article 21 of the ACHR states: (1) Everyone has the right to the use and enjoyment of his property. The law may subordinate such use and enjoyment to the interest of society.

(2) No one shall be deprived of his property except upon payment of just compensation, for reasons of public utility or social interest, and in the cases and according to the forms established by law.

(3) Usury and any other form of exploitation of man by man shall be prohibited by law.

[ 14 ] Europe [ edit ] Main article: European Convention on Human Rights After failed attempts to include the right to protection of property in the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), European states enshrined the right to protection of property in Article 1 of Protocol I to the ECHR as the "right to peaceful enjoyment of possessions", [ 15 ] where the right to protection of property is defined as such: (1) Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions. No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by law and by the general principles of international law.
(2) The preceding provisions shall not, however, in any way impair the right of a State to enforce such laws as it deems necessary to control the use of property in accordance with the general interest or to secure the payment of taxes or other contributions or penalties.

[ 16 ] Therefore, European human rights law recognises the right to peaceful enjoyment of property, makes deprivation of possessions subject to certain conditions and recognises that states can balance the right to peaceful possession of property against the public interest. The European Court of Human Rights has interpreted "possessions" to include not only tangible property, but also economic interests, contractual agreements with economic value, compensation claims against the state and public law related claims such as pensions .

[ 17 ] The European Court of Human Rights has held that the right to property is not absolute and states have a wide degree of discretion to limit the rights. As such, the right to property is regarded as a more flexible right than other human rights. States' degree of discretion is defined in Handyside v. United Kingdom , heard by the European Court of Human Rights in 1976. Notable cases where the European Court of Human Rights has found the right to property having been violated include Sporrong and Lonnroth v. Sweden , heard in 1982, where Swedish law kept property under the threat of expropriation for an extended period of time.

[ 3 ] The highest economic compensation following a judgment of the Strasbourg Court on this matter was given (1,3 million euro) in case Beyeler v. Italy .

[ 18 ] India [ edit ] In India property rights (Article 31) was one of the fundamental rights of citizens until 1978, and it became a legal right through the 44th Amendment to the Constitution in 1978.

[ 19 ] The amendment was introduced by the Morarji Desai government as part of land reform policies.

[ 19 ] In 2020, the Supreme Court of India has stated that, even though property rights are not part of a citizen's fundamental right , it should be considers as one of the human rights promised by the Constitution.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] The Supreme Court also ruled that the states cannot acquire individual land unless there is a clear legal framework.

[ 19 ] International conventions [ edit ] Property rights are also recognised in the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination which states in Article 5 that everyone has the right to equality before the law without distinction as to race, colour and national or ethnic origin, including the "right to own property alone as well as in association with others" and "the right to inherit". The Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women recognises the property rights in Article 16, which establishes the same right for both spouses to ownership, acquisition, management, administration, enjoyment and disposition of property and Article 15, which establishes women's right to conclude contracts.

[ 7 ] Property rights are also enshrined in the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families . These international human rights instruments for minorities do not establish a separate right to property, but prohibit discrimination in relation to property rights where such rights are guaranteed.

[ 21 ] Relationship to other rights [ edit ] The right to private property was a crucial demand in early quests for political freedom and equality and against feudal control of property. Property can serve as the basis for the entitlements that ensure the realisation of the right to an adequate standard of living and it was only property owners which were initially granted civil and political rights , such as the right to vote . Because not everybody is a property owner, the right to work was enshrined to allow everybody to attain an adequate standard of living.

[ 22 ] Today, discrimination on the basis of property ownership is commonly seen as a serious threat to the equal enjoyment of human rights by all and non-discrimination clauses in international human rights instruments frequently include property as a ground on the basis of which discrimination is prohibited (see the right to equality before the law ).

[ 7 ] The protection of private property may come into conflict with economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights , such as the right to freedom of expression . To mitigate this, the right to property is commonly limited to protect the public interest. Many states also maintain systems of communal and collective ownership. Property rights have frequently been regarded as preventing the realisation of human rights for all, through for example slavery and the exploitation of others. Unequal distribution of wealth often follows line of sex, race and minorities, therefore property rights may appear to be part of the problem, rather than as an interest that merits protection. Property rights have been at the centre of recent human rights debates on land reform, the return of cultural artifacts by collectors and museums to indigenous peoples and the popular sovereignty of peoples over natural resources.

[ 23 ] History [ edit ] The Roman law defined property as "the right to use and abuse one's own within the limits of the law" — jus utendi et abutendi re suâ, guatenus juris ratio patitur.

Second, salus populi suprema lex esto , or "the safety of the people shall be the supreme law," was stipulated as early as the Law of the Twelve Tables . The notion of private property and property rights was elaborated further in the Renaissance as international trade by merchants gave rise to mercantilist ideas. In 16th-century Europe, Lutheranism and the Protestant Reformation advanced property rights using biblical terminology. The Protestant work ethic and views on man's destiny came to underline social views in emerging capitalist economies in early modern Europe . The right to private property emerged as a radical demand for human rights vis-a-vis the state in 17th-century revolutionary Europe, but in the 18th and 19th centuries the right to property as a human right became subject of intense controversy.

[ 24 ] English Civil War [ edit ] See also: English Civil War The arguments advanced by the Levellers during the English Civil War on property and civil and political rights , such as the right to vote , informed subsequent debates in other countries.

[ citation needed ] The Levellers emerged as a political movement in mid-17th century England in the aftermath of the Protestant Reformation. They believed that property which had been earned as the fruit of one's labour was sacred under the Bible's commandment "thou shall not steal". As such, they believed that the right to acquire property from one's work was sacred. Levellers' views on the right to property and the right not to be deprived of property as a civil and political right were developed by the pamphleteer Richard Overton .

[ 25 ] In "An Arrow against all Tyrants" (1646), Overton argued: To every individual in nature is given an individual property by nature not to be invaded or usurped by any. For everyone, as he is himself, so he has a self propertiety, else he could not be himself; and of this no second may presume to deprive of without manifest violation and affront to the very principles of nature of the rules of equity and justice between man and man. Mine and thine cannot be, except this. No man has power over my rights and liberties, and I over no man.

[ 26 ] The views of the Levellers, who enjoyed support amongst small-scale property-owners and craftsmen, were not shared by all revolutionary parties of the English Civil War. At the 1647 General Council, Oliver Cromwell and Henry Ireton argued against equating the right to life with the right to property. They argued that doing so would establish the right to take anything that one may want, irrespective of the rights of others. The Leveller Thomas Rainsborough responded, relying on Overton's arguments, that the Levellers required respect for others' natural rights . The definition of property and whether it was acquired as the fruit of one's labour and as such a natural right was subject to intense debate because the right to vote depended on property ownership. Political freedom was at the time associated with property ownership and individual independence. Cromwell and Ireton maintained that only property in freehold land or chartered trading rights gave a man the right to vote. They argued that this type of property ownership constituted a "stake in society", which entitles men to political power. In contrast, Levellers argued that all men who are not servants, alms-recipients or beggars should be considered as property owners and be given voting rights. They believed that political freedom could only be secured by individuals, such as craftsmen, engaging in independent economic activity.

[ 25 ] [ 27 ] Levellers were primarily concerned with the civil and political rights of small-scale property owners and workers, whereas the Diggers , a smaller revolutionary group led by Gerrard Winstanley , focused on the rights of the rural poor who worked on landed property . The Diggers argued that private property was not consistent with justice and that the land that had been confiscated from the Crown and Church should be turned into communal land to be cultivated by the poor. According to the Diggers, the right to vote should be extended to all and everybody had the right to an adequate standard of living . With the Restoration of the English monarchy in 1660, all confiscated land returned to the Crown and Church. Some property rights were recognised and limited voting rights were established. The ideas of the Levellers on property and civil and political rights remained influential and were advanced in the subsequent 1688 Glorious Revolution , [ 25 ] [ 27 ] but restrictions on the right to vote based on property meant that only a fraction of the British population had the suffrage. In 1780 only 214,000 property-owning men were entitled to vote in England and Wales, less than 3 percent of the population of 8 million. The Reform Act 1832 restricted the right to vote to men who owned property with an annual value of £10, giving approximately 4 percent of the adult male population the right to vote. The reforms of 1867 extended the right to vote to approximately 8 percent. The working class (which increased dramatically with the Industrial Revolution) and industrialists remained effectively excluded from the political system.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] John Locke and the American and French revolutions [ edit ] John Locke 's 1689 Two Treatises of Government in which Locke calls "lives, liberties and estates" the "property" of individuals The English philosopher John Locke (1632–1704) developed the ideas of property, civil and political rights further. In his Second Treatise on Civil Government (1689), Locke proclaimed that "everyman has a property in his person; this nobody has a right to but himself. The labor of his body and the work of his hand, we may say, are properly his".

[ 30 ] He argued that property ownership derives from one's labor, though those who do not own property and only have their labor to sell should not be given the same political power as those who owned property. Labourers, small-scale property owners and large-scale property owners should have civil and political rights in proportion to the property they owned. According to Locke, the right to property and the right to life were inalienable rights and that it was the duty of the state to secure these rights for individuals. Locke argued that the safeguarding of natural rights, such as the right to property, along with the separation of powers and other checks and balances, would help to curtail political abuses by the state.

[ 25 ] [ 31 ] Locke's labor theory of property and the separation of powers greatly influenced the American Revolution and the French Revolution . The entitlement to civil and political rights, such as the right to vote, was tied to the question of property in both revolutions. American revolutionaries, such as Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson , opposed universal suffrage, advocating votes only for those who owned a "stake" in society.

James Madison argued that extending the right to vote to all could lead in the right to property and justice being "overruled by a majority without property". While it was initially suggested [ by whom?

] to establish the right to vote for all men, eventually the right to vote in the nascent United States was extended to white men who owned a specified amount of real estate and personal property.

French revolutionaries recognised property rights in Article 17 of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1791), which stated that no one "may be deprived of property rights unless a legally established public necessity required it and upon condition of a just and previous indemnity". Articles 3 and 6 declared that "all citizens have the right to contribute personally or through their representatives" in the political system and that "all citizens being equal before [the law], are equally admissible to all public offices, positions and employment according to their capacity, and without other distinction than that of virtues and talents". However, in practice the French revolutionaries did not extend civil and political rights to all, although the property qualification required for such rights was lower than that established by the American revolutionaries.

[ 32 ] According to the French revolutionary Abbé Sieyès , "all the inhabitants of a country should enjoy the right of a passive citizen... but those alone who contribute to the public establishment are like the true shareholders in the great social enterprise. They alone are the true active citizens, the true members of the association". Three months after the Declaration had been adopted, domestic servants , women and those who did not pay taxes equal to three days of labor were declared "passive citizens". Sieyes wanted to see the rapid expansion of commercial activities and favoured the unrestricted accumulation of property. In contrast, Maximilien Robespierre warned that the free accumulation of wealth ought to be limited and that the right to property should not be permitted to violate the rights of others, particularly poorer citizens, including the working poor and peasants. Robespierre's views were eventually excluded from the French Constitution of 1793 and a property qualification for civil and political rights was maintained.

[ 33 ] See also [ edit ] Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution § Takings Clause English land law Entitlement theory Housing First Married Women's Property Act 1882 Property law Property rights (economics) Real estate business Real estate development Real estate bubble Right to housing Public domain in French public law Notes [ edit ] ^ See generally Berle, Adolph A.

(1965). "Property, Production and Revolution".

Columbia Law Review .

65 (1): 1– 20.

doi : 10.2307/1120512 .

JSTOR 1120512 .

^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

un.org .

Article 17. 1) Everyone has the right to own property alone as well as in association with others.

^ a b c Doebbler, Curtis F. J.

(2006).

Introduction to International Human Rights Law . CD Publishing. pp.

141– 142.

ISBN 978-0-9743570-2-7 .

^ European Convention on Human Rights , protocol 1, article 1 ^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" . United Nations. Article 17.

^ Stilman, Gabriel.

"La Biblia, Laudato Si y el derecho universal a la propiedad privada" . El Dial – Biblioteca Jurídica online . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ a b c Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 372.

^ "African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights" . Organisation of African Unity. Article 14.

^ "African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights" . Organisation of African Unity. pp. Article 13 and 21.

^ a b Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 370.

^ "American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man" . Ninth International Conference of American States. Article 23.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , pp. 359–360.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 364.

^ "American Convention on Human Rights" . Organization of American States. Article 21.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 366.

^ "Protocol I to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms" . Council of Europe. pp. Protocol 1 Article 1.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 367.

^ The handling of the affair by the Italian authorities has never been the most mirrored, although it is clear that, in the case Beyeler, the right and wrong was not all on one side: Buonomo, Giampiero (2002).

"Il contribuente paga il conto dell'adeguamento ai principi di legalità e buona amministrazione" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-26 .

^ a b c d വിശ്വനാഥൻ, വന്ദന.

"സ്വത്തവകാശം മനുഷ്യാവകാശം; അറിയാം നിർണായക സുപ്രീം കോടതി വിധിയെക്കുറിച്ച്" .

Mathrubhumi (in Malayalam).

^ "സ്വത്തവകാശം പ്രധാന ഭരണഘടനാ അവകാശം : സുപ്രീംകോടതി" .

Deshabhimani (in Malayalam).

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 373.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 533.

^ Alfredsson & Eide (1999) , p. 360.

^ Compare: Ishay (2008) , pp. 91 ^ a b c d Ishay (2008) , pp. 91–94.

^ Ishay (2008) , pp. 92.

^ a b Rossides, Daniel W. (1998).

Social Theory: Its Origins, History, and Contemporary Relevance . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 54.

ISBN 978-1-882289-50-9 .

^ Robinson, Eric W. (2004).

Ancient Greek democracy: readings and sources . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 302.

ISBN 978-0-631-23394-7 .

^ "The Struggle for democracy – Getting the vote" . National archives . Retrieved 15 January 2011 .

^ Second Treatise of Civil Government, § 27 ^ Rossides, Daniel W. (1998).

Social Theory: Its Origins, History, and Contemporary Relevance . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

52– 54.

ISBN 978-1-882289-50-9 .

^ Ishay (2008) , pp. 94–97.

^ Ishay (2008) , pp. 97–98.

References [ edit ] Alfredsson, Gudmundur; Eide, Asbjørn (1999).

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights: A Common Standard of Achievement . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 978-9-041-11168-5 .

OL 12803991M .

AA Berle and GC Means , The Modern Corporation and Private Property (New York, Macmillan 1932) oclc 1411248 AA Berle , 'Property, Production and Revolution' (1965) 65 Columbia Law Review 1 Ishay, Micheline (2008).

The History of Human Rights: From Ancient Times to the Globalized Era . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-25641-5 .

OL 10435060M .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Right to property .

Protocol I to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250816100311
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.807 seconds
Real time usage: 0.974 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4655/1000000
Revision size: 29210/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 160931/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11248/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 130681/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.474/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8795953/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  761.231      1 -total
 27.30%  207.843      1 Template:Reflist
 14.36%  109.287      1 Template:Rights
 14.07%  107.138      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.18%   92.683      2 Template:Cite_journal
 10.27%   78.163     19 Template:Sfnp
  8.43%   64.161      1 Template:Short_description
  7.80%   59.388      4 Template:Navbox
  7.44%   56.631      5 Template:Fix
  6.65%   50.634      1 Template:Property_navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3119733:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100311 and revision id 1298755338. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_property&oldid=1298755338 " Categories : Human rights by issue Property Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 Malayalam-language sources (ml) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2018 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to property 30 languages Add topic

