Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kantian philosophy 2 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 2.1 F. H. Jacobi 2.2 G. E. Schulze 2.3 Johann Gottlieb Fichte 2.4 Schopenhauer 2.5 Mainländer 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Thing-in-itself 28 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina کوردی Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Thing in itself ) This article may be a rough translation from German .  It may have been generated, in whole or in part, by a computer or by a translator without dual proficiency.

Please help to enhance the translation . The original article is under "Deutsch" in the "languages" list.

If you have just labeled this article as needing attention, please add {{ subst:Needtrans |pg=Thing-in-itself |language=German |comments= }} ~~~~ to the bottom of the WP:PNTCU section on Wikipedia:Pages needing translation into English .

( November 2023 ) In philosophy, the status of objects as they are, independent of observation Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal In Kantian philosophy , the thing-in-itself ( German : Ding an sich ) is the status of objects as they are, independent of representation and observation. The concept of the thing-in-itself was introduced by the German philosopher Immanuel Kant , and over the following centuries was met with controversy among later philosophers.

[ 1 ] It is closely related to Kant's concept of noumena or the objects of inquiry, as opposed to phenomena , its manifestations.

Kantian philosophy [ edit ] In his doctrine of transcendental idealism , Kant argued the sum of all objects, the empirical world, is a complex of appearances whose existence and connection occur only in our representations.

[ 2 ] Kant introduces the thing-in-itself as follows: And we indeed, rightly considering objects of sense as mere appearances, confess thereby that they are based upon a thing in itself, though we know not this thing as it is in itself, but only know its appearances, viz., the way in which our senses are affected by this unknown something.

— Prolegomena, § 32 Criticism [ edit ] F. H. Jacobi [ edit ] The first to criticize the concept of a thing-in-itself was F. H. Jacobi , with the expression: I could not enter into the system without the assumption of the concept of the thing-in-itself and, on the other hand, I could not remain in it with this concept.

[ 3 ] G. E. Schulze [ edit ] The anonymously published work Aenesidemus was one of the most successful attacks against the project of Kant. According to Kant's teaching, things-in-themselves cannot cause appearances, since the category of causality can only find application to objects of experience. Kant, therefore, does not have the right to claim the existence of things-in-themselves.

This contradiction was subsequently generally accepted as being the main problem of the thing-in-itself. The attack on the thing-in-itself, and the skeptical work in general, had a big impact on Fichte , and Schopenhauer called G. E. Schulze , who was revealed to be the author, “the acutest" of Kant's opponents.

[ 4 ] Johann Gottlieb Fichte [ edit ] Initially Fichte embraced Kantian philosophy , including a thing-in-itself, but the work of Schulze made him revise his position.

Aenesidemus, which I consider one of the most remarkable products of our decade, has convinced me of something which I admittedly already suspected: that even after the labors of Kant and Reinhold, philosophy is still not a science. Aenesidemus has shaken my own system to its very foundations, and, since one cannot live very well under the open sky, I have been forced to construct a new system. I am convinced that philosophy can become a science only if it is generated from one single principle, but that it must then become just as self-evident as geometry.

[ 5 ] The system which Fichte subsequently published, Science of Knowledge , scraps the thing-in-itself.

[ 6 ] Schopenhauer [ edit ] In his " Critique of the Kantian Philosophy " appended to The World as Will and Representation (1818), Arthur Schopenhauer agreed with the critics that the manner in which Kant had introduced the thing-in-itself was inadmissible, but he considered that Kant was right to assert its existence and praised the distinction between thing-in-itself and appearance as Kant's greatest merit.

[ 4 ] As he wrote in volume 1 of his Parerga and Paralipomena , "Fragments of the History of Philosophy," §13: Kant was guided by the truth certainly felt that there lies behind every phenomenon a being-in-itself whence such phenomenon obtains its existence ... But he undertook to derive this from the given representation itself by the addition of its laws that are known to us a priori.

Yet just because these are a priori , they cannot lead to something independent of, and different from, the phenomenon or representation; and so for this purpose we have to pursue an entirely different course. The inconsistencies in which Kant was involved through the faulty course taken by him in this respect were demonstrated to him by G. E. Schultze who in his ponderous and diffuse manner expounded the matter first anonymously in his Aenesidemus ... and then in his Kritik der theoretischen Philosophie.

[ 7 ] Mainländer [ edit ] A unique position is taken by Philipp Mainländer , who hailed Kant for breaking the rules of his own philosophy to proclaim the existence of a thing-in-itself.

He did it, because he feared nothing more than the allegation, that his philosophy is pure idealism, which makes the whole objective world into illusion and takes away all reality from it. The three remarks of the first part of the Prolegomena are, with this in mind, very much worth reading. I cannot condemn this great inconsequence. It was the smaller one of two evils, and Kant bravely embraced it.

[ Note 1 ] See also [ edit ] Acatalepsy – Concept of human knowledge in philosophy Master argument – That mind-independent objects do not exist because it is impossible to conceive of them (a viewpoint put forward by George Berkeley ) Noumenon – Object or event that exists independently of the senses of a posited object or event that exists independently of human sense and/or perception Use–mention distinction – Distinction between using a word and mentioning it, according to which it is necessary to make a distinction between using a word (or phrase) and mentioning it as a thing in itself Notes [ edit ] ^ " Er that es, weil er Nichts mehr fürchtete als den
Vorwurf, seine Philosophie sei der reine Idealismus, welcher die ganze objektive Welt zu
Schein macht und ihr jede Realität nimmt. Die drei Anmerkungen zum ersten Buche der
Prolegomena sind, in dieser Hinsicht, sehr lesenswerth. Diese große Inconsequenz kann ich
nicht verdammen. Sie war das kleinere von zwei Uebeln, und Kant ergriff es herzhaft.

" [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Salomon Maimon" .

Salomon Maimon (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

Perhaps the most obvious problem — and certainly one of the earliest — that Kant faces concerns the issue of the thing in itself.

^ Kant, Immanuel.

Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics . Translated by Paul Carus. § 52c.

^ S. Atlas.

From Critical to Speculative Idealism . p. 21.

^ a b Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1 Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy.

Kant's greatest merit is the distinction of the phenomenon from the thing in itself …  This defect, as is known, is the introduction of the thing in itself in the way chosen by him, the inadmissibleness of which was exposed at length by G. E. Schulze in "Aenesidemus " and was soon recognised as the untenable point of his system. … It is most remarkable that one of Kant's opponents, and indeed the acutest of them, G. E. Schulze … ^ Fichte: Early Philosophical Writings . Cornell University Press. 1993. p. 14.

^ C. Beiser, Frederick (2002).

German idealism : the struggle against subjectivism, 1781–1801 . Harvard University Press. pp.

217 .

ISBN 0-674-00769-7 .

First, it eliminates the thing-in-itself and the given manifold.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. 1 (1851). Translated by E. F. J. Payne (Oxford, 1974), p. 89-90 ^ Mainländer, Philipp (1876).

Die Philosophie der Erlösung . p. 438.

Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐br9p2
Cached time: 20250814215912
Cache expiry: 1476061
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.520 seconds
Real time usage: 0.670 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2107/1000000
Revision size: 8354/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 42211/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4195/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40184/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.389/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25720622/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  624.824      1 -total
 22.15%  138.389      2 Template:Reflist
 19.81%  123.797      1 Template:Rough_translation
 18.48%  115.483      7 Template:Cite_book
 17.68%  110.485      1 Template:Ambox
 15.91%   99.415      1 Template:Langx
 12.45%   77.773      1 Template:Immanuel_Kant
 12.14%   75.859      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.17%   57.291      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.80%   48.723      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:610771:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215912 and revision id 1254903019. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thing-in-itself&oldid=1254903019 " Categories : Concepts in metaphysics Idealism Kantianism Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles needing cleanup after translation from November 2023 Wikipedia articles needing cleanup after translation from German All Wikipedia articles needing cleanup after translation Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 November 2024, at 07:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thing-in-itself 28 languages Add topic

