Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Estimating the population median of a symmetric population 3 In general statistics 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Hodges–Lehmann estimator 4 languages Español Français 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Robust and nonparametric estimator of a population's location parameter In statistics , the Hodges–Lehmann estimator is a robust and nonparametric estimator of a population's location parameter . For populations that are symmetric about one median , such as the Gaussian or normal distribution or the Student t -distribution , the Hodges–Lehmann estimator is a consistent and median-unbiased estimate of the population median. For non-symmetric populations, the Hodges–Lehmann estimator estimates the " pseudo–median ", which is closely related to the population median.

The Hodges–Lehmann estimator was proposed originally for estimating the location parameter of  one-dimensional populations, but it has been used for many more purposes. It has been used to estimate the differences between the members of two populations.  It has been generalized from univariate populations to multivariate populations , which produce samples of vectors .

It is based on the Wilcoxon signed-rank statistic . In statistical theory, it was an early example of a rank-based estimator , an important class of estimators both in  nonparametric statistics and in robust statistics. The Hodges–Lehmann estimator was proposed in 1963 independently by Pranab Kumar Sen and by Joseph Hodges and Erich Lehmann , and so it is also called the " Hodges–Lehmann–Sen estimator ".

[ 1 ] Definition [ edit ] In the simplest case, the "Hodges–Lehmann" statistic estimates the location parameter for a univariate population.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its computation can be described quickly. For a dataset with n measurements, the set of all possible two-element subsets of it ( z i , z j ) {\displaystyle (z_{i},z_{j})} such that i {\displaystyle i} ≤ j {\displaystyle j} (i.e. specifically including self-pairs; many secondary sources incorrectly omit this detail), which set has n ( n + 1)/2 elements. For each such subset, the mean is computed; finally, the median of these n ( n + 1)/2 averages is defined to be the Hodges–Lehmann estimator of location.

The two-sample Hodges–Lehmann statistic is an estimate of a location-shift type difference between two populations. For two sets of data with m and n observations, the set of two-element sets made of them is their Cartesian product, which contains m × n pairs of points (one from each set); each such pair defines one difference of values. The Hodges–Lehmann statistic is the median of the m × n differences.

[ 4 ] Estimating the population median of a symmetric population [ edit ] In the general case the Hodges-Lehmann statistic estimates the population's pseudomedian , [ 5 ] a location parameter that is closely related to the median . The difference between the median and pseudo-median is relatively small, and so this distinction is neglected in elementary discussions. Like the spatial median , [ 6 ] the pseudo–median is well defined for all distributions of random variables having dimension two or greater; for one-dimensional distributions, there exists some pseudo–median, which need not be unique, however. Like the median, the pseudo–median is defined for even heavy–tailed distributions that lack any (finite) mean .

[ 7 ] For a population that is symmetric, the Hodges–Lehmann statistic also estimates the population's median. It is a robust statistic that has a breakdown point of 0.29, which means that the statistic remains bounded even if nearly 30 percent of the data have been contaminated. This robustness is an important advantage over the sample mean, which has a zero breakdown point, being proportional to any single observation and so liable to being misled by even one outlier . The sample median is even more robust, having a breakdown point of 0.50.

[ 8 ] The Hodges–Lehmann estimator is much better than the sample mean when estimating mixtures of normal distributions, also.

[ 9 ] For symmetric distributions, the Hodges–Lehmann statistic sometimes has greater efficiency at estimating the center of symmetry (population median) than does the sample median. For the normal distribution, the Hodges-Lehmann statistic is nearly as efficient as the sample mean.   For the Cauchy distribution (Student t-distribution with one degree of freedom), the Hodges-Lehmann is infinitely more efficient than the sample mean, which is not a consistent estimator of the median, [ 8 ] but it is not more efficient than the median in that instance.

The one-sample Hodges–Lehmann statistic need not estimate any population mean, which  for many distributions does not exist. The two-sample Hodges–Lehmann estimator need not estimate the difference of two means or the difference of two (pseudo-)medians; rather, it estimates the median of the distribution of the difference between pairs of random–variables drawn respectively from the two populations.

[ 4 ] In general statistics [ edit ] The Hodges–Lehmann univariate statistics have several generalizations in multivariate statistics : [ 10 ] Multivariate ranks and signs [ 11 ] Spatial sign tests and spatial medians [ 6 ] Spatial signed-rank tests [ 12 ] Comparisons of tests and estimates [ 13 ] Several-sample location problems [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Median-unbiased estimator Notes [ edit ] ^ Lehmann (2006 , pp. 176 and 200–201) ^ Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms , OUP.

ISBN 0-19-850994-4 Entry for "Hodges-Lehmann one-sample estimator" ^ Hodges & Lehmann (1963) ^ a b Everitt (2002) Entry for "Hodges-Lehmann estimator" ^ Hettmansperger & McKean (1998 , pp. 2–4) ^ a b Oja (2010 , p. 71) ^ Hettmansperger & McKean (1998 , pp. 2–4 and 355–356) ^ a b Myles Hollander. Douglas A. Wolfe.

Nonparametric statistical methods . 2nd ed. John Wiley.

^ Jureckova Sen. Robust Statistical Procedures.

^ Oja (2010 , pp. 2–3) ^ Oja (2010 , p. 34) ^ Oja (2010 , pp. 83–94) ^ Oja (2010 , pp. 98–102) ^ Oja (2010 , pp. 160, 162, and 167–169) References [ edit ] Everitt, B.S. (2002) The Cambridge Dictionary of Statistics , CUP.

ISBN 0-521-81099-X Hettmansperger, T. P.; McKean, J. W. (1998).

Robust nonparametric statistical methods . Kendall's Library of Statistics. Vol. 5 (First ed., rather than Taylor and Francis (2010) second ed.). London; New York: Edward Arnold; John Wiley and Sons, Inc. pp. xiv+467.

ISBN 0-340-54937-8 .

MR 1604954 .

Hodges, J. L.; Lehmann, E. L.

(1963).

"Estimation of location based on ranks" .

Annals of Mathematical Statistics .

34 (2): 598– 611.

doi : 10.1214/aoms/1177704172 .

JSTOR 2238406 .

MR 0152070 .

Zbl 0203.21105 .

PE euclid.aoms/1177704172 .

Lehmann, Erich L.

(2006).

Nonparametrics: Statistical methods based on ranks . With the special assistance of H. J. M. D'Abrera (Reprinting of 1988 revision of 1975 Holden-Day ed.). New York: Springer. pp. xvi+463.

ISBN 978-0-387-35212-1 .

MR 0395032 .

Oja, Hannu (2010).

Multivariate nonparametric methods with R : An approach based on spatial signs and ranks . Lecture Notes in Statistics. Vol. 199. New York: Springer. pp. xiv+232.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-0468-3 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-0467-6 .

MR 2598854 .

Sen, Pranab Kumar (December 1963). "On the estimation of relative potency in dilution(-direct) assays by distribution-free methods".

Biometrics .

19 (4): 532– 552.

doi : 10.2307/2527532 .

JSTOR 2527532 .

Zbl 0119.15604 .

v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hodges–Lehmann_estimator&oldid=1293572473 " Categories : Robust statistics Nonparametric statistics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 13:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hodges–Lehmann estimator 4 languages Add topic

