Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plate tectonics Toggle Plate tectonics subsection 1.1 Tectonic evolution 1.2 Greater India 2 Major rock groups Toggle Major rock groups subsection 2.1 Precambrian super-eon 2.2 Phanerozoic 2.2.1 Palaeozoic 2.2.1.1 Lower Paleozoic 2.2.1.2 Upper Paleozoic 2.2.2 Mesozoic 2.2.3 Cenozoic 2.2.3.1 Tertiary period 2.2.3.2 Quaternary period 3 Earthquakes 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Geology of India 10 languages العربية বাংলা भोजपुरी Deutsch Hausa हिन्दी Italiano Suomi தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geology of India" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Plates in the crust of the earth, according to the plate tectonics theory The geology of India is diverse. Different regions of the Indian subcontinent contain rocks belonging to different geologic periods , dating as far back as the Eoarchean Era . Some of the rocks are very deformed and altered . Other deposits include recently deposited alluvium that has yet to undergo diagenesis .

Mineral deposits of great variety are found in the subcontinent in huge quantities. Even India's fossil record is impressive in which stromatolites , invertebrates , vertebrates and plant fossils are included.
India's geographical land area can be classified into the Deccan Traps , Gondwana and Vindhyan .

The Deccan Traps covers almost all of Maharashtra , a part of Gujarat , Karnataka , Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh marginally. During its journey northward after breaking off from the rest of Gondwana, the Indian Plate passed over a geologic hotspot , the Réunion hotspot , which caused extensive melting underneath the Indian Craton. The melting broke through the surface of the craton in a massive flood basalt event, creating the Deccan Traps. It is also thought that the Reunion hotspot caused the separation of Madagascar and India.

The Gondwana and Vindhyan include within its fold parts of Madhya Pradesh , Chhattisgarh , Odisha , Bihar , Jharkhand , West Bengal , Andhra Pradesh , Maharashtra , Jammu and Kashmir , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Rajasthan and Uttarakhand . The Gondwana sediments form a unique sequence of fluviatile rocks deposited in Permo-Carboniferous time. The Damodar and Sone river valleys and Rajmahal hills in eastern India contain a record of the Gondwana rocks.

The Geological Survey of India has published the List of National Geological Monuments in India .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Plate tectonics [ edit ] The Indian Craton was once part of the supercontinent of Pangaea . At that time, what is now India's southwest coast was attached to Madagascar and southern Africa, and what is now its east coast was attached to Australia. During the Jurassic Period about 160 Ma ( ICS 2004), rifting caused Pangaea to break apart into two supercontinents, namely Gondwana (to the south) and Laurasia (to the north). The Indian Craton remained attached to Gondwana , until the supercontinent began to rift apart about in the early Cretaceous , about 125 million years ago (ICS 2004). The Indian Plate then drifted northward toward the Eurasian Plate , at a pace that is the fastest known movement of any plate. It is generally believed that the Indian Plate separated from Madagascar about 90 Million years ago (ICS 2004), however some biogeographical and geological evidence suggests that the connection between Madagascar and Africa was retained at the time when the Indian Plate collided with the Eurasian Plate about 50 Million years ago (ICS 2004).

[ 4 ] This orogeny, which is continuing today, is related to closure of the Tethys Ocean . The closure of this ocean which created the Alps in Europe, and the Caucasus range in western Asia, created the Himalaya Mountains and the Tibetan Plateau in South Asia. The current orogenic event is causing parts of the Asian continent to deform westward and eastward on either side of the orogen. Concurrently with this collision, the Indian Plate sutured on to the adjacent Australian Plate , forming a new larger plate, the Indo-Australian Plate .

Tectonic evolution [ edit ] Due to continental drift , the India Plate split from Madagascar and collided with the Eurasian Plate resulting in the formation of the Himalayas .

The earliest phase of tectonic evolution was marked by the cooling and solidification of the upper crust of the earth's surface in the Archaean Era (prior to 2.5 billion years) which is represented by the exposure of gneisses and granites especially on the Peninsula . These form the core of the Indian Craton . The Aravalli Range is the remnant of an early Proterozoic orogen called the Aravali-Delhi Orogen that joined the two older segments that make up the Indian Craton. It extends approximately 500 kilometres (311 mi) from its northern end to isolated hills and rocky ridges into Haryana, ending near Delhi.

Minor igneous intrusions, deformation (folding and faulting) and subsequent metamorphism of the Aravalli Mountains represent the main phase of orogenesis. The erosion of the mountains, and further deformation of the sediments of the Dharwarian group (Bijawars) marks the second phase. The volcanic activities and intrusions, associated with this second phase are recorded in the composition of these sediments.

Early to Late Proterozoic(2.5 to 0.54 billion years) calcareous and arenaceous deposits, which correspond to humid and semi-arid climatic regimes, were deposited the Cuddapah and Vindhyan basins. These basins which border or lie within the existing crystalline basement, were uplifted during the Cambrian (500 Ma (ICS 2004)). The sediments are generally undeformed and have in many places preserved their original horizontal stratification. The Vindhyans consist of a lower Supergroup that was deposited sometime between ~1800–1600 Ma. The lower Vindhyan rocks were slightly deformed (tilted) and the Upper Vindhyan sequence lies unconformably over the Lower Vindhyan.  The age of Upper Vindhyan (Kaimur, Rewa and Bhander) sedimentation is contentious.  Kaimur rocks were intruded by the 1073 Ma Majhgawan kimberlite (Gregory et al., 2006) and are therefore older than 1073 Ma.  The Rewa contains diamondiferous conglomerates suggesting that they formed after the Kaimur.  The Rewa is conformably overlain by the Bhander Group.  Indirect evidence for the age of the Upper Vindhyan was discussed by Meert and Pandit (2015) who noted the similarity in paleomagnetic directions from the 1073 Ma Majhgawan kimberlite, the 1.1 Ga Mahoba dyke and sediments of the Bhander and Rewa Groups.  In addition, multiple detrital zircon studies failed to isolate any ages younger than ~1000 Ma from Upper Vindhyan rocks.  A recent claim of the iconic Ediacaran fossil "Dickinsonia" located in the Upper Bhander (Retallack et al., 2021) required an Ediacaran age for that Group; however, Meert et al. (2023) demonstrated that the fossil was misidentified and therefore the age of the Upper Vindhyan is still debated.

Early Paleozoic rocks are found in the Himalayas and consist of southerly derived sediments eroded from the crystalline craton and deposited on the Indian platform.

In the Late Paleozoic, Permo-Carboniferous glaciations left extensive glacio-fluvial deposits across central India, in new basins created by sag/normal faulting. These tillites and glacially derived sediments are designated the Gondwanas series. The sediments are overlain by rocks resulting from a Permian marine transgression (270 Ma (ICS 2004)).

The late Paleozoic coincided with the deformation and drift of the Gondwana supercontinent. To this drift, the uplift of the Vindhyan sediments and the deposition of northern peripheral sediments in the Himalayan Sea, can be attributed.

During the Jurassic, as Pangea began to rift apart, large grabens formed in central India filling with Upper Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous sandstones and conglomerates.

By the Late Cretaceous India had separated from Australia and Africa and was moving northward towards Asia. At this time, prior to the Deccan eruptions, uplift in southern India resulted in sedimentation in the adjacent nascent Indian Ocean. Exposures of these rocks occur along the south Indian coast at Pondicherry and in Tamil Nadu.

At the close of the Mesozoic one of the greatest volcanic eruptions in earth's history occurred, the Deccan lava flows . Covering more than 500,000 square kilometres (193,051 sq mi) area, these mark the final break from Gondwana.

In the early Tertiary, the first phase of the Himalayan orogeny, the Karakoram phase occurred. The Himalayan orogeny has continued to the present day.

Greater India [ edit ] Greater India or the Greater India Basin means the Indian Plate plus a postulated northern extension which either subducted under Eurasia or pressed against (or drag) Eurasia's ancient volcanic mountains farther north.

[ 5 ] As a result, the crust of this formerly coastal region shortened under compression and thickened to become what is today the Tibetan Plateau .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The term was used before plate tectonic theory, [ 7 ] but the term has seen increased usage since the 1970s.

The Indian Plate and the Eurasian Plate have converged up to 3,600 km (2,200 mi) ± 35 km (22 mi). The upper crustal shortening is documented from the geological record of Asia and the Himalaya as up to approximately 2,350 km (1,460 mi) less. Much of the lost area was pushed under Asia to form the Tibetan highland.

[ 8 ] Major rock groups [ edit ] See also: Major soil deposits of India Map of chronostratigraphic divisions of India 1911 Geological map of India Precambrian super-eon [ edit ] A considerable area of peninsular India, the Indian Shield , consists of Archean gneisses and schists which are the oldest rocks found in India. The Precambrian rocks of India have been classified into two systems, namely the Dharwar system and the Archaean system (gneiss and schists).

The Dharwar System The rocks of the Dharwar system are mainly sedimentary in origin, [ 9 ] and occur in narrow elongated synclines resting on the gneisses found in Bellary district, Mysore and the Aravalis of Rajputana. These rocks are enriched in manganese and iron ore which represents a significant resource of these metals. They are also extensively mineralised with gold most notably the Kolar gold mines located in Kolar. In the north and west of India, the Vaikrita system, which occurs in Hundar , Kumaon and Spiti areas, the Dailing series in Sikkim and the Shillong series in Assam are believed to be of the same age as the Dharwar system.

The metamorphic basement consists of gneisses which are further classified into the Bengal gneiss, the Bundelkhand gneiss and the Nilgiri gneiss. The Nilgiri system comprises charnockites ranging from granites to gabbros .

Phanerozoic [ edit ] Palaeozoic [ edit ] Lower Paleozoic [ edit ] Rocks of the earliest part of the Cambrian Period are found in the Salt range in Punjab and the Spiti area in the central Himalayas and consist of a thick sequence of fossiliferous sediments. In the Salt range, the stratigraphy starts with the Salt Pseudomorph zone, which has a thickness of 450 feet (137 m) and consists of dolomites and sandstones . It is overlain by magnesian sandstones with a thickness of 250 feet (76 m), similar to the underlying dolomites. These sandstones have very few fossils. Overlying the sandstones is the Neobolus Shale, which is composed of dark shales with a thickness of 100 feet (30 m). Finally there is a zone consisting of red or purple sandstones having a thickness of 250 feet (76 m) to 400 feet (122 m) called the Purple Sandstone. These are unfossiliferous and show sun-cracks and worm burrows which are typical of subaerial weathering. The deposits in Spiti are known as the Haimanta system and they consist of slates , micaceous quartzite and dolomitic limestones . The Ordovician rocks comprise flaggy shales, limestones, red quartzites, quartzites, sandstones and conglomerates . Siliceous limestones belonging to the Silurian overlie the Ordovician rocks. These limestones are in turn overlain by white quartzite and this is known as Muth quartzite. Silurian rocks which contain typical Silurian fauna are also found in the Vihi district of Kashmir .

Upper Paleozoic [ edit ] Devonian fossils and corals are found in grey limestone in the central Himalayas and in black limestone in the Chitral area. The Carboniferous is composed of two distinct sequences, the upper Carboniferous Po, and the lower Carboniferous Lipak. Fossils of brachiopods and some trilobites are found in the calcareous and sandy rocks of the Lipak series. The Syringothyris limestone in Kashmir also belongs to the Lipak. The Po series overlies the Lipak series, and the Fenestella shales are interbedded within a sequence of quartzites and dark shales. In many places Carboniferous strata are overlaid by grey agglomeratic slates, believed to be of volcanic origin. Many genera of productids are found in the limestones of the Permo-Triassic, which has led to these rocks being referred to as "productus limestone". This limestone is of marine origin and is divided into three distinct lithostratigraphic units based on the productus chronology: the Late Permian Chideru, which contains many ammonites, the Late — Middle Permian Virgal, and the Middle Permian Amb unit.

Mesozoic [ edit ] In the Triassic the Ceratite beds, named after the ammonite ceratite , consist of arenaceous limestones, calcerous sandstones and marls. The Jurassic consists of two distinct units. The Kioto limestone, extends from the lower the middle Jurassic with a thickness 2,000 feet (610 m) to 3,000 feet (914 m). The upper Jurassic is represented by the Spiti black shales, and stretches from the Karakoram to Sikkim .

Cretaceous rocks cover an extensive area in India. In South India, the sedimentary rocks are divided into four stages; the Niniyur, the Ariyalur, the Trichinopoly(a district in the Madras Presidency, covering present-day districts of Tiruchirappalli, Karur, Ariyalur and Perambalur), and the Utatur stages. In the Utatur stage the rocks host phosphate nodules , which constitute an important source of phosphates in the country. In the central provinces, the well developed beds of Lameta contain fossil records which are helpful in estimating the age of the Deccan Traps. This sequence of basaltic rocks was formed near the end of the Cretaceous period due to volcanic activity. These lava flows occupy an area of 200,000 square miles (520,000 km 2 ). These rocks are a source of high quality building stone and also provide a very fertile clayey loam , particularly suited to cotton cultivation.

Cenozoic [ edit ] Tertiary period [ edit ] In this period the Himalayan orogeny began, and the volcanism associated with the Deccan Traps continued. The rocks of this era have valuable deposits of petroleum and coal. Sandstones of Eocene age are found in Punjab, which grade into chalky limestones with oil seepages. Further north the rocks found in the Simla area are divided into three series, the Sabathu series consisting of grey and red shales , the Dagshai series of bright red clays and the Kasauli series sandstones. Towards the east in Assam, Nummulitic limestone is found in the Khasi hills. Oil is associated with these rocks of the Oligo-Miocene age. Along the foothills of the Himalayas the Siwalik molasse is composed of sandstones , conglomerates and shales with thicknesses of 16,000 feet (4,877 m) to 20,000 feet (6,096 m) and ranging from Eocene to Pliocene . These rocks are notable for their rich vertebrate fauna including many fossil hominoids .

Quaternary period [ edit ] The alluvium which is found in the Indo-Gangetic plain belongs to this era. It was eroded from the Himalayas by the rivers and the monsoons. These alluvial deposits consist of clay, loam, silt etc. and are divided into the older alluvium and the newer alluvium. The older alluvium is called Bhangar and is present in the ground above the flood level of the rivers. Khaddar or newer alluvium is confined to the river channels and their flood plains . This region has some of the most fertile soil found in the country as new silt is continually laid down by the rivers every year.

Earthquakes [ edit ] Main article: Earthquake zones of India The Indian subcontinent has a history of devastating earthquakes . The Assam earthquake of 1950 registered a magnitude of 8.6; it is one of the most powerful earthquakes to have ever been recorded.

[ 10 ] A similar earthquake in a densely populated area today would kill hundreds of thousands if not millions. This is why the Himalayan range is believed to be one of the most dangerous places to build large dams. The major reason for the high frequency and intensity of the earthquakes is that the Indian plate is driving into Asia at a rate of approximately 47 mm/year.

[ 11 ] Geographical statistics of India show that almost 54% of the land is vulnerable to earthquakes. A World Bank & United Nations report shows estimates that around 200 million city dwellers in India will be exposed to storms and earthquakes by 2050.

[ 12 ] National Disaster Management Authority says that 60% of Indian landmass is prone to earthquake and 8% susceptible to cyclone risks.

See also [ edit ] Geology of Aravalli Range National Geological Monuments of India References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Indian Craton .

^ "National Geological Monument, from Geological Survey of India website" . Archived from the original on 12 July 2017 . Retrieved 21 January 2019 .

^ "Geo-Heritage Sites" .

pib.nic.in .

Press Information Bureau . 9 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2018 .

^ national geo-heritage of India Archived 11 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine , INTACH ^ Briggs, John C. (2003) The biogeographic and tectonic history of India. Journal of Biogeography 30:381–388 ^ a b Molnar 2015 , p. 128.

^ Ali, Jason R.; Aitchison, Jonathan C. (2005). "Greater India".

Earth-Science Reviews .

72 ( 3– 4): 170.

Bibcode : 2005ESRv...72..169A .

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2005.07.005 .

^ Argand, E., 1924. La tectonique de l' Asie. Proc. 13th Int. Geol. Cong. 7 (1924), 171–372.

^ "The Greater India Basin hypothesis" (PDF) . University of Oslo . Retrieved 20 December 2016 .

^ Majid, Husain (1 January 2014).

Geography of India . McGraw-Hill Education. p. 1.

ISBN 9789351343578 .

^ Kingdon-Ward, F. (September 1955).

"Aftermath of the Great Assam Earthquake of 1950" .

The Geographical Journal .

121 (3): 290– 303.

Bibcode : 1955GeogJ.121..290K .

doi : 10.2307/1790893 .

ISSN 0016-7398 .

JSTOR 1790893 .

^ "Earthquake Hazards and the Collision between India and Asia" . Archived from the original on 19 September 2006 . Retrieved 13 May 2006 .

^ "Indian cities under threat of storms & earthquakes by 2050: World Bank & United Nations" .

The Times Of India . 9 December 2011.

Further reading [ edit ] Gregory, L. C., Meert, J. G., Pradhan, V., Pandit, M. K., Tamrat, E., & Malone, S. J., 2006. A paleomagnetic and geochronologic study of the Majhgawan kimberlite, India: implications for the age of the Upper Vindhyan Supergroup. Precambrian Research, 149, 65–75.

Grout, Andrew. "Geology and India, 1775–1805: an episode in colonial science." South Asia Research 10.1 (1990): 1–18.

Jain, A.K., D.M. Banerjee, et al. eds.

Tectonics of the Indian Subcontinent (Society of Earth Scientists Series) (2020).

excerpt Medlicott, Henry Benedict, and William Thomas Blanford.

A Manual of the Geology of India: Chiefly Compiled from the Observations of the Geological Survey (2nd ed. 1892) reprinted by Cambridge University Press, 2011.

Meert, J.G. and Pandit, M.K., 2015. The Archaean and Proterozoic history of Peninsular India: tectonic framework for Precambrian sedimentary basins in India. Geological Society, London, Memoirs, 43, 29–54.

Meert, J.G., Pandit, M.K, Kwafo, S., Singha, A., 2023. Stinging News: ‘Dickinsonia’ discovered in the Upper Vindhyan of India not worth the buzz, Gondwana Research, doi:10.1016/j.gr.2023.01.003.

Molnar, Peter (2015).

Plate Tectonics: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198728269 .

Raju, D. S. N. "Paleogene Stratigraphy of India: An Overview." The Indian Paleogene.

(Springer, Cham, 2018). 1–89.

Ramakrishnan, Moni, and Rajagopala Vaidyanadhan.

Geology of India (2 vol. GSI Publications 2.1 (2010).

Retallack, G.J., Matthews, N.A., Master, S., Khangar, R.G. and Khan, M., 2021. Dickinsonia discovered in India and late Ediacaran biogeography. Gondwana Research, 90, 165–170.

Saikia, Arupjyoti. "Earthquakes and the Environmental Transformation of a Floodplain Landscape: The Brahmaputra Valley and the Earthquakes of 1897 and 1950." Environment and History 26.1 (2020): 51–77.

Wadia, Darashaw Nosherwan.

Geology of India (Macmillan, 1939).

Wadia, Darashaw Nosherwan.

Geology of India: For Students (Macmillan, 1919) online .

v t e Geography of India Geology Fossil Parks Geology Indian plate Geological Monuments Stones Culture History National monuments Sacred Groves Sacred Mountains Sacred Rivers Tourism World Heritage Sites Landforms Beaches Borders Coasts Canals Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions North India Northwest Northeast India East India South India West India Central India Geographical regions Deccan Plateau Eastern Coastal Plains Circars Coromandel Utkal Himalayas Eastern Himachal Himadri Sivalik Indo-Gangetic Plain Thar Desert Western Coastal Plains Canara Konkan Kathiawar Kutch Malabar Subdivisions States and territories Autonomous areas Divisions Districts Cities Towns Municipalities Ecology Biogeographic classification Climate Ecoregions Environmental Issues Fauna Flora Forests Protected Areas Biosphere reserves Communal forests Conservation areas Conservation and community reserves Elephant reserves National parks Ramsar Sites Reserved and protected forests Tiger reserves Wildlife sanctuaries Wildlife v t e India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBTQ Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Paper currency Postal Science and technology Ancient Stone Age Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Indo-Greek Kingdom Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley Indo-Parthian kingdom Kushan Empire Alchon Huns Seleucid–Mauryan war Middle Kingdoms Middle kingdoms Chola Middle Ages Medieval India Hoysala Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Early Modern Mughals Marathas European trade Bengal War Late modern Colonial Princely state East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Commander-in-Chief Zamindari Bengal Renaissance Political reforms Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Contemporary History of India (1947–present) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II COVID-19 pandemic Geography Geology Fossil Parks Geology of India Indian Plate Heritage National Geological Monuments of India Sacred groves of India Sacred mountains of India Sacred rivers of India Stones of India Environment Biogeographic classification Biosphere reserves Climate Climate change Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Forests Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Canals Coasts Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions Central East North Northwest Northeast South Southwest Southeast West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories See also National monuments of India National parks of India Nature worship in Indian-origin religions World Heritage Sites in India Culture of India History of India Tourism in India Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Citizenship Elections Democracy Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX NIFTY 50 NIFTY Next 50 NIFTY 500 GIFT Nifty Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Finance Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate External debt Foreign trade Foreign direct investment Foreign exchange reserves Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India Atmanirbhar Bharat Currency Indian rupee Sign History Historical Forex Digital rupee Coinage Paisa Reserve Bank of India Governor Mint Inflation Financial services Banking Insurance Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion BSE NSE India INX History COVID-19 impact Economic development Liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People By net worth Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Ladakh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Mizoram Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Chemical Construction Defence Education Energy Electricity Nuclear Oil and gas Solar Wind Electronics and semiconductor Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Hospitals Information technology Media Cinema FM Radio Television Printing Mining Coal Iron and Steel Pharmaceuticals Pulp and paper Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Space Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Aviation Civil Ports Rail Roads Electricity Water Power Regulator IRDAI RBI SEBI IBBI PFRDA Other NCLT NCLAT BIFR IBBI IBC SARFESI Act Income Tax Act Companies Act Banking Act Insurance Act FEMA Mumbai Consensus Society and culture Society Caste system Corruption Crime Demographics Indians Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Health Languages Life expectancy Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Women Sexuality Youth Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Painting Physical culture Public holidays Sculpture tallest Sport Traditional v t e Geology of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9zpv5
Cached time: 20250816155748
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.725 seconds
Real time usage: 0.867 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15441/1000000
Revision size: 23906/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 246228/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15651/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69221/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11069591/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  680.820      1 -total
 31.71%  215.914      9 Template:Navbox
 20.13%  137.048      1 Template:Reflist
 17.48%  118.984      1 Template:Asia_topic
 14.57%   99.193     56 Template:Iso2country
 12.42%   84.532      1 Template:Geography_of_India
 11.49%   78.231      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.36%   77.371      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  9.32%   63.438      1 Template:Short_description
  7.43%   50.610      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1876159:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816155748 and revision id 1293736389. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geology_of_India&oldid=1293736389 " Category : Geology of India Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from August 2024 Use Indian English from July 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 11:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geology of India 10 languages Add topic

