Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Depth in stereograms 2 Stereoscopic reconstruction 3 Depth rendition defined 4 Homeomorphic and heteromorphic rendition 5 Non-veridical depth: other factors 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Stereoscopic depth rendition 1 language Català Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stereoscopic depth rendition specifies how the depth of a three-dimensional object is encoded in a stereoscopic reconstruction.  It needs attention to ensure a realistic depiction of the three-dimensionality of viewed scenes and is a specific instance of the more general task of 3D rendering of objects in two-dimensional displays.

Depth in stereograms [ edit ] A stereogram consists of a pair of two-dimensional frames, one for each eye.  Common to both are the widths and heights of objects; their depth is encoded in the differences between right and left eye views. The geometric relationship between an object's third dimension and these position differences is presented below and depends on the location of the stereo-camera lenses and the observer's eyes. Other factors, however, contribute to the depth seen in a stereoscopic view and whether it corresponds to that in the actual object; the act of viewing a stereoscopic display often alters observers' three-dimensional perception.

[ 1 ] Stereoscopic reconstruction [ edit ] The right and left eyes' panels in a stereoscopic reconstruction are created by projection from the principal points of the twin recording camera. The geometrical situation is most clearly understood by analyzing how the screens are generated when a small cubical element of side length dx = dy = dz is photographed from a distance z with a twin camera whose lenses are a distance a apart.

Geometry of screen view of a small cube at a distance z captured by a twin camera with separation a . Right and left eye images are shown superimposed.

In the left eye panel of the stereogram the distance AB is the representation of the front face of the cube, in the right eye panel, there is in addition BC , the representation of the cube's depth, i.e., the intercept on the screen of the rays from the  cameras' principal points to the back of the cube. This interval computes to the first order to d z ∗ ∗ a z {\displaystyle dz*{\frac {a}{z}}} .  (To simplify the account, the right and left screens are taken to be superimposed, as they would be in a 3D display with LCD goggles .)  Hence the depth/width ratio of the cube's view, as embodied in its representation on the viewing screen, is r = a×dz/z×dx = a/z since dx=dz and depends solely on the distance of the target from the twin lenses and their separation and remains constant with scale or magnification changes. The depth/width ratio of the actual object , of course,  is 1.00 .

This stereogram with the cube, whose depth/width ratio had been captured with recording parameters a c and z c and embodied in the ratio BC/AB = r c =a c /z c , is now viewed by an observer with interocular separation a o at a distance z o . An overall scale change in BC/AB does not matter, but unless r o = r c , i.e., a o /z o = a c /z c . this no longer represents a cube but rather becomes, for this observer at this distance, a configuration for which R = r c /r o ...... (1) i.e., whose depth is R times that of a cube.

Depth rendition defined [ edit ] A stereogram of intertwining rings. When fused by an observer, perceived depth increases with viewing distance.

The stereoscopic depth rendition r is a measure of the flattening or expansion in depth for a display situation and is equal to the ratio of the angles of depth and width subtended at the eye in the stereogram reconstruction of a small cubical element.  A value r > 1 says that what is seen has an expanded depth relative to the actual configuration.

A numerical example will illustrate: a structure is photographed by a stereocamera with interlens separation a c = 25 cm from a distance of 1 m, z c = 100.

Hence r c =  a c /z c = 0.25 and on the screens the right and left representation of the cube's far edge will be separated by ⁠ 1 / 4 ⁠ the distance of the width.  This stereogram is now viewed from a distance of 39 cm (the magnification does not matter, only the ratio BC/AB has to have been conserved) by an observer with interocular distance 6.5 cm, i.e., r o = 6.5/39 = 0.167 .  According to equation (1) for this view the structure has a stereoscopic depth rendition given by R = r c /r o = 0.25/0.167 = 1.5 , meaning that the observer is presented with the geometrical situation not of a cube but of a structure 1.5× as deep as it is wide.  For this to become a cube r o needs to be 0.25 which occurs for an observation distance z o = 6.5/0.25 = 26 cm.

This example illustrates that a given stereoscopic presentation for a given observer gains in depth/width ratio (expands in depth) with increasing observation distance. Observers, who can fuse the twin images of the rings by voluntarily changing their convergence, can verify this by moving away and towards the viewing screen.

Homeomorphic and heteromorphic rendition [ edit ] Only when the recording and viewing situations have the same r value, i.e., only when a c /z c = a o /z o will the depth/width ratios of the actual structure and its view be identical. This particular condition has been termed homeomorphic by Moritz von Rohr and was contrasted by him with the heteromorphic one in which the r values of  the stereoscopic and actual views differ.

[ 2 ] Non-veridical depth: other factors [ edit ] But homeomorphic rendition with geometrical parameters identical to the original does not assure that an observer's perception of depth in a stereoscopic image is the same as that in the actual three-dimensional structure.  An observer judgment of the apparent disposition of objects in space depends on many factors other than the geometrical ones that pertain to the angles subtended by the components at the two eyes.  This was well described in the classical study by Wallach and Zuckerman who pointed out that the depth in the view through binoculars seems foreshortened.

[ 3 ] Scenes appear flattened through field glasses, even non-prismatic ones without artificial extension of the base, which provide merely overall magnification and leave the r value unchanged.

In contrast to the rules, laid out above, for calculating the geometrically defined stereoscopic depth rendition, the perceived depth involves factors — context, previous experience — that are individual and not specifiable with the same degree of generality.  Chief among them is the distance at which the configuration appears to the viewer.  This is by no means fixed: the subjective z is only vaguely related to the actual object distance, as is obvious in watching 3D film . Because apparent distance is the main source of judging object size (size or subjective constancy ), observers' reports on the perceived depth/width ratio can deviate substantially from calculated values.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] On the other hand, recent research confirms that the relative depths seen in three-dimensional configurations scale up more or less in proportion to the stereoscopic depth rendition arrived at within the purely geometrical framework.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Westheimer, Gerald (2011). "Three-dimensional displays and stereo vision".

Proc. Roy. Soc. B , 278, 2241-2248.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2010.2777 .

^ v. Rohr, Moritz (1907).

Die Binokularen Instrumente . Berlin: Julius Springer.

^ Wallach, H. and Zuckerman, C. (1963). " The constancy of stereoscopic depth ".

Am. J. Psychol.

, 76, 404–412.

^ Gogel, W.C. (1960). " Perceived frontal size as a determiner of perceived binocular depth ".

J. Psychol.

, 50, 119–131.

^ Foley, J.M. (1968). " Depth, size and distance in stereoscopic vision ".

Percept Psychophys, 3, 265–274.

^ Johnston, E.B. (1991). " Systematic distortions of shape from stereopsis ".

Vision Research , 31, 1351–1360.

^ Westheimer, Gerald (2011). " Depth rendition of three-dimensional displays ", J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 28, 1185–1190.

External links [ edit ] Review of 3D displays and stereo vision v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stereoscopic_depth_rendition&oldid=1206503185 " Categories : 3D rendering Stereoscopy This page was last edited on 12 February 2024, at 09:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stereoscopic depth rendition 1 language Add topic

