Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Signs and symptoms 3 Causes 4 Diagnosis 5 Treatment 6 Epidemiology 7 Criticism 8 In popular culture 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Delusional disorder 23 languages العربية Català Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mental illness featuring beliefs with inadequate grounding Medical condition Delusional disorder Other names Delusional insanity, [ 1 ] paranoia [ 2 ] Painting by Théodore Géricault portraying an old man with a grandiose delusion of power and military command. Grandiose delusions are common in delusional disorder.

Specialty Psychiatry , clinical psychology Symptoms Strong false belief(s) despite superior evidence to the contrary Usual onset 18–90 years old ( mean of about age 40) [ 3 ] Types Erotomanic type, grandiose type, jealous type, persecutory type, somatic type, mixed type, unspecified type Causes Genetic and environmental [ 4 ] Risk factors Family history , chronic stress , low SES , substance abuse Differential diagnosis Paranoid personality disorder , bipolar disorder , schizophrenia , substance-induced psychosis [ 4 ] Frequency 0.02–0.1% of general population [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Delusional disorder is a mental disorder in which a person has delusions , but with no accompanying prominent hallucinations , thought disorder , mood disorder , or significant flattening of affect .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Delusions are a specific symptom of psychosis . Delusions can be bizarre or non-bizarre in content; [ 8 ] non-bizarre delusions are fixed false beliefs that involve situations that could occur in real life, such as being harmed or poisoned.

[ 9 ] Apart from their delusion or delusions, people with delusional disorder may continue to socialize and function in a normal manner and their behavior does not necessarily seem odd.

[ 10 ] However, the preoccupation with delusional ideas can be disruptive to their overall lives.

[ 10 ] For the diagnosis to be made, auditory and visual hallucinations cannot be prominent, though olfactory or tactile hallucinations related to the content of the delusion may be present.

[ 8 ] The delusions cannot be due to the effects of a drug , medication , or general medical condition , and delusional disorder cannot be diagnosed in an individual previously properly diagnosed with schizophrenia . A person with delusional disorder may be high functioning in daily life. Recent and comprehensive meta-analyses of scientific studies point to an association with a deterioration in aspects of IQ in psychotic patients, in particular perceptual reasoning, although, the between-group differences were small.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] According to German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin , patients with delusional disorder remain coherent, sensible, and reasonable.

[ 14 ] The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) defines six subtypes of the disorder: erotomanic (belief that someone is in love with one), grandiose (belief that one is the greatest, strongest, fastest, richest, or most intelligent person ever), jealous (belief that one is being cheated on), persecutory (delusions that one or someone one is close to is being malevolently treated in some way), somatic (belief that one has a disease or medical condition), and mixed, i.e., having features of more than one subtype.

[ 8 ] Delusions also occur as symptoms of many other mental disorders, especially the other psychotic disorders .

The DSM-IV and psychologists agree that personal beliefs should be evaluated with great respect to cultural and religious differences, as some cultures have normalized beliefs that may be considered delusional in other cultures.

[ 15 ] An earlier, now-obsolete, nosological name for delusional disorder was "paranoia". This should not be confused with the modern definition of paranoia (i.e., persecutory ideation specifically).

Classification [ edit ] The International Classification of Diseases classifies delusional disorder as a mental and behavioural disorder .

[ 16 ] Diagnosis of a specific type of delusional disorder can sometimes be made based on the content of the delusions, to wit,  the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) enumerates seven types: Erotomanic type (erotomania) : delusion that another person, often a prominent figure, is in love with the individual. The individual may breach the law as they try to obsessively make contact with the desired person.

Grandiose type (megalomania) : delusion of inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity or believing oneself to be a famous person, claiming the actual person is an impostor or an impersonator.

Jealous type : delusion that the individual's sexual partner is unfaithful when it is untrue. The patient may follow the partner, check text messages, emails, phone calls etc. in an attempt to find "evidence" of the infidelity.

Persecutory type : This delusion is a common subtype. It includes the belief that the person (or someone to whom the person is close) is being malevolently treated in some way. The patient may believe that they have been drugged, spied upon, harmed, harassed and so on and may seek "justice" by making reports, taking  action or even acting violently.

Somatic type : delusions that the person has some physical defect or general medical condition Mixed type : delusions with characteristics of more than one of the above types but with no one theme predominating.

Unspecified type : delusions that cannot be clearly determined or characterized in any of the categories in the specific types.

[ 17 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] The following can indicate a delusion: [ 18 ] An individual expresses an idea or belief with unusual persistence or force, even when evidence suggests the contrary.

That idea appears to have an undue influence on the person's life, and the way of life is often altered to an inexplicable extent.

Despite their profound conviction, there is often a quality of secretiveness or suspicion when the person is questioned about it.

The individual tends to be humorless and oversensitive, especially about the belief.

There is a quality of centrality : no matter how unlikely it is that these strange things are happening to the person, they accept them relatively unquestioningly.

An attempt to contradict the belief is likely to arouse an inappropriately strong emotional reaction, often with irritability and hostility. They will not accept any other opinions.

The belief is, at the least, unlikely, and out of keeping with the individual's social, cultural, and religious background.

The person is emotionally over-invested in the idea and it overwhelms other elements of their psyche .

The delusion, if acted out, often leads to behaviors which are abnormal, and out of character, although perhaps understandable in light of the delusional beliefs.

Other people who know the individual observe that the belief and behavior are uncharacteristic and alien.

Additional characteristic of delusional disorder include the following: [ 18 ] It is a primary disorder.

It is a stable disorder characterized by the presence of delusions to which the patient clings with extraordinary tenacity.

The illness is chronic and frequently lifelong.

The delusions are logically constructed and internally consistent.

The delusions do not interfere with general logical reasoning (although within the delusional system the logic is perverted) and there is usually no general disturbance of behavior. If disturbed behavior does occur, it is directly related to the delusional beliefs.

The individual experiences a heightened sense of self-reference.  Events which, to others, are nonsignificant are of enormous significance to them, and the atmosphere surrounding the delusions is highly charged.

However, this should not be confused with gaslighting , where a person denies the truth, and causes the one being gaslit to think that they are being delusional.

Causes [ edit ] The cause of delusional disorder is unknown, [ 9 ] but genetic , biochemical , and environmental factors may play a significant role in its development.

[ better source needed ] Some people with delusional disorders may have an imbalance in neurotransmitters , the chemicals that send and receive messages to the brain.

[ 19 ] There does seem to be some familial component, and immigration (generally for persecutory reasons), [ 9 ] drug abuse, excessive stress, [ 20 ] being married, being employed, low socioeconomic status , celibacy among men, and widowhood among women may also be risk factors.

[ 21 ] Delusional disorder is currently thought to be on the same spectrum or dimension as schizophrenia , but people with delusional disorder, in general, may have less symptomatology and functional disability.

[ 22 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Differential diagnosis includes ruling out other causes such as drug-induced conditions, dementia , infections , metabolic disorders , and endocrine disorders .

[ 9 ] Other psychiatric disorders must then be ruled out. In delusional disorder, mood symptoms tend to be brief or absent, and unlike schizophrenia , delusions are non-bizarre and hallucinations are minimal or absent.

[ 9 ] Interviews are important tools to obtain information about the patient's life situation and history to help make a diagnosis. Clinicians generally review earlier medical records to gather a full history. Clinicians also try to interview the patient's immediate family , as this can be helpful in determining the presence of delusions. The mental status examination is used to assess the patient's current mental condition.

A psychological questionnaire used in the diagnosis of the delusional disorder is the Peters Delusion Inventory (PDI) which focuses on identifying and understanding delusional thinking. However, this questionnaire is more likely used in research than in clinical practice.

In terms of diagnosing a non-bizarre delusion as a delusion, ample support should be provided through fact checking. In case of non-bizarre delusions,  Psych Central [ 23 ] [ better source needed ] notes, "All of these situations could be true or possible, but the person suffering from this disorder knows them not to be (e.g., through fact-checking , third-person confirmation, etc.)." Treatment [ edit ] A challenge in the treatment of delusional disorders is that most patients have limited insight, and do not acknowledge that there is a problem.

[ 9 ] Most patients are treated as out-patients, although hospitalization may be required in some cases if there is a risk of harm to self or others.

[ 9 ] Individual psychotherapy is recommended rather than group psychotherapy , as patients are often quite suspicious and sensitive.

[ 9 ] Antipsychotics are not well tested in delusional disorder, but they do not seem to work very well, and often have no effect on the core delusional belief.

[ 9 ] Antipsychotics may be more useful in managing agitation that can accompany delusional disorder.

[ 9 ] Until further evidence is found, it seems reasonable to offer treatments which have efficacy in other psychotic disorders.

[ 24 ] There is a certain amount of evidence that alternative treatment-regimes (beyond conventional attempted treatment with antipsychotics) may include clomipramine for people with the somatic subtype of paranoia.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] There is a dearth of well-published studies investigating the effectiveness of trimipramine ; another derivative of tricyclic-antidepressant imipramine and one which has modest anti-psychotic properties weakly analogous to those of clozapine ; in delusional disorder per-se. However, trimipramine was compared to a combination of amitriptyline and haloperidol in a double-blinded trial involving patients with severe, psychotic depression (specifically with customary delusional features) and appeared favourable in its treatment.

[ 27 ] Psychotherapy for patients with delusional disorder can include cognitive therapy which is conducted with the use of empathy . During the process, the therapist can ask hypothetical questions in a form of therapeutic Socratic questioning .

[ 28 ] This therapy has been mostly studied in patients with the persecutory type. The combination of pharmacotherapy with cognitive therapy integrates treating the possible underlying biological problems and decreasing the symptoms with psychotherapy as well. Psychotherapy has been said to be the most useful form of treatment because of the trust formed in a patient and therapist relationship.

[ 29 ] Supportive therapy has also been shown to be helpful. Its goal is to facilitate treatment adherence and provide education about the illness and its treatment.

Furthermore, providing social skills training has been found to be helpful for many people. It can promote interpersonal competence as well as confidence and comfort when interacting with those individuals perceived as a threat .

[ 30 ] Insight-oriented therapy is rarely indicated or contraindicated; yet there are reports of successful treatment.

[ 30 ] Its goals are to develop therapeutic alliance, containment of projected feelings of hatred , powerlessness, and badness; measured interpretation as well as the development of a sense of creative doubt in the internal perception of the world. The latter requires empathy with the patient's defensive position.

[ 30 ] Epidemiology [ edit ] Delusional disorders are uncommon in psychiatric practice, though this may be an underestimation due to the fact that those with the condition lack insight and thus avoid psychiatric assessment. The prevalence of this condition stands at about 24 to 30 cases per 100,000 people while 0.7 to 3.0 new cases per 100,000 people are reported every year. Delusional disorder accounts for 1–2% of admissions to inpatient mental health facilities.

[ 8 ] [ 31 ] The incidence of first admissions for delusional disorder is lower, from 0.001 to 0.003%.

[ 32 ] Delusional disorder tends to appear in middle to late adult life, and for the most part first admissions to hospital for delusional disorder occur between age 33 and 55.

[ 9 ] It is more common in women than men, and immigrants seem to be at higher risk.

[ 9 ] Criticism [ edit ] In some situations, the delusion may turn out to be true belief.

[ 33 ] For example, in delusional jealousy , where a person believes that the partner is being unfaithful (in extreme cases perhaps going so far as to follow the partner into the bathroom, believing the other to be seeing a lover even during the briefest of separations), it may actually be true that the partner is having sexual relations with another person. In this case, the delusion does not cease to be a delusion because the content later turns out to be verified as true or the partner actually chose to engage in the behavior of which they were being accused.

In other cases, a belief may be incorrectly deemed delusional by a doctor or psychiatrist who subjectively concludes that a patient's assertions are unlikely, bizarre, or held with excessive conviction. Psychiatrists rarely have the time or resources to check the validity of a person's claims leading some true beliefs to be erroneously classified as delusional.

[ 34 ] This is known as the Martha Mitchell effect , named after the wife of US Attorney General John Mitchell and derived from the initial response to her allegations of illegal activity taking place in the White House . At the time, her claims were thought to be signs of mental illness; only after the Watergate scandal broke were her claims corroborated and her sanity thus confirmed.

Similar factors have led to criticisms of Jaspers' definition of delusion as being ultimately 'un-understandable'. Critics (such as R. D. Laing ) have argued that this leads to the diagnosis of delusions being based on the subjective understanding of a particular psychiatrist, who may not have access to all the information that might make a belief otherwise interpretable.

Another difficulty with the diagnosis of delusions is that almost all of these features can be found in "normal" beliefs. Many religious beliefs hold exactly the same features, yet are not universally considered delusional. For instance, if a person was holding a true belief then they will of course persist with it. This can cause the disorder to be misdiagnosed by psychiatrists. These factors have led the psychiatrist Anthony David to write that "there is no acceptable (rather than accepted) definition of a delusion." [ 35 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In the 2010 psychological thriller Shutter Island , directed by Martin Scorsese and starring Leonardo DiCaprio , delusional disorder is portrayed along with other disorders.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] An Indian movie Anantaram (Thereafter) directed by Adoor Gopalakrishnan also portrays the complex nature of delusions.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] The plot of the French movie He Loves Me... He Loves Me Not revolves around a case of erotomania , as does the plot of the Ian McEwan novel, Enduring Love .

See also [ edit ] Delusional parasitosis Monothematic delusions Robert Scott Lazar References [ edit ] ^ Andrew Scull, The diagnosis of delusional insanity in the United States and Great Britain, 1860-1913 ^ Manschreck, T. C. (1996). "Delusional disorder: the recognition and management of paranoia".

The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry . 57 Suppl 3: 32– 38, discussion 49.

ISSN 0160-6689 .

PMID 8626368 .

^ Joseph, S. M.; Siddiqui, W. (2021).

"Delusional Disorder" .

StatPearls . StatPearls.

PMID 30969677 .

^ a b "Delusional Disorder: Treatments, Causes, Types & Diagnosis" .

^ Joseph, S. M.; Siddiqui, W. (2023).

"Delusional Disorder" . StatPearls.

PMID 30969677 .

^ "Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV" . 1999.

^ Semple.David."Oxford Hand Book of Psychiatry" Oxford Press. 2005. p 230 ^ a b c d e American Psychiatric Association . (2013).

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , (5th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Hales E and Yudofsky JA, eds, The American Psychiatric Press Textbook of Psychiatry , Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc., 2003 ^ a b Winokur, George."Comprehensive Psychiatry-Delusional Disorder"American Psychiatric Association. 1977. p 513 ^ Peters, Emmanuelle R.; Nunn, Julia A.; Pickering, Alan D.; Hemsley, David R. (2002).

"Perceptual organization deficits in psychotic patients" .

Psychiatry Research .

110 (2): 125– 135.

doi : 10.1016/S0165-1781(02)00096-3 .

PMID 12057825 .

S2CID 1529978 .

^ Bora, Emre; Yucel, Murat; Pantelis, Christos (2009).

"Cognitive functioning in schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and affective psychoses: Meta-analytic study" .

British Journal of Psychiatry .

195 (6): 475– 482.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.bp.108.055731 .

PMID 19949193 .

^ Zanelli, Jolanta; Reichenberg, Abraham; Morgan, Kevin; Fearon, Paul; Kravariti, Eugenia; Dazzan, Paola; Morgan, Craig; Zanelli, Caroline; Demjaha, Arsime; Jones, Peter B.; Doody, Gillian A.; Kapur, Shitij; Murray, Robin M. (2010). "Specific and Generalized Neuropsychological Deficits: A Comparison of Patients with Various First-Episode Psychosis Presentations".

American Journal of Psychiatry .

167 (1): 78– 85.

doi : 10.1176/appi.ajp.2009.09010118 .

PMID 19952077 .

^ Winokur, G (1977). "Delusional Disorder (Paranoia)".

Comprehensive Psychiatry .

18 (6): 511– 521.

doi : 10.1016/s0010-440x(97)90001-8 .

PMID 923223 .

^ Bourgeois, James A.

"Delusional Disorder" .

Medscape . WebMD . Retrieved 2018-11-16 .

^ Drs; Sartorius, Norman ; Henderson, A.S.; Strotzka, H.; Lipowski, Z.; Yu-cun, Shen; You-xin, Xu; Strömgren, E.; Glatzel, J.; Kühne, G.-E.; Misès, R.; Soldatos, C.R.; Pull, C.B.; Giel, R.; Jegede, R.; Malt, U.; Nadzharov, R.A.; Smulevitch, A.B.; Hagberg, B.; Perris, C.; Scharfetter, C.; Clare, A.; Cooper, J.E.; Corbett, J.A.; Griffith Edwards, J.; Gelder, M.; Goldberg, D.; Gossop, M.; Graham, P.; Kendell, R.E.; Marks, I.; Russell, G.; Rutter, M.; Shepherd, M.; West, D.J.; Wing, J.; Wing, L.; Neki, J.S.; Benson, F.; Cantwell, D.; Guze, S.; Helzer, J.; Holzman, P.; Kleinman, A.; Kupfer, D.J.; Mezzich, J.; Spitzer, R.; Lokar, J.

"The ICD-10 Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines" (PDF) .

www.who.int World Health Organization .

Microsoft Word . bluebook.doc. pp. 77, 84– 5.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2004-10-17 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 – via Microsoft Bing .

^ http://www.health.am/psy/delusional-disorder Delusional Disorder. Retrieved 7 August 2012 ^ a b Munro, Alistair (1999).

Delusional disorder: paranoia and related illnesses . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-58180-X .

^ Kay DWK. "Assessment of familial risks in the functional psychoses and their application in genetic counseling. Br J Pschychiatry." 1978. p385-390 ^ Karakus, Gonca."Delusional Parasitosis: Clinical Features, Diagnosis and Treatment"American Psychiatric Association. 2010.p396 ^ Shivani Chopra.

"Delusional Disorder - Epidemiology - Patient demographics" .

Medscape . WebMD . Retrieved 2013-04-15 .

^ Heckers, Stephan; Barch, Deanna M.; Bustillo, Juan; Gaebel, Wolfgang; Gur, Raquel ; Malaspina, Dolores; Owen, Michael J.; Schultz, Susan; Tandon, Rajiv; Tsuang, Ming; Van Os, Jim; Carpenter, William (2013). "Structure of the psychotic disorders classification in DSM 5".

Schizophrenia Research .

150 (1): 11– 14.

doi : 10.1016/j.schres.2013.04.039 .

PMID 23707641 .

S2CID 14580469 .

^ "Delusional Disorder Symptoms" . Retrieved 2015-03-04 .

^ Skelton, Mike; Khokhar, Waqqas Ahmad; Thacker, Simon P (2015).

"Treatments for delusional disorder" .

Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2015 (5): CD009785.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD009785.pub2 .

PMC 10166258 .

PMID 25997589 .

^ Wada, T.; Kawakatsu, S.; Nadaoka, T.; Okuyama, N.; Otani, K. (May 1995). "Clomipramine treatment of delusional disorder, somatic type".

International Clinical Psychopharmacology .

14 (3): 181– 183.

doi : 10.1097/00004850-199905030-00006 .

ISSN 0268-1315 .

PMID 10435772 .

^ Ozen ME, Aydin M, Derici C, Orum MH, Kalenderoglu A. Successful treatment of olfactory reference syndrome with clomipramine. Psiquiatría Biológica. 2018 Jan 1;25(1):29-31.

^ Künzel, Heike E.; Ackl, Nibal; Hatzinger, Martin; Held, Katja; Holsboer-Trachsler, Edith; Ising, Marcus; Kaschka, Wolfgang; Kasper, Siegfried; Konstantinidis, Anastasios; Sonntag, Annette; Uhr, Manfred; Yassouridis, Alexander; Holsboer, Florian; Steiger, Axel (April 2009). "Outcome in delusional depression comparing trimipramine monotherapy with a combination of amitriptyline and haloperidol--a double-blind multicenter trial".

Journal of Psychiatric Research .

43 (7): 702– 710.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2008.10.004 .

ISSN 1879-1379 .

PMID 19038406 .

^ "Treatments" . Retrieved 2010-08-06 .

^ Grohol, John.

"Delusional Disorder Treatment" . Psych Central . Retrieved 24 November 2011 .

^ a b c Shivani Chopra.

"Delusional Disorder - Treatment & Management - Psychotherapy" .

Medscape . WebMD . Retrieved 2013-04-15 .

^ Crowe, R. R., & Roy, M. A. (2008). Delusional disorders. In S. H. Fatemi & P. J. Clayton (Eds.), The Medical Basis of Psychiatry (pp. 125-131). New York, USA: Humana Press.

^ Kendler, K. S. (Aug 1982). "Demography of paranoid psychosis (delusional disorder): a review and comparison with schizophrenia and affective illness".

Arch Gen Psychiatry .

39 (8): 890– 902.

doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1982.04290080012003 .

PMID 7103678 .

^ Jones E (1999).

"The phenomenology of abnormal belief" .

Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology .

6 : 1– 16.

^ Maher B.A. (1988). "Anomalous experience and delusional thinking: The logic of explanations". In Oltmanns T.; Maher B. (eds.).

Delusional Beliefs . New York: Wiley Interscience.

ISBN 0-471-83635-4 .

^ David AS (1999). "On the impossibility of defining delusions".

Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology .

6 (1): 17– 20.

^ "Psychology in the Media: Shutter Island (Part I)" . Archived from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2015-03-28 .

^ "A One Way Ticket to Shutter Island - Applied Psychology OPUS - NYU Steinhardt" .

steinhardt.nyu.edu . Archived from the original on 2011-10-24.

^ Mammootty, Adoor; Asokan; Shobana; Bahadur (1987-10-01), Anantaram , retrieved 2017-02-02 ^ "Anantaram: After three years, another landmark from Adoor Gopalakrishnan" . Retrieved 2017-02-02 .

Further reading [ edit ] Arnold, K.; Vakhrusheva, J. (2015).

"Resist the negation reflex: Minimizing reactance in psychotherapy of delusions" (PDF) .

Psychosis .

8 (2): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1080/17522439.2015.1095229 .

S2CID 146386637 .

[ permanent dead link ] McDermott, Sarah (22 February 2018), " 'The story of a weird world I was warned never to tell' ", BBC News . [A related case study.] Munro, A. (1999) Delusional Disorder: Paranoia and Related Illnesses . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-58180-X .

Sims, A. (1995) Symptoms in the mind: An introduction to descriptive psychopathology . Edinburgh: Elsevier Science Ltd.

ISBN 0-7020-2627-1 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 11 : 6A24 ICD - 10 : F22.0 ICD - 9-CM : 297.1 MeSH : D010259 External resources eMedicine : article/292991 Media related to Delusional disorders at Wikimedia Commons v t e Delusional disorders General Cotard's syndrome Cryptic pregnancy Delusional companion syndrome Erotomania Folie à deux (Shared delusional disorder) Glass delusion Grandiose delusions Ideas and delusions of reference Idée fixe Clinical lycanthropy Monothematic delusion Paranoid anxiety Persecutory delusion Reduplicative paramnesia Religious delusion Somatoparaphrenia Thought broadcasting Thought insertion Thought withdrawal Truman Show delusion Delusional misidentification Capgras delusion Fregoli delusion Intermetamorphosis Mirrored-self misidentification Syndrome of subjective doubles Delusional parasitosis Formication Matchbox sign Morgellons v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Delusional_disorder&oldid=1301044180 " Categories : Delusional disorders Paranoia Psychosis Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2015 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 20:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Delusional disorder 23 languages Add topic

