Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Analysis 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Winter Market 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short story by William Gibson "The Winter Market" Short story by William Gibson Country Canada Language English Genre(s) Science fiction Publication Published in Burning Chrome Publication type Anthology Publisher Arbor House Publication date April 1986 Chronology New Rose Hotel Dogfight " The Winter Market " is a science fiction short story written by William Gibson and published as part of his Burning Chrome short story collection. The story was commissioned in 1985 by Vancouver Magazine , who stipulated that Gibson – who at the time was "unquestionably the leading Vancouver author on the international literary scene" [ 1 ] – set it in the city (thereby making it unique among the author's works until 2007, when he set the final third of Spook Country in and around the Port of Vancouver ).

[ 2 ] The market of the title was modelled on that of Granville Island , though in a state of bohemian decay.

[ 1 ] As the author commented in a 2007 blog post: "Vancouver's Granville Island, centered around Granville Island Market (produce and food fair) is a very successful (and pleasant) retrofit of an under-bridge urban island that previously was heavily industrial. When the story was written, the retrofit was recent, and I dirtied it up for requisite punky near-future effect." [ 3 ] Plot [ edit ] The story's narrator, Casey, works as an editor at a Vancouver studio that specializes in turning the images from people's dreams into movie-like productions. While attending a party hosted by his friend, junk artist Rubin Stark, he meets a young, drug-addicted woman named Lise who relies on an exoskeleton to move. She suffers from a degenerative disease that greatly hampers her mobility, and she wears the exoskeleton at all times even though it causes abrasions on her skin. Rubin describes to Casey the circumstances under which he first met Lise. He had been scavenging in an alley for materials when he found her sitting motionless and seemingly waiting to die, her exoskeleton having run out of battery power.

Casey takes Lise home from the party and, at her request, connects their brains so he can see her dreams directly. The images are so vivid, powerful, and unsettling that he brings her to his boss's attention as the start of a new project. Casey works with Lise for three weeks as the project expands, but her physical condition steadily deteriorates from the effects of her disease and addiction. Shortly after the recording sessions are completed, Casey sees Lise for what turns out to be the last time, meeting a random man in a bar in search of a final pleasurable experience.

The finished project, released under the title Kings of Sleep , proves to be a tremendous commercial success. Lise uses her share of the profits to have her consciousness uploaded onto a computer server, in order to achieve a form of immortality and free herself from the constant physical pain of her life. She dies and her body is cremated.

Casey dreads the thought of receiving a telephone call from Lise, wondering if it will be the true person or only a program constructed from her mind. Rubin comments that she will need to release some new material soon in order to pay the fees charged by the data storage company for keeping her on file, and suggests that Casey should be ready to work with her again.

Analysis [ edit ] A 2010 photograph of the interior of the Granville Island public market , on which the market of the story's title is based According to the analysis of critic Pramod Nayar, the story "depicts the body as a vehicle for experiencing dreams edited into Hollywood thrillers".

[ 4 ] Critic David Seed saw the character of Rubin as a "thinly disguised" incarnation of performance artist Mark Pauline of Survival Research Laboratories .

[ 5 ] Reception [ edit ] The story was critically well-received, garnering nominations for the Hugo Award for Best Novelette , the Nebula Award for Best Novelette , the "short-form, English" Prix Aurora award, and the British Science Fiction Association award for best short story. It also finished highly in several science fiction magazines' annual readers polls in 1987, coming fourth in the Locus novelette category, third in the Interzone fiction category, and joint second in the Science Fiction Chronicle novelette category.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Delany, Paul (1994).

" "Hardly the Center of the World": Vancouver in William Gibson's "The Winter Market" " . In Delany, Paul (ed.).

Vancouver: Representing the Postmodern City . Vancouver: Arsenal Pulp Press. pp.

179–192 .

ISBN 978-1-55152-002-5 .

OCLC 30357339 . Retrieved February 29, 2012 .

^ Wiebe, Joe (2007-10-13).

"Writing Vancouver" .

Special to the Sun .

The Vancouver Sun . Retrieved January 3, 2009 .

^ Gibson, William (June 2, 2007).

"READERS ASK: THE WINTER MARKET" . WilliamGibsonBooks.com . Retrieved January 3, 2009 .

^ Nayar, Pramod (2004).

Virtual Worlds . Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. pp.

118– 119.

ISBN 0-7619-3229-1 .

^ Seed, David (2005).

A Companion to Science Fiction . Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing Professional. p. 219.

ISBN 1-4051-1218-2 .

OCLC 56924865 .

^ Kelly, Mark R. (2008).

"Locus index to Science Fiction Awards: William Gibson" .

Locusmag.com . Locus Publications. Archived from the original on February 7, 2011 . Retrieved March 15, 2009 .

External links [ edit ] "The Winter Market" at SFTropes "The Winter Market" at the William Gibson Aleph v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Winter_Market&oldid=1298131090 " Categories : 1985 short stories Fiction about brain–computer interface Cyberpunk short stories Short stories by William Gibson Vancouver in fiction Works set in the 2010s Short stories about diseases and disorders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 17:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Winter Market 1 language Add topic

