Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Causal factors 3 Benefits of prevention 4 Determining liability 5 Examples 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Work accident 26 languages العربية Asturianu Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Work accidents ) Occurrence during work that leads to physical or mental harm Erik Henningsen 's painting A wounded worker from the National Gallery of Denmark A 19th century work accident in a mine A work accident , workplace accident , occupational accident , or accident at work is a "discrete occurrence in the course of work " leading to physical or mental occupational injury .

[ 1 ] According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), more than 337 million accidents happen on the job each year, resulting, together with occupational diseases , in more than 2.3 million deaths annually.

[ 2 ] The phrase "in the course of work" can include work-related accidents happening off the company's premises, and can include accidents caused by third parties, according to Eurostat . The definition of work accident includes accidents occurring "while engaged in an economic activity, or at work, or carrying on the business of the employer" according to the ILO.

[ 3 ] The phrase "physical or mental harm" means any injury , disease , or death. Occupational accidents differ from occupational diseases as accidents are unexpected and unplanned occurrences (e.g., mine collapse ), while occupational diseases are "contracted as a result of an exposure over a period of time to risk factors arising from work activity" (e.g., miner's lung ).

[ 4 ] Incidents that fall within the definition of occupational accidents include cases of acute poisoning , attacks by humans and animals, insects etc., slips and falls on pavements or staircases, traffic collisions , and accidents on board means of transportation in the course of work, accidents in airports, stations and so on.

There is no consensus as to whether commuting accidents (i.e. accidents on the way to work and while returning home after work) should be considered to be work accidents. The ESAW methodology excludes them; the ILO includes them in its conventions concerning health & safety at work , although it lists them as a separate category of accidents; [ 5 ] and some countries (e.g., Greece ) do not distinguish them from other work accidents.

[ 6 ] A fatal accident at work is defined as an accident which leads to the death of a victim. The time within which the death may occur varies among countries: in Netherlands an accident is registered as fatal if the victim dies during the same day that the accident happened, in Germany if death came within 30 days, while Belgium , France and Greece set no time limit.

[ 7 ] Where the accidents involve multiple fatalities, they are often referred to as industrial disasters .

Types [ edit ] Although many workplace accidents have relatively minor repercussions, which could result in just a paper cut or scratch, others can have more serious – and potentially fatal – consequences.

[ citation needed ] For instance, there are some industries in which individuals are more exposed to occupational hazards than others, such as the construction trade. This had the highest rate of fatal injuries out of all other industry sections in 2011/12. During this period, [ 8 ] falls accounted for 51% of construction injuries resulting in death, demonstrating that builders are more likely to fall from height than those who work in less dangerous locations, such as an office.

[ citation needed ] An independent watchdog – the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) – aims to reduce the number of work-related fatalities and injuries within Great Britain, publishing statistics that show the different – and most common – types of reported workplace injuries across a range of sectors.

[ citation needed ] For example, the HSE reported that, between 2011 and 2012, incidents such as falls from height, becoming trapped by a falling structure, and being struck by a vehicle or moving object , were the reasons for the majority of fatalities to British workers.

[ 9 ] It was also revealed that slips, trips or falls were responsible for more than 50% of serious injuries to employees. Furthermore, the majority of incidents that resulted in employees taking more than three days off work – or affected their ability to perform their usual duties over this period – were caused by handling accidents.

Although some accidents at work can have minor effects, the cumulative impact of workplace injuries is significant, translating into an estimated loss of 70 million lost days of work and approximately 540 million days of lost production time in the U.S., in 2023.

[ 10 ] Causal factors [ edit ] Skid mark from a faulty ladder.

Accidents arise from unsafe behavior and/or unsafe conditions. An important factor is the safety climate or safety culture of an organization. Safety culture concerns how workplace safety is managed, consisting of the shared attitudes, beliefs, perceptions, and values among employees.

[ 11 ] Faulty equipment can also cause serious personal injuries, a common example being accidents from faulty ladders. If the rubber feet are absent, the base of the aluminium stile can slip suddenly on a hard floor and the user can fall.

Benefits of prevention [ edit ] Health and safety warning sign According to the Health and Safety Executive, [ 12 ] employers who implement suitable measures to prevent accidents in the workplace could reap a number of benefits. As well as reducing the number of injuries at work, managers could also: Be less likely to suffer legal action Acquire a better reputation amongst partners, investors, customers and suppliers Have employees who feel more motivated, demonstrating greater productivity Reduce costs Have reduced employee turnover and absence rates. It has been reported that over 2,000,000 working days each year are lost due to handling accidents and slips and trips alone. In Argentina, the work accident rate in the year 2018 decreased 10% from the previous year.

[ 13 ] Determining liability [ edit ] Depending on the circumstances of a workplace accident, several different parties may be held liable . These may include the employer, employees, property owner, manufacturer, or other third parties. For example, if it can be proven that an employer was negligent by allowing unsafe working conditions to persist, they may be held responsible for any resulting accidents or injuries.

Examples [ edit ] During the 2015 shooting of the movie Resident Evil: The Final Chapter , stuntwoman Olivia Jackson had her arm amputated after her motorbike crashed to a metal camera arm during a high-speed chase.

[ 14 ] Matilda Rapaport died from an avalanche while filming an advertisement for the 2016 video game Steep .

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Forensic engineering Health and Safety Executive National Safety Council Occupational injury Occupational disease Occupational health psychology Personal injury Social security Workers' compensation Workers' Memorial Day References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Work accidents .

^ "European Commission, European Statistics on Accidents at Work (ESAW) , Methodology, 2001" (PDF) .

^ "Safety and health at work" .

www.ilo.org .

^ "ILOSTAT: Volume 8: Occupational injuries (E)" .

webapps.ilo.org . Retrieved 2025-05-05 .

^ "The Sixteenth International Conference of Labour Statisticians, Resolution concerning statistics of occupational injuries (resulting from occupational accidents), adopted by the Sixteenth International Conference of Labour Statisticians, (October 1998)" (PDF) .

ilo.org .

^ "Protocol of 2002 to the Occupational Safety and Health Convention, 1981" .

ilo.org . Archived from the original on January 20, 2012.

^ "Elinyae Eongress 2010" (PDF) .

www.elinyaecongress2010.gr . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 25, 2011.

^ "Tools and publications - Safety and health at work - EU-OSHA" .

osha.europa.eu .

^ "Health and safety statistics for the construction sector in Great Britain, 2017" (PDF) .

www.hse.gov.uk . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 August 2018.

^ "Kinds of accident" .

www.hse.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 25 March 2016.

^ "Worker Off-the-Job Safety" .

Injury Facts . National Safety Council . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Cox, S. & Cox, T. (1991) The structure of employee attitudes to safety - a European example Work and Stress, 5, 93 - 106.

^ "Benefits and costs: Leading health and safety at work" .

Health and Safety Executive .

^ estudiomma (2019-07-19).

"Accidente de Trabajo in Itinere O No | Art" .

abogados online . Archived from the original on August 25, 2019.

^ Wareing, Charlotte (2015-12-21).

"Star Wars stunt double reveals she will lose an arm after horrific accident on Resident Evil set" .

Daily Mirror .

^ Makuch, Eddie (July 19, 2016).

"Pro Skier Dies During Film Shoot for Ubisoft's New Game Steep" .

v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor Authority control databases International FAST National Germany France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Work_accident&oldid=1294475159 " Categories : Industrial accidents and incidents Occupational hazards Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 23:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Work accident 26 languages Add topic

