Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Conditions 2 Possible sites 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents rp-process 14 languages العربية Català Español Français 한국어 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල Sunda Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of nucleosynthesis Nucleosynthesis of proton-rich nuclei by rapid proton capture The rp-process (rapid proton capture process) consists of consecutive proton captures onto seed nuclei to produce heavier elements.

[ 1 ] It is a nucleosynthesis process and, along with the s -process and the r -process , may be responsible for the generation of many of the heavy elements present in the universe.  However, it is notably different from the other processes mentioned in that it occurs on the proton-rich side of stability as opposed to on the neutron-rich side of stability.

The end point of the rp-process (the highest-mass element it can create) is not yet well established, but recent research has indicated that in neutron stars it cannot progress beyond tellurium .

[ 2 ] The rp-process is inhibited by alpha decay , which puts an upper limit on the end point at 104 Te , the lightest observed alpha-decaying nuclide, [ 3 ] and the proton drip line in light antimony isotopes . At this point, further proton captures result in prompt proton emission or alpha emission, and thus the proton flux is consumed without yielding heavier elements; this end process is known as the tin–antimony–tellurium cycle.

[ 4 ] Conditions [ edit ] The process has to occur in very high-temperature environments (above 10 9 kelvin ) so that the protons can overcome the large Coulomb barrier for charged-particle reactions.  A hydrogen-rich environment is also a prerequisite due to the large proton flux needed. The seed nuclei needed for this process to occur are thought to be formed during breakout reactions from the hot CNO cycle .  Typically proton capture in the rp-process will compete with (α,p) reactions, as most environments with a high flux of hydrogen are also rich in helium.  The time scale for the rp-process is set by β + decays at or near the proton drip line , because the weak interaction is notoriously slower than the strong interaction and electromagnetic force at these high temperatures.

Possible sites [ edit ] Sites suggested for the rp-process are accreting binary systems where one star is a neutron star .  In these systems the donor star is accreting material onto its compact partner star.  The accreted material is usually rich in hydrogen and helium because of its origin from the surface layers of the donor star.  Because such compact stars have high gravitational fields , the material falls with a high velocity towards the compact star, usually colliding with other accreted material en route, forming an accretion disk .  In the case of accretion onto a neutron star, as this material slowly builds up on the surface, it will attain a temperature on the order of 10 8 K.

Eventually it is believed that thermonuclear instabilities arise in this hot atmosphere, allowing the temperature to continue to rise until it leads to a runaway thermonuclear explosion of the hydrogen and helium. During the flash, the temperature quickly rises, becoming high enough for the rp-process to occur. While the initial flash of hydrogen and helium lasts only a second, the rp-process typically takes up to 100 seconds. Therefore, the  rp-process is observed as the tail of the resulting X-ray burst .

See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Physics portal p-nuclei References [ edit ] ^ Bildsten, Lars (2010) [1998]. "Thermonuclear Burning on Rapidly Accreting Neutron Stars". In van Paradijs, J.; Alpar, M.A.; Buccheri, R. (eds.).

The Many Faces of Neutron Stars . Springer.

arXiv : astro-ph/9709094v1 .

ISBN 9789048150762 .

^ Schatz, H.; A. Aprahamian; V. Barnard; L. Bildsten; A. Cumming; et al. (April 2001).

"End Point of the rp Process on Accreting Neutron Stars" .

Physical Review Letters .

86 (16): 3471– 3474.

arXiv : astro-ph/0102418 .

Bibcode : 2001PhRvL..86.3471S .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.86.3471 .

PMID 11328001 .

S2CID 46148449 . Retrieved 2006-08-24 .

^ Auranen, K.; et al. (2018).

"Superallowed α decay to doubly magic 100 Sn" (PDF) .

Physical Review Letters .

121 (18): 182501.

Bibcode : 2018PhRvL.121r2501A .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.182501 .

PMID 30444390 .

^ Lahiri, S.; Gangopadhyay, G. (2012). "Endpoint of rp process using relativistic mean field approach and a new mass formula".

International Journal of Modern Physics E .

21 (8).

arXiv : 1207.2924 .

Bibcode : 2012IJMPE..2150074L .

doi : 10.1142/S0218301312500747 .

S2CID 119259433 .

v t e Nuclear processes Radioactive decay Alpha Beta Double Gamma radiation Cluster decay Electron capture Double Internal conversion Isomeric transition Neutron emission Positron emission Proton emission Spontaneous fission Stellar nucleosynthesis Deuterium fusion Li burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle α process Triple-α C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning r -process s -process p-process rp-process Other processes Photodisintegration Photofission Capture Neutron capture Proton capture Exchange (n-p) reaction v t e Neutron star Types Radio-quiet Pulsar Single pulsars Magnetar Soft gamma repeater Anomalous X-ray Ultra-long period Rotating radio transient Binary pulsars Binary X-ray pulsar X-ray binary X-ray burster List Millisecond Be/X-ray Spin-up Hulse–Taylor pulsar Properties Blitzar Fast radio burst Bondi accretion Chandrasekhar limit Gamma-ray burst Glitch Neutron matter Neutron-star oscillation Optical Pulsar kick Quasi-periodic oscillation Relativistic Rp-process Starquake Timing noise Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff limit Urca process Related Gamma-ray burst progenitors Asteroseismology Compact star Quark star Exotic star Supernova Supernova remnant Related links Hypernova Kilonova Microquasar Neutron star merger Quark-nova White dwarf Related links Stellar black hole Related links Radio star Pulsar planet Pulsar wind nebula Thorne–Żytkow object QCD matter Discovery LGM-1 Centaurus X-3 Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae Satellite investigation Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Chandra X-ray Observatory Other X-ray pulsar-based navigation The Magnificent Seven List of neutron stars Most massive neutron stars Neutron stars in fiction Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rp-process&oldid=1290711539 " Categories : Nuclear physics Concepts in stellar astronomy Nucleosynthesis Binary stars Proton Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 15:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents rp-process 14 languages Add topic

