Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of pasture 2 Examples of pasture habitats 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pasture 77 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land used for grazing This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pasture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mountain pasture in Switzerland Lush lowland pasture Pasture (from the Latin pastus , past participle of pascere , "to feed") is land used for grazing .

[ 1 ] Types of pasture [ edit ] Pasture lands in the narrow sense are enclosed tracts of farmland , grazed by domesticated livestock , such as horses , cattle , sheep , or swine . The vegetation of tended pasture, forage , consists mainly of grasses , with an interspersion of legumes and other forbs (non-grass herbaceous plants). Pasture is typically grazed throughout the summer, in contrast to meadow which is ungrazed or used for grazing only after being mown to make hay for animal fodder .

[ 2 ] Pasture in a wider sense additionally includes rangelands , other unenclosed pastoral systems , and land types used by wild animals for grazing or browsing .
Pasture lands in the narrow sense are distinguished from rangelands by being managed through more intensive agricultural practices of seeding , irrigation , and the use of fertilizers , while rangelands grow primarily native vegetation, managed with extensive practices like controlled burning and regulated intensity of grazing.

Soil type, minimum annual temperature , and rainfall are important factors in pasture management.

[ 3 ] World agricultural land by use, permanent meadows and pastures and cropland Hillside pasture in Pennsylvania.

Sheepwalk is an area of grassland where sheep can roam freely. The productivity of sheepwalk is measured by the number of sheep per area. This is dependent, among other things, on the underlying rock.

[ 4 ] Sheepwalk is also the name of townlands in County Roscommon , Ireland , and County Fermanagh , Northern Ireland . Unlike factory farming , which entails in its most intensive form entirely trough-feeding, managed or unmanaged pasture is the main food source for ruminants . Pasture feeding dominates livestock farming where the land makes crop sowing or harvesting (or both) difficult, such as in arid or mountainous regions, where types of camel , goat , antelope , yak and other ruminants live which are well suited to the more hostile terrain and very rarely factory-farmed. In more humid regions, pasture grazing is managed across a large global area for free range and organic farming . Certain pasture types suit the diet, evolution , and metabolism of particular animals. Their fertilising and tending of the land may over generations result in the pasture combined with the ruminants in question being integral to a particular ecosystem .

[ 5 ] Examples of pasture habitats [ edit ] Bocage Grassland Heathland Machair Maquis Moorland Pampas Potrero (landform) Prairie Rangeland Rough pasture Savanna Sown biodiverse pasture Steppe Wood pasture Veld Red Hill Farm and fields sheep pasture at Bredenbury, Herefordshire, England A pasture in the East Riding of Yorkshire in England Snowy pasture at Bosco Chiesanuova in Italy Grazing cattle on a pasture near Hradec nad Moravicí in the Czech Republic See also [ edit ] Transhumance Notes [ edit ] ^ "pasture" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Pasture" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

^ Tracy, Benjamin F. (2000).

"Patterns of plant species richness in pasture lands of the northeast United States" .

Plant Ecology .

149 (2): 169– 180.

doi : 10.1023/a:1026536223478 .

ISSN 1385-0237 .

^ R. Elfyn Hughes, "Sheep Population and Environment in Snowdonia (North Wales)", Journal of Ecology Vol. 46, No. 1, March 1958, 169-189 ^ "Agricultural biodiversity’s contribution to ecosystem functions" Archived 2015-01-08 at the Wayback Machine Dr. Devra I. Jarvis, CGIAR . Retrieved 2014-12-01 External links [ edit ] Media related to Pastures at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX This animal-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pasture&oldid=1295632302 " Categories : Livestock Agricultural land Grasslands Animal stubs Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from September 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2011 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 00:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pasture 77 languages Add topic

