Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characters 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion 14 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1779 philosophical work by David Hume Title page David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion is a philosophical work by the Scottish philosopher David Hume , first published in 1779. Through dialogue, three philosophers named Demea, Philo, and Cleanthes debate the nature of God 's existence. Whether or not these names reference specific philosophers, ancient or otherwise, remains a topic of scholarly dispute. While all three agree that a god exists, they differ sharply in opinion on God's nature or attributes and how, or if, humankind can come to knowledge of a deity.

In the Dialogues , Hume's characters debate a number of arguments for the existence of God , and arguments whose proponents believe through which we may come to know the nature of God. Such topics debated include the argument from design —for which Hume uses a house as an analogy—and whether there is more suffering or good in the world ( argument from evil ).

[ 1 ] Hume started writing the Dialogues in 1750 but did not complete them until 1776, shortly before his death. They are based partly on Cicero 's De Natura Deorum . The Dialogues were published posthumously in 1779, originally with neither the author's nor the publisher's name.

[ 2 ] In The Blind Watchmaker (1986), evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins discussed his choice to title his book after theologian William Paley 's famous statement of the teleological argument, the watchmaker analogy , and noted that Hume's critique of the argument from design as an explanation of design in nature was the initial criticism that would ultimately be answered by Charles Darwin in On the Origin of Species (1859).

[ 3 ] In the second part of the Dialogues (1779), the character Philo observes that animal reproduction appears to be more responsible for the intricacies and order of animal bodies rather than intelligent design , stating: But were we ever so much assured, that a thought and reason, resembling the human , were to be found throughout the whole universe, and were its activity elsewhere vastly greater and more commanding than it appears in this globe; yet I cannot see, why the operations of a world constituted, arranged, adjusted, can with any propriety be extended to a world which is in its embryo state, and is advancing towards that constitution and arrangement. By observation, we know somewhat of the economy, action, and nourishment of a finished animal; but we must transfer with great caution that observation to the growth of a foetus in the womb, and still more to the formation of an animalcule in the loins of its male parent. Nature, we find, even from our limited experience, possesses an infinite number of springs and principles, which incessantly discover themselves on every change of her position and situation .

[ 4 ] Characters [ edit ] Pamphilus is a youth present during the dialogues. In a letter , he reconstructs the conversation of Demea, Philo, and Cleanthes in detail for his friend Hermippus. He serves as the narrator throughout the piece. At the end of the Dialogues he believes that Cleanthes offered the strongest arguments. However, this could be out of loyalty to his teacher, as this does not seem to reflect Hume's own views on the topic. When other pieces on religion by Hume are taken into consideration, it may be noted that they all end with (apparently) ironic statements reaffirming the truth of Christian religious views. While the irony may be less readily evident in the Dialogues, this would suggest a similar reading of this work's ending.

[ 5 ] Cicero used a similar technique in his Dialogues.

Cleanthes is an "experimental theist"—"an exponent of orthodox empiricism" [ 6 ] —who bases his beliefs about God's existence and nature upon a version of the teleological argument , which uses evidence of design in the universe to argue for God's existence and resemblance to the human mind.

Philo , according to the predominant view among scholars, is the character who presents views most similar to those of Hume.

[ 7 ] Philo, along with Demea, attacks Cleanthes' views on anthropomorphism and teleology; while not going as far as to deny the existence of God, Philo asserts that human reason is wholly inadequate to make any assumptions about the divine, whether through a priori reasoning or observation of nature.

Demea "defends the Cosmological argument and philosophical theism..." [ 6 ] He believes that the existence of God should be proven through a priori reasoning and that our beliefs about the nature of God should be based upon revelation and fideism . Demea rejects Cleanthes' " natural religion " for being too anthropomorphic .  Demea objects to the abandonment of the a priori arguments by Philo and Cleanthes (both of whom are empiricists) and perceives Philo to be "accepting an extreme form of skepticism ." [ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Willis, Andre C. (19 June 2015).

Toward a Humean True Religion: Genuine Theism, Moderate Hope, and Practical Morality . Penn State Press. p. 107.

ISBN 978-0-271-06578-6 .

^ Hume, David (1779).

Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (Second ed.). London: Penguin Books, Limited. p.

3 . Retrieved 20 June 2016 .

via Google Books ^ Dawkins, Richard (1996) [1986].

The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe Without Design . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

7– 11.

ISBN 978-0393351491 .

^ Hume, David (2006) [1779].

Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion .

Mineola, NY : Dover Publications . p. 19.

ISBN 978-0486451114 .

^ See Bernd Gräfrath's "Vernunftige Gelassenheit" in G. Gabriel, C. Schildknecht, Literarische Formen der Philosophie. Metzler, 1990.

^ a b c Anthony C. Thiselton, "A Concise Encyclopedia of the Philosophy of Religion" ^ William Crouch, " "Which character is Hume in the "Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion"?" " . Archived from the original on 5 December 2007 . Retrieved 26 December 2006 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Wikiquote has quotations related to Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion .

Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion at Project Gutenberg Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion public domain audiobook at LibriVox "Humean Arguments from Evil against Theism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e David Hume Books A Treatise of Human Nature An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary Four Dissertations Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion The History of England The History of Great Britain Criticism Argument for the existence of God from design Problem of induction Is–ought problem Philosophy Hume's principle Hume's law Hume's fork The Missing Shade of Blue " Of Miracles " Scottish Enlightenment Empiricism Price–specie flow mechanism Related Hume Studies A Treatise of Human Nature (Abstract) Extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence v t e Arguments for and against the existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's Razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Authority control databases : National France BnF data NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐fxg6v
Cached time: 20250812001752
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision]
CPU time usage: 0.473 seconds
Real time usage: 0.613 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1545/1000000
Revision size: 8047/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77740/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2835/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55271/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.298/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8000346/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  513.307      1 -total
 24.66%  126.578      1 Template:Reflist
 21.45%  110.115      1 Template:Wikisource
 20.95%  107.559      3 Template:Navbox
 20.78%  106.687      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 20.40%  104.700      4 Template:Cite_book
 20.36%  104.530      2 Template:Sister_project
 20.22%  103.778      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 19.63%  100.764      2 Template:Side_box
 17.70%   90.865      1 Template:Hume Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2590078:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812001752 and revision id 1252693243. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dialogues_Concerning_Natural_Religion&oldid=1252693243 " Categories : 1779 books Books by David Hume Books critical of religion Arguments for the existence of God Arguments against the existence of God Criticism of intelligent design Philosophy of religion literature Dialogues Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikisource templates with missing id Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion 14 languages Add topic

