Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classes Toggle Classes subsection 1.1 Class A (Shkadov thruster) 1.2 Class B 1.3 Class C 1.4 Class D 1.4.1 Caplan thruster 1.4.2 Svoronos Star Tug 2 In fiction 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Stellar engine 13 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class of hypothetical megastructures Diagram of a class-C stellar engine (to scale) built around a Sun-like star. It consists of a partial Dyson swarm composed of 5 Dyson rings of solar collectors (the class-B component), and a large statite Shkadov thruster (the class-A component). Perspective is from below the system's ecliptic at a distance of ~2.8 AU . The system's direction of acceleration is on a vector from the center of the star through the center of the Shkadov thruster, which is hovering over the star's north pole (with regards to the ecliptic), at a distance of 1 AU.

Stellar engines are a class of hypothetical megastructures which use the resources of a star to generate available work (also called exergy ). For instance, they can use the energy of the star to produce mechanical, electrical or chemical work or they can use the impulse of the light emitted by the star to produce thrust, able to control the motion of a star system.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The concept has been introduced by Bădescu and Cathcart.

[ 3 ] The variants which produce thrust may accelerate a star and anything orbiting it in a given direction.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The creation of such a system would make its builders a Type II civilization on the Kardashev scale .

Classes [ edit ] Four classes of stellar engines have been defined.

[ 3 ] Class A (Shkadov thruster) [ edit ] One of the simplest examples of a stellar engine is the Shkadov thruster (named after Dr.

Leonid Shkadov , who first proposed it), or a class-A stellar engine.

[ 6 ] Such an engine is a stellar propulsion system, consisting of an enormous mirror/ light sail —actually a massive type of solar statite large enough to classify as a megastructure —which would balance gravitational attraction towards and radiation pressure away from the star. Since the radiation pressure of the star would now be asymmetrical , i.e. more radiation being emitted in one direction as compared to another, the "excess" radiation pressure acts as net thrust , accelerating the star in the direction of the hovering statite. Such thrust and acceleration would be very slight, but such a system could be stable for millennia. Any planetary system attached to the star would be "dragged" along by its parent star. For a star such as the Sun , with luminosity 3.85 × 10 26 W and mass 1.99 × 10 30 kg , the total thrust produced by reflecting half of the solar output would be 1.28 × 10 18 N . After a period of one million years this would yield an imparted speed of 20 m/s, with a displacement from the original position of 0.03 light-years . After one billion years, the speed would be 20 km/s and the displacement 34,000 light-years, a little over a third of the estimated width of the Milky Way galaxy.

Class B [ edit ] A class-B stellar engine consists of two concentric spheres around a star. The inner sphere (which may be assimilated with a Dyson shell) receives energy from the star and becomes hotter than the outer sphere. The difference of temperature between the two spheres drives thermal engines able to provide mechanical work.

Unlike the Shkadov thruster, a class-B stellar engine is not propulsive.

Class C [ edit ] A class-C stellar engine, such as the Badescu–Cathcart engine, [ 3 ] combines the two other classes, employing both the propulsive aspects of the Shkadov thruster and the energy generating aspects of a class-B engine. A higher temperature Dyson shell partially covered by a mirror combined with an outer sphere at a lower temperature would be one incarnation of such a system. The non-spherical mirror ensures conversion of light impulse into effective thrust (like a class-A stellar engine) while the difference of temperature may be used to convert star energy into mechanical work (like a class-B stellar engine). Notice that such system suffers from the same stabilization problems as a non-propulsive shell, as would be a Dyson swarm with a large statite mirror (see image above). A Dyson bubble variant is already a Shkadov thruster (provided that the arrangement of statite components is asymmetrical).

Class D [ edit ] A class D stellar engine uses a star’s mass to propel the star.

[ 4 ] Particular class D stellar engines are the stellar rocket described in 1989 [ 7 ] , based on a modification of the concept of “star lifting” proposed in 1985 [ 8 ] , the Caplan thruster proposed in 2019 and the Svoronos Star Tug proposed in 2020.

Caplan thruster [ edit ] Astronomer Matthew E. Caplan of Illinois State University has proposed a type of stellar engine that uses concentrated stellar energy (repurposing the mirror statites from class A) to excite certain regions of the outer surface of the star and create beams of solar wind for collection by a multi- Bussard ramjet assembly. The ramjets would produce directed plasma to stabilize its orbit and jets of oxygen-14 to push the star. Using rudimentary calculations that assume maximum efficiency, Caplan estimates that the Bussard engine would use 10 12 kg of solar material per second to produce a maximum acceleration of 10 −9 m/s 2 , yielding a velocity of 200 km/s after 5 million years and a distance of 10 parsecs over 1 million years. While theoretically the Bussard engine would work for 100 million years, given the mass loss rate of the Sun, Caplan deems 10 million years to be sufficient for a stellar collision avoidance.

[ 9 ] His proposal was commissioned by the German educational YouTube channel Kurzgesagt .

[ 10 ] Svoronos Star Tug [ edit ] Alexander A. Svoronos of Yale University proposed the 'Star Tug', a concept that combines aspects of the Shkadov thruster and Caplan engine to produce an even more powerful and efficient mechanism for controlling a star's movement. Essentially, it replaces the giant parabolic mirror of the Shkadov thruster with an engine powered by mass lifted from the star, similar to the Caplan engine. However, instead of pushing a star from behind with a beam of thrust, as the Caplan engine does, it pulls the star from the front via its gravitational link to it, same as the Shkadov thruster. As a result, it only needs to produce a single beam of thrust (toward but narrowly missing the star), whereas the Caplan engine must produce two beams of thrust (one to push the star from behind and negate the force of gravity between the engine and the star, and one to propel the system as a whole forward). The result is that the Svoronos Star Tug is a much more efficient engine capable of significantly higher accelerations and max velocities. The Svoronos Star Tug can, in principle (assuming perfect efficiency), accelerate the Sun to ~27% the speed of light (after burning enough of the Sun's mass to transition it to a brown dwarf).

[ 11 ] In fiction [ edit ] The Bowl of Heaven series of novels involves an enormous alien structure around a star (the eponymous Bowl) which serves as both living space and as a Class D stellar engine. This structure is shaped like an actual bowl with a hole in the centrer, through which a jet of plasma from the star (the engine's exhaust) can escape.

[ 12 ] Various kinds of stellar engines are used in the Orion's Arm worldbuilding project.

[ 13 ] One alien civilization, the Sundrivers, is so named because they have been observed moving many stars into a spherical volume of space. The Sundrivers are hypothesized to be using reactionless drive technology for this.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Dyson spheres References [ edit ] ^ "Stellar_Engines.pdf" .

Google Docs . Retrieved 2022-06-12 .

^ Darling, David.

"stellar engine" .

www.daviddarling.info . Retrieved 2025-07-28 .

^ a b c Badescu, Viorel; Cathcart, Richard B. (2000).

"Stellar engines for Kardashev's Type II Civilization" .

Journal of the British Interplanetary Society .

53 : 297– 306.

Bibcode : 2000JBIS...53..297B . Archived from the original on 2018-08-24 . Retrieved 2013-07-01 .

^ a b Badescu, Viorel; Cathcart, Richard B. (February 2006). "Use of Class A and Class C stellar engines to control Sun movement in the galaxy".

Acta Astronautica .

58 (3): 119– 129.

Bibcode : 2006AcAau..58..119B .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2005.09.005 .

^ Badescu, Viorel; Cathcart, Richard B. (2006). "Chapter 12: Stellar Engines and the Controlled Movement of the Sun".

Macro-Engineering: A Challenge for the Future . Water Science and Technology Library. Vol. 54. pp.

251– 280.

doi : 10.1007/1-4020-4604-9_12 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-3739-9 .

^ Shkadov, Leonid (10–17 October 1987). "Possibility of controlling solar system motion in the Galaxy".

Proceedings of the IAF 38th International Astronautical Congress . 38th International Astronautical Congress IAC 1987. Brighton, England: International Astronautical Federation. pp.

1– 8.

Bibcode : 1987brig.iafcR....S .

^ Fogg, Martyn (1988-01-01).

"Solar Exchange as a Means of Ensuring the Long Term Habitability of the Earth" .

Speculations in Science and Technology .

12 : 153– 157.

^ Criswell, D. R. (1985). "Solar system industrialization: implications for interstellar migrations". In Finney, R.; Jones, E. M. (eds.).

Interstellar Migration and the Human Experience . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

50– 87.

ISBN 9780520053496 .

^ Caplan, Matthew E. (2019-12-01).

"Stellar engines: Design considerations for maximizing acceleration" .

Acta Astronautica .

165 : 96– 104.

Bibcode : 2019AcAau.165...96C .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2019.08.027 .

ISSN 0094-5765 .

^ "How to Move the Sun: Stellar Engines" .

YouTube . Kurzgesagt. December 22, 2019.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved April 26, 2021 .

^ Svoronos, Alexander A. (2020-11-01).

"The Star Tug: An active stellar engine capable of accelerating a star to relativistic velocities" .

Acta Astronautica .

176 : 306– 312.

Bibcode : 2020AcAau.176..306S .

doi : 10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.07.005 .

ISSN 0094-5765 .

S2CID 224962621 .

^ "Building the Bowl of Heaven | Centauri Dreams" .

www.centauri-dreams.org . Retrieved 2025-07-30 .

^ "Stellar Propulsion Systems" .

Orion's Arm - Encyclopedia Galactica . Retrieved 2025-07-30 .

^ "Sundrivers" .

Orion's Arm - Encyclopedia Galactica . Retrieved 2025-07-30 .

Library resources about Stellar engine Resources in your library Resources in other libraries v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stellar_engine&oldid=1303305017 " Categories : Megastructures Hypothetical technology Interstellar travel Hypothetical spacecraft Fiction about stars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 05:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stellar engine 13 languages Add topic

