Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Arguments for productivism 2 Criticism of productivism Toggle Criticism of productivism subsection 2.1 Public assistance 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Productivism 4 languages Español Euskara Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Primacy of productivity and growth For the populist ideology, see Producerism . For the art movement, see Productivism (art) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Productivism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Productivism or growthism is the belief that measurable productivity and growth are the purpose of human organization (e.g., work), and that "more production is necessarily good". Critiques of productivism center primarily on the limits to growth posed by a finite planet and extend into discussions of human procreation, the work ethic , and even alternative energy production.

[ 1 ] Arguments for productivism [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2024 ) Although productivism is often meant pejoratively as a general problem in politics and economics, most countries and economies are productivist in nature.

[ citation needed ] While critics of productivism and its political-economic variants, notably capitalism and socialism , challenge the notions of conventional political economy and argue for an economic policy more compatible with humanity, these views are often dismissed as utopian by economists and political scientists, who hold that there is no conflict between the roles of the worker and the citizen.

[ citation needed ] That is, that conventional economics , particularly macroeconomics , already accounts for the relationship between productivity and the freedom to enjoy that productivity.

Criticism of productivism [ edit ] Anthony Giddens defines productivism as "an ethos in which 'work', as paid employment, has been separated out in a clear-cut way from other domains of life", and further states that work "defines whether or not individuals feel worthwhile or socially valued".

[ 2 ] Although "productivism" may be considered to be derisive, as the idea is unacceptable to many of the individuals and ideologies that the term is intended to characterise, these same individuals and ideologies often use phrases like "productivity", "growth", "economic sense", and "common sense" (interchangeably) without argument, presupposing the primacy of industry.

[ 2 ] According to those who use the term "productivism", the difference between themselves and the promoters of conventional neoclassical economics is that a productivist does not believe in the idea of " uneconomic growth ". That is, the productivist believes all growth is good, while the critic of productivism believes it can be more like a disease, measurably growing but interfering with life processes, and that it is up to the electorate, worker, and purchaser to put values on their free time and decide whether to use their time for production or their money for consumption.  A key academic critic of productivism is Amartya Sen , winner of the 1999 Nobel Prize in Economics . His theory of "development as freedom" is one of several human development theories that state that the growth of individual capital —that is, "talent", "creativity", and "personal ingenuity"—is more significant than the growth of many other measurable quantities, such as the production of commercial products . In his essays from 1975, the British economist E. F. Schumacher remarked: "Infinite growth in consumption in a world of finite resources is an impossibility. ... When my child grows, I am pleased. When I grow, less so!" [ 3 ] In the 1990s, the American public was told that the United States would become a nation of educated managers and specialists, with industrial labor outsourced to less fortunate countries.

[ 4 ] Those countries refused to accept that role and Americans have been vying for the few elite roles that were available ever since. According to Samuel P. Huntington , Americans spend more time at work and have worse benefits when compared to similar rich countries.

[ 5 ] Sleep, repose, and slacking are often marginalized and the environment suffers as a result of a throw-away-society that is supposed to keep people working. Depression and anxiety rates are higher than they were in the 1980s, perhaps because people are working harder to find great jobs that just are not there. With a productivist mindset, free time becomes time to create something impressive to share on social media or develop a skill.

[ 4 ] In the United States, people of lower classes are conditioned to believe in meritocracy, despite class mobility in the country being among the lowest in industrialized economies .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In the United States, 50% of a father's income position is inherited by his son. In contrast, the amount in Norway or Canada is less than 20%. Moreover, in the U.S. 8% of children raised in the bottom 20% of the income distribution are able to climb to the top 20% as adults, while the figure in Denmark is nearly double at 15%.

[ 8 ] According to an academic study on why Americans overestimate class mobility, "research indicates that errors in social perception are driven by both informational factors—such as the lack of awareness of statistical information relevant to actual mobility trends—and motivational factors—the desire to believe that society is meritocratic." [ 9 ] Americans are more inclined to believe in meritocracy out of the prospect that they will one day join the elite or upper class. Scholars have paralleled this belief to John Steinbeck 's notable quote that "the poor see themselves not as an exploited proletariat but as temporarily embarrassed millionaires.” [ 10 ] As academic Tad Delay states, "the fantasy of class mobility, of becoming bourgeois , is enough to defend the aristocracy ." [ 7 ] People miss the part where it's a zero-sum game for good jobs, good friends, and good partners.

[ 11 ] For some reason, people's contentment hinges more on relative wealth than absolute wealth, sometimes referred to as the Easterlin paradox.

[ 12 ] Jobs were not created to be a way of life, they are just clumps of tasks that would not be performed for free because they are too difficult or too boring. Depression is a taboo because it denounces what society has to offer. Depression also suggests the idea that in a society of winners and losers, the losers often can't cope with it, and are simultaneously incapable of becoming winners. The poor are marginalized as are the unemployed for not being productive enough.

[ 13 ] Critics have pointed out that “being productive” necessitates unhindered access to the means of production, which people don't have.

Public assistance [ edit ] Social stigma is prevalent towards recipients of public assistance programs.  This includes programs frequently utilized by families struggling with poverty such as Head Start and AFDC (Aid To Families With Dependent Children).  The value of self-reliance is often at the center of feelings of shame and the fewer people value self reliance the less stigma affects them psychologically.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Stigma towards welfare recipients has been proven to increase passivity and dependency in poor people and has further solidified their status and feelings of inferiority.

[ 14 ] [ 16 ] Caseworkers frequently treat recipients of welfare disrespectfully and make assumptions about deviant behavior and reluctance to work.  Many single mothers cited stigma as the primary reason they wanted to exit welfare as quickly as possible.  They often feel the need to conceal food stamps to escape judgement associated with welfare programs.  Stigma is a major factor contributing to the duration and breadth of poverty in developed societies which largely affects single mothers.

[ 14 ] Recipients of public assistance are viewed as objects of the community rather than members allowing for them to be perceived as enemies of the community which is how stigma enters collective thought.

[ 17 ] Amongst single mothers in poverty, lack of health care benefits is one of their greatest challenges in terms of exiting poverty.

[ 14 ] Traditional values of self reliance increase feelings of shame amongst welfare recipients making them more susceptible to being stigmatized.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Agricultural productivity Anarchism Bedtime procrastination Consumerism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cycle of poverty Degrowth Economic mobility Eco-socialism Green anarchism Green growth Green parties Gross national happiness Growth imperative Happiness economics Human development theory Humanistic economics Individual capital The Limits to Growth List of countries by GNI per capita growth Keeping up with the Joneses Parkinson's law Post-growth Post-work society Progress Refusal of work Social mobility Social stress Social stigma Workism References [ edit ] ^ Horn, Steve (8 April 2013).

"Power Shift Away From Green lllusions" . Truthout . Retrieved 28 April 2013 .

^ a b Anthony Giddens (1994).

Beyond left and right: the future of radical politics . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804724517 .

^ E.F.Schumacher (1975).

Small Is Beautiful . Harper & Row (London, UK).

ISBN 978-0060803520 .

^ a b Griffith, Erin (2019-03-14).

"Why Are Young People Pretending to Love Work? - The New York Times" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2019-03-14 . Retrieved 2023-11-25 .

^ "The Religion of Workism Is Making Americans Miserable - The Atlantic" .

The Atlantic . 2019-02-25. Archived from the original on 2019-02-25 . Retrieved 2023-11-25 .

^ Gould, Elise (10 October 2012).

"U.S. lags behind peer countries in mobility" .

Economic Policy Institute .

^ a b Delay, Tad (2019).

Against: What Does the White Evangelical Want?

.

Cascade Books . p. 140.

ISBN 9781532668463 .

^ Rank, Mark R; Eppard, Lawrence M (13 March 2021).

"The American Dream of upward mobility is broken. Look at the numbers" .

The Guardian .

^ Kraus, Michael W.; Tan, Jacinth J.X. (May 2015).

"Americans overestimate social class mobility" .

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

58 : 101– 111.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2015.01.005 .

S2CID 145796186 – via Elsevier Science Direct .

^ Alesina, Alberto; Stantcheva, Stefanie; Teso, Edoardo (2018).

"Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution" .

American Economic Review .

108 (2): 521– 554.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20162015 .

S2CID 33408213 .

^ "The Psychology of Competition | Psychology Today United Kingdom" .

www.psychologytoday.com . Retrieved 2023-11-25 .

^ "Studies Show That Humans Tend to Be Competitive - The Atlantic" .

The Atlantic . 2015-10-24. Archived from the original on 2015-10-24 . Retrieved 2023-11-25 .

^ Katarzyna Dębska and Katarzyna Suwada (2020).

"Social relations of people experiencing unemployment. Between support and stigmatisation" .

^ a b c d e Rogers-Dillon, Robin (1 December 1995). "The dynamics of welfare stigma".

Qualitative Sociology .

18 (4): 439– 456.

doi : 10.1007/BF02404490 .

ISSN 1573-7837 .

S2CID 144636532 .

^ "How Long-Term Unemployment May Mess with Your Mental Health" .

Psych Central . 2021-11-05 . Retrieved 2023-10-24 .

^ Drasch, Katrin (2019).

"The social stigma of unemployment: consequences of stigma consciousness on job search attitudes, behaviour and success" .

^ Davis, Liane V.; Hagen, Jan L. (26 July 2016). "Stereotypes and Stigma: What's Changed for Welfare Mothers".

Affilia .

11 (3): 319– 337.

doi : 10.1177/088610999601100304 .

S2CID 144933839 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Productivism&oldid=1303767763 " Categories : Economic ideologies Political terminology Economic growth Production and manufacturing Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from February 2024 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Productivism 4 languages Add topic

