Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Companies' codes of conduct Toggle Companies' codes of conduct subsection 1.1 Accountants' code of conduct 2 Personal Codes of Conduct 3 Codes of conduct in practice 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Code of conduct 21 languages العربية বাংলা Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Lëtzebuergesch मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Српски / srpski Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of rules Code of conduct of the Wikimedia Foundation , displayed at an event in New York.

A code of conduct is a set of rules outlining the norms , rules, and responsibilities or proper practices of an individual party or an organization.

Companies' codes of conduct [ edit ] A company code of conduct is a set of rules which is commonly written for employees of a company, which protects the business and informs the employees of the company's expectations. It is appropriate for even the smallest of companies to create a document containing important information on expectations for employees.

[ 1 ] The document does not need to be complex or have elaborate policies.

Failure of an employee to follow a company's code of conduct can have negative consequences. In Morgan Stanley v. Skowron , 989 F. Supp. 2d 356 (S.D.N.Y. 2013), applying New York's faithless servant doctrine, the court held that a hedge fund's employee engaging in insider trading in violation of his company's code of conduct, which also required him to report his misconduct , must repay his employer the full $31 million his employer paid him as compensation during his period of faithlessness.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Accountants' code of conduct [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Code of conduct" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In its 2007 International Good Practice Guidance, "Defining and Developing an Effective Code of Conduct for Organizations", provided [ who?

] the following working definition: "Principles, values, standards, or rules of behaviour that guide the decisions, procedures, and systems of an organization in a way that (a) contributes to the welfare of its key stakeholders, and (b) respects the rights of all constituents affected by its operations." Personal Codes of Conduct [ edit ] While codes of conduct are commonly associated with organizations and institutions, individuals can also develop a personal code of conduct, to guide their behavior, decision-making, and responses to adversity. These personal codes can typically reflect a person's core values, ethical principles, and practise aspirational virtues - such as courage, honesty, discipline, or resilience.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Historically, figures like Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius , through his philosophical reflections in Meditations, or the samurai class, through the Bushidō code, adhered to personal codes that shaped their worldview and conduct. In contemporary settings, individuals may adopt a personal code of conduct to uphold integrity, cultivate psychological resilience, or navigate unpredictable or stressful environments. Such self-imposed frameworks of rules can offer a structured psychological anchor by reinforcing a sense of agency and control.

[ 9 ] Psychological research suggests that individuals with a higher internal locus of control , defined as the belief that one can influence outcomes through their own actions, are generally more resilient and motivated in the face of adversity. Studies on learned helplessness and control have demonstrated that perceived control is closely linked to psychological well-being and adaptive coping behaviors. Developing and consistently adhering to a personal code may support an internal locus of control by encouraging deliberate, value-driven responses to life’s challenges. Writing down one’s personal code and reviewing it regularly can further reinforce commitment, aid in goal-setting, and improve behavioral consistency.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Codes of conduct in practice [ edit ] A code of conduct can be an important part in establishing an inclusive culture , but it is not a comprehensive solution on its own. An ethical culture is created by the organization's leaders who manifest their ethics in their attitudes and behaviour.

[ 10 ] Studies of codes of conduct in the private sector show that their effective implementation must be part of a learning process that requires training, consistent enforcement, and continuous measurement/improvement: [ 11 ] simply requiring members to read the code is not enough to ensure that they understand it and will remember its contents.

[ 12 ] Castellano et al.

describe Tom Morris ' book If Aristotle Ran General Motors as "compelling" and "persuasive" in arguing that in addition to codes of conduct and ethical guidelines, the creation of an ethical workplace climate requires "socially harmonious relationships" to be embedded in practice.

[ 13 ] The proof of effectiveness is when employees/members feel comfortable enough to voice concerns and believe that the organization will respond with appropriate action.

[ 14 ] Examples [ edit ] Banking Code [ 15 ] Bushido Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief International Code of Conduct for Private Security Service Providers Code of Conduct for Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States Code of Hammurabi Code of the United States Fighting Force Code of Service Discipline Declaration of Geneva Declaration of Helsinki Don't be evil Eight precepts Election Commission of India's Model Code of Conduct Five Pillars of Islam Five precepts Golden Rule Geneva Conventions Hippocratic Oath ICC Cricket Code of Conduct International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (ICOC or Hague Code of Conduct) Izzat Journalist's Creed Kapu Moral Code of the Builder of Communism Pāṭimokkha Pirate code Rule of Saint Benedict Ten Commandments Ten precepts (Taoism) Three Fundamental Bonds and Five Constant Virtues Uniform Code of Military Justice Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations Yamas See also [ edit ] Programming ethics References [ edit ] ^ "Building a compliance department" .

Thomson Reuters . 26 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ Glynn, Timothy P.; Arnow-Richman, Rachel S.; Sullivan, Charles A. (2019).

Employment Law: Private Ordering and Its Limitations . Wolters Kluwer Law & Business.

ISBN 978-1543801064 – via Google Books.

^ Jerin Matthew (December 20, 2013).

" 'Faithless' Ex-Morgan Stanley Fund Manager Ordered to Repay $31m to Former Employer" .

International Business Times UK .

^ Henning, Peter J. (December 23, 2013).

"The Huge Costs of Being a 'Faithless Servant' " .

New York Times DealBook .

^ "Morgan Stanley seeks $10.2 million from convicted former trader" .

GreenwichTime . January 15, 2013.

^ Dates, Eric (2024-11-07).

"Developing Your Personal Code of Ethics Examples" .

VComply . Retrieved 2025-04-09 .

^ Magazine, Brainz (2021-12-09).

"Self-Discipline – A Code Of Conduct" .

Brainz Magazine . Retrieved 2025-04-09 .

^ a b Fox, Erica Ariel.

"You Need A Personal Code Of Conduct. Here's Why" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2025-04-09 .

^ a b Seligman, Martin E. P.; Ph.D, Fox Leadership Professor of Psychology Martin E. P. Seligman (1975).

Helplessness: On Depression, Development, and Death . W. H. Freeman.

ISBN 978-0-7167-0751-6 .

^ McMillan, Michael (2012-02-20).

"Codes of Ethics: If You Adopt One, Will They Behave?" .

Enterprising Investor: Practical analysis for investment professionals . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ Doig, Alan; Wilson, John (1998). "Business Ethics: A European Review Volume 7, Issue 3, July 1998".

Business Ethics: A European Review .

7 (3): 140– 149.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8608.00100 .

^ ACC.

"Top Ten Tips for Developing an Effective Code of Conduct" .

Association of Corporate Counsel . Archived from the original on 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ Castellano, J. F., Rosenzweig, K. and Roehm, H. A., How Corporate Culture Impacts Unethical Distortion of Financial Numbers , Management Accounting Quarterly , Summer 2004, accessed 7 January 2023 ^ Barman, Tanya; White, Samantha (June 2014).

"Implementing an effective corporate ethics policy" .

Chartered Global Management Accountant (CGMA) Magazine . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ Koh, Benjamin; McConnell, Pat (October 25, 2018).

"Bank codes of conduct: add bars to the window dressing and make them legally binding" .

The Conversation . Retrieved April 18, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Codes of conduct at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Codes of conduct at Wikiquote v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Code_of_conduct&oldid=1296589593 " Categories : Codes of conduct Applied ethics Morality Political charters Rules Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 23:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Code of conduct 21 languages Add topic

