Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evaporation 2 Boiling 3 Sublimation 4 Other uses of the term 'vaporization' 5 Table 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Vaporization 45 languages العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Bosanski Català Чӑвашла الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido IsiZulu Italiano Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Lombard മലയാളം मराठी Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transition of a liquid to vapor This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vaporization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Vaporization (or vapo(u)risation) of an element or compound is a phase transition from the liquid phase to vapor .

[ 1 ] There are two types of vaporization: evaporation and boiling . Evaporation is a surface phenomenon , whereas boiling is a bulk phenomenon (a phenomenon in which the whole object or substance is involved in the process).

Evaporation [ edit ] A laboratory flask filled with pure bromine , a liquid that evaporates rapidly Evaporation is a phase transition from the liquid phase to vapor (a state of  substance below critical temperature ) that occurs at temperatures below the boiling temperature at a given pressure. Evaporation occurs on the surface . Evaporation only occurs when the partial pressure of vapor of a substance is less than the equilibrium vapor pressure . For example, due to constantly decreasing pressures, vapor pumped out of a solution will eventually leave behind a cryogenic liquid.

Boiling [ edit ] Boiling is also a phase transition from the liquid phase to gas phase, but boiling is the formation of vapor as bubbles of vapor below the surface of the liquid. Boiling occurs when the equilibrium vapor pressure of the substance is greater than or equal to the atmospheric pressure . The temperature at which boiling occurs is the boiling temperature, or boiling point.  The boiling point varies with the pressure of the environment.

Sublimation [ edit ] Sublimation is a direct phase transition from the solid phase to the gas phase, skipping the intermediate liquid phase.

Other uses of the term 'vaporization' [ edit ] The term vaporization has also been used in a colloquial or hyperbolic way to refer to the physical destruction of an object that is exposed to intense heat or explosive force, where the object is actually blasted into small pieces rather than literally converted to gaseous form. Examples of this usage include the "vaporization" of the uninhabited Marshall Island of Elugelab in the 1952 Ivy Mike thermonuclear test.

[ 2 ] Many other examples can be found throughout the various MythBusters episodes that have involved explosives, chief among them being Cement Mix-Up , where they "vaporized" a cement truck with ANFO.

[ 3 ] At the moment of a large enough meteor or comet impact, bolide detonation, a nuclear fission , thermonuclear fusion , or theoretical antimatter weapon detonation, a flux of so many gamma ray , x-ray , ultraviolet , visual light and heat photons strikes matter in a such brief amount of time (a great number of high-energy photons, many overlapping in the same physical space) that all molecules lose their atomic bonds ( atomization ) and "fly apart". All atoms lose their electron shells and become positively charged ions ( ionization ), in turn emitting photons of a slightly lower energy than they had absorbed. All such matter becomes a gas of nuclei and electrons which rise into the air due to the extremely high temperature or bond to each other as they cool. The matter vaporized this way is immediately a plasma in a state of maximum entropy and this state steadily reduces via the factor of passing time due to natural processes in the biosphere and the effects of physics at normal temperatures and pressures .

A similar process occurs during ultrashort pulse laser ablation , where the high flux of incoming electromagnetic radiation strips the target material's surface of electrons, leaving positively charged atoms which undergo a coulomb explosion .

[ 4 ] Table [ edit ] Phase transitions of matter ( v t e ) To From Solid Liquid Gas Plasma Solid Melting Sublimation Liquid Freezing Vaporization Gas Deposition Condensation Ionization Plasma Recombination References [ edit ] ^ Vaporization .

Encyclopedia Britannica . April 25, 2007. Archived from the original on May 16, 2015.

^ " "Mike" Test" . PBS American Experience. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016.

^ Mythbusters Cement Truck Blow Up , 30 April 2010, archived from the original on 2022-07-16 , retrieved 2022-07-16 ^ GmbH, Dirk Müller, Lumera Laser.

"Picosecond Lasers for High-Quality Industrial Micromachining" .

Archived from the original on 2018-02-20 . Retrieved 2018-02-19 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vaporization .

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vaporization&oldid=1289866094 " Categories : Physical chemistry Chemical processes Phase transitions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 09:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vaporization 45 languages Add topic

