Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Transport system things and activities 2 Examples of transport legislation Toggle Examples of transport legislation subsection 2.1 System level 2.2 Mode or activity-based legislation 3 Case law and law from other sources 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Transport law 10 languages Deutsch فارسی Français עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of law The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with Australia and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Transport law (or transportation law ) is the area of law dealing with transport .  The laws can apply very broadly at a transport system level or more narrowly to transport things or activities within that system such as vehicles, things and behaviours.  Transport law is generally found in two main areas: Legislation or statutory law passed or made by elected officials like Parliaments or made by other officials under delegation Case law decided by courts Legislation typically consists of statutes known as Acts and delegated legislation like regulations , orders or notices.  Case law consists of judgments , findings and rulings handed down by courts.

Transport system things and activities [ edit ] Transport laws can apply at a global transport system-wide level.  A transport system can encompass a wide range of matters which make up the system.  These include - heavy and light rail systems including associated land, infrastructure and rolling stock which comprise trains , trams and light rail vehicles roads including freeways , arterial roads and paths vehicles including cars , trucks , buses and bicycles ports and waterways commercial ships and recreational vessels air transport systems and aircraft.

A transport system includes not only system infrastructure and conveyances, but also things like - communication systems and other technologies strategic, business and operational plans schedules, timetables and ticketing systems safety systems labour components service components government decision makers like Ministers , departments, authorities, corporations, agencies and other legal persons.

The Transport Integration Act of Victoria , Australia provides an example of the use of a broad statutory formulation to circumscribe the operation of a transport law in legislative form.

[ 1 ] Individual components can be identified from this broad transport system formulation and then regulated discreetly.  For example, a bus or a car forms part of a broad transport system but are commonly regulated on an individual basis in terms of identification (registration), control of the vehicle (driver licensing and drug and blood alcohol controls), vehicle forms and fittings (vehicle standards) and other safety requirements.

Examples of transport legislation [ edit ] Victoria again provides an example of a jurisdiction with a suite of transport legislation which operates both at transport system and modal or activity levels.

System level [ edit ] The Transport Integration Act sets out the overall policy framework for transport in Victoria.  It also establishes and sets the charters of the key government agencies which make decisions affecting the planning and operation of the State's transport system and each agency is required by the statute to have regard to the policy framework.

As a general rule, transport agencies and officials do not exist in their own right and have no existence or power without conferral from a transport law.  Legislation is commonly required for this purpose.  Transport decision makers and agencies established and/or empowered by the Transport Integration Act [ 2 ] include - key government figures such as Ministers (currently the Minister for Public Transport, the Minister for Roads and the Minister for Ports) a central government Department - the Department of Transport (Victoria, 2019–) - responsible for system-wide planning, integration and coordination a public transport agency responsible for providing or regulating train, tram, light rail, bus and taxi services - the Public Transport Development Authority a road agency responsible for road construction and maintenance and vehicles and towing services regulation  - the Roads Corporation ( VicRoads ) agencies responsible for discrete parts of the rail system such as land, infrastructure and other assets (Victorian Rail Track ( VicTrack )) and regional services ( V/Line Corporation ) agencies responsible for ports and other waters - the Port of Melbourne Corporation , the Port of Hastings Development Authority, the Victorian Regional Channels Authority and local and other authorities an independent transport safety regulator ( Director, Transport Safety ) and independent safety investigator (the Chief Investigator, Transport Safety ) The Transport Integration Act establishes these agencies and sets their statutory charters.  The charters circumscribe the agencies' jurisdiction or power to operate in and to regulate their respective components of the transport system.

Mode or activity-based legislation [ edit ] Victoria has a range of statutes which regulate transport modes and transport-related activities throughout the State.  These include: the Road Management Act 2004 the Road Safety Act 1986 the Rail Management Act 1996 the Rail Safety Act 2006 the Bus Safety Act 2009 the Bus Services Act 1995 the Accident Towing Services Act 2007 the Major Transport Projects Facilitation Act 2009 the Port Management Act 1995 the Marine Act 1988 the Tourist and Heritage Railways Act 2010 Case law and law from other sources [ edit ] Areas of transport law governed by court decisions and other non transport statutes or laws include property law, contract law, torts law and specialist regulation governing the contract of carriage , and the relationship between carriers and passengers in public transport and shippers and cargo owners in shipping .

See also [ edit ] Aviation law Bicycle law Traffic law Traffic court References [ edit ] ^ Transport Integration Act 2010 - see www.legislation.vic.gov.au .  See the definition of "transport system" in section 3 of the Act.

^ Transport Integration Act 2010 - see Parts 3, 5, 5A, 6, and 6A.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Transport law at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transport_law&oldid=1294136043 " Category : Transport law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2018 Australia-centric Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transport law 10 languages Add topic

