Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History 3 Functions Toggle Functions subsection 3.1 Representation 3.2 Deliberation 3.3 Legislation 3.4 Authorizing expenditure 3.5 Oversight 3.6 Function in authoritarian regimes 4 Internal organization 5 Relation to other branches of government 6 Members 7 Chambers 8 Size 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Legislature 108 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaelg Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Batak Mandailing ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Legislative power ) Deliberative assembly that makes laws Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Legislature Chambers Unicameralism Bicameralism Tricameralism Multicameralism Upper house ( senate ) Lower house Parliament Parliamentary system Parliamentary group Speaker Parliamentary leader Member of parliament Whip Clerk International parliament Parliamentary procedure Committee Quorum Motion ( no-confidence ) Mass meeting Types Parliament ( member of parliament ) Congress ( member of congress ) Municipal council ( councillor ) The Estates (states-general) Legislatures by country v t e Palace of Westminster , where the legislature of the United Kingdom, the Parliament of the United Kingdom , meets, located in London A legislature ( UK : / ˈ l ɛ dʒ ɪ s l ə tʃ ə r / , US : /- ˌ l eɪ tʃ ə r / ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a deliberative assembly with the legal authority to make laws for a political entity such as a country , nation , or city on behalf of the people therein. They are often contrasted with the executive and judicial bodies of government . Legislatures can exist at different levels of government, including national, state/provincial/regional, local, and even supranational (such as the European Parliament ). Countries differ as to what extent they grant deliberative assemblies at the subnational law-making power, as opposed to purely administrative responsibilities.

Laws enacted by legislatures are usually known as primary legislation . In addition, legislatures may observe and steer governing actions, with authority to amend the budget involved.

The members of a legislature are called legislators. In a democracy, legislators are most commonly popularly elected , although indirect election and appointment by the executive are also used, particularly for bicameral legislatures featuring an upper house .

Terminology [ edit ] Map showing the terminology for each country's national legislature in English None National assembly Parliament Congress Legislative council/assembly National/supreme council House of representatives Other The name used to refer to a legislative body varies by country.

Common names include: Assembly (from Old French asemblee , cf. assemble) Congress (from Latin congressum , "having gone together") Council (from Latin concilium , "calling out with, uniting") Diet (from Ancient Greek díaita , "lifestyle, discussion, decision") Estates or States (from Old French estat , "condition, state, the state") Parliament (from Old French parlement , "talking") The Palazzo Madama is the seat of the upper house of the Italian Parliament , the Senate of the Republic .

By names: Chamber of Deputies Chamber of Representatives House of Assembly House of Chiefs House of Representatives Legislative assembly Legislative council National Assembly Senate By languages: Cortes (from Spanish cortes , "courts") Duma (from Russian dúma , "thought") Knesset (from Hebrew k'néset , "meeting") Majlis (from Arabic majlis , "sitting room") Oireachtas (From Irish airecht/oireacht , "deliberative assembly of freemen") Rada (from Polish rada , "'advice, decision") Reichstag (from German Reichstag , "assembly of the empire") Landtag (from German Landtag , "assembly of the country") Sansad (from Sanskrit saṃsada , "assembly") Sejm (from Polish sejm , "take with, assembly") Soviet (from Russian sovét , "council") Thing (from Proto-Germanic *þingą , "meeting, matter discussed at a meeting") Husting (from Old Norse húsþing , "house meeting") Veche (from Old East Slavic věče , "council, agreement") Though the specific roles for each legislature differ by location, they all aim to serve the same purpose of appointing officials to represent their citizens to determine appropriate legislation for the country.

History [ edit ] Among the earliest recognised formal legislatures was the Athenian Ecclesia .

[ 3 ] In the Middle Ages , European monarchs would host assemblies of the nobility, which would later develop into predecessors of modern legislatures.

[ 3 ] These were often named the Estates . The oldest surviving legislature is the Icelandic Althing , founded in 930 CE.

[ 4 ] Functions [ edit ] Democratic legislatures have six major functions: representation, deliberation, legislation, authorizing expenditure, making governments, and oversight.

[ 3 ] Representation [ edit ] There exist five ways that representation can be achieved in a legislature: [ 3 ] Formalistically: how the rules of the legislature ensure representation of constituents; Symbolically: how the constituents perceive their representatives; Descriptively: how well the composition of the legislature matches the demographics of the wider society; Substantively: how well representatives actually respond to the needs of their constituents; Collectively: how well the representatives represent the interests of the society as a whole.

Deliberation [ edit ] One of the major functions of a legislature is to discuss and debate issues of major importance to society.

[ 3 ] This activity can take place in two forms. In debating legislatures, such as the Parliament of the United Kingdom , the floor of the legislature frequently sees lively debate.

[ 3 ] In contrast, in committee-based legislatures like the United States Congress , deliberation takes place in closed committees.

[ 3 ] Legislation [ edit ] While legislatures have nominally the sole power to create laws, the substantive extent of this power depends on details of the political system. In Westminster-style legislatures the executive (composed of the cabinet) can essentially pass any laws it wants, as it usually has a majority of legislators behind it, kept in check by the party whip, while committee-based legislatures in continental Europe and those in presidential systems of the Americas have more independence in drafting and amending bills.

[ 5 ] Authorizing expenditure [ edit ] The origins of the power of the purse which legislatures typically have in passing or denying government budgets goes back to the European assemblies of nobility which the monarchs would have to consult before raising taxes.

[ 6 ] For this power to be actually effective, the legislature should be able to amend the budget, have an effective committee system, enough time for consideration, as well as access to relevant background information.

[ 6 ] Oversight [ edit ] There are several ways in which the legislature can hold the executive branch (the administration or government) accountable. This can be done through hearings, questioning , interpellations , votes of confidence , the formation of committees.

[ 7 ] Parliaments are usually ensured with upholding the rule of law, verifying that public funds are used accountably and efficiently as well as make government processes transparent and actions so that they can be debated by the public and its representatives.

[ 7 ] Agora notes that parliamentary systems or political parties in which political leaders can influence or decide which members receive top jobs can lead to passivity amongst members of the party and less challenging of leadership.

[ 7 ] Agora notes that this phenomenon is acute if the election of a member is dependent on the support of political leadership.

[ 7 ] Function in authoritarian regimes [ edit ] In contrast to democratic systems, legislatures under authoritarianism are used to ensure the stability of the power structure by co-opting potential competing interests within the elites, which they achieve by: [ 8 ] Providing legitimacy; Incorporating opponents into the system; Providing some representation of outside interests; Offering a way to recruit new members to the ruling clique; Being a channel through which limited grievances and concessions can be passed.

Internal organization [ edit ] Each chamber of the legislature consists of a number of legislators who use some form of parliamentary procedure to debate political issues and vote on proposed legislation. There must be a certain number of legislators present to carry out these activities; this is called a quorum .

Some of the responsibilities of a legislature, such as giving first consideration to newly proposed legislation, are usually delegated to committees made up of a few of the members of the chamber(s).

The members of a legislature usually represent different political parties ; the members from each party generally meet as a caucus to organize their internal affairs.

Relation to other branches of government [ edit ] Legislatures vary widely in the amount of political power they wield, compared to other political players such as judiciaries , militaries , and executives . In 2009, political scientists M. Steven Fish and Matthew Kroenig constructed a Parliamentary powers index in an attempt to quantify the different degrees of power among national legislatures. The German Bundestag , the Italian Parliament , and the Mongolian State Great Khural tied for most powerful, while Myanmar's House of Representatives and Somalia's Transitional Federal Assembly (since replaced by the Federal Parliament of Somalia ) tied for least powerful.

[ 9 ] Some political systems follows the principle of legislative supremacy , which holds that the legislature is the supreme branch of government and cannot be bound by other institutions, such as the judicial branch or a written constitution . Such a system renders the legislature more powerful.

In parliamentary and semi-presidential systems of government , the executive is responsible to the legislature, which may remove it with a vote of no confidence . On the other hand, according to the separation of powers doctrine, the legislature in a presidential system is considered an independent and coequal branch of government along with both the judiciary and the executive.

[ 10 ] Nevertheless, many presidential systems provide for the impeachment of the executive for criminal or unconstitutional behaviour.

Legislatures will sometimes delegate their legislative power to administrative or executive agencies .

[ 11 ] Members [ edit ] See also: Mandate (politics) Legislatures are made up of individual members, known as legislators , who vote on proposed laws. A legislature usually contains a fixed number of legislators; because legislatures usually meet in a specific room filled with seats for the legislators, this is often described as the number of "seats" it contains. For example, a legislature that has 100 "seats" has 100 members. By extension, an electoral district that elects a single legislator can also be described as a "seat", as, for example, in the phrases " safe seat " and " marginal seat ".

[ 12 ] After election, the members may be protected by parliamentary immunity or parliamentary privilege , either for all actions the duration of their entire term, or for just those related to their legislative duties.

Chambers [ edit ] The Congress of the Republic of Peru , the country's national legislature, meets in the Legislative Palace in 2010.

A legislature may debate and vote upon bills as a single unit, or it may be composed of multiple separate assemblies , called by various names including legislative chambers , debate chambers , and houses , which debate and vote separately and have distinct powers. A legislature which operates as a single unit is unicameral , one divided into two chambers is bicameral , and one divided into three chambers is tricameral .

The British House of Commons , its lower house In bicameral legislatures, one chamber is usually considered the upper house , while the other is considered the lower house . The two types are not rigidly different, but members of upper houses tend to be indirectly elected or appointed rather than directly elected, tend to be allocated by administrative divisions rather than by population, and tend to have longer terms than members of the lower house. In some systems, particularly parliamentary systems , the upper house has less power and tends to have a more advisory role, but in others, particularly federal presidential systems , the upper house has equal or even greater power.

The German Bundestag , its theoretical lower house In federations , the upper house typically represents the federation's component states. This is also the case with the supranational legislature of the European Union . The upper house may either contain the delegates of state governments – as in the European Union and in Germany and, before 1913, in the United States – or be elected according to a formula that grants equal representation to states with smaller populations, as is the case in Australia and the United States since 1913.

The Australian Senate , its upper house Tricameral legislatures are rare; the Massachusetts Governor's Council still exists, but the most recent national example existed in the waning years of White-minority rule in South Africa .

Tetracameral legislatures no longer exist, but they were previously used in Scandinavia. The only legislature with a number of chambers bigger than four was the Federal Assembly of Yugoslavia ; initially established as a Pentacameral body in 1963, it was turned into a hexacameral body in 1967.

Size [ edit ] Main article: List of legislatures by number of members Legislatures vary widely in their size. Among national legislatures , China's National People's Congress is the largest with 2,980 members, [ 13 ] while Vatican City 's Pontifical Commission is the smallest with 7.

[ 14 ] Neither legislature is democratically elected: The Pontifical Commission members are appointed by the Pope and the National People's Congress is indirectly elected within the context of a one-party state .

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] Legislature size is a trade off between efficiency and representation; the smaller the legislature, the more efficiently it can operate, but the larger the legislature, the better it can represent the political diversity of its constituents. Comparative analysis of national legislatures has found that size of a country's lower house tends to be proportional to the cube root of its population ; that is, the size of the lower house tends to increase along with population, but much more slowly.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Politics portal List of legislatures by country List of legislative buildings Election apportionment diagram Evidence-based legislation Highest organ of state power References [ edit ] ^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ Jones, Daniel (2011).

Roach, Peter ; Setter, Jane ; Esling, John (eds.).

Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6 .

^ a b c d e f g Hague, Rod (14 October 2017).

Political science : a comparative introduction . pp.

128– 130.

ISBN 978-1-137-60123-0 .

OCLC 961119208 .

^ "A short history of Alþingi – the oldest parliament in the world" .

europa.eu . The European Union. Archived from the original on 15 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2017 .

^ Hague, Rod (14 October 2017).

Political science : a comparative introduction . pp.

130– 131.

ISBN 978-1-137-60123-0 .

OCLC 961119208 .

^ a b Hague, Rod (14 October 2017).

Political science : a comparative introduction . pp.

131– 132.

ISBN 978-1-137-60123-0 .

OCLC 961119208 .

^ a b c d "Parliamentary Function of Oversight | Agora" .

www.agora-parl.org . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ Hague, Rod (14 October 2017).

Political science : a comparative introduction .

ISBN 978-1-137-60123-0 .

OCLC 961119208 .

^ Fish, M. Steven; Kroenig, Matthew (2009).

The handbook of national legislatures: a global survey .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-51466-8 .

^ "Governing Systems and Executive-Legislative Relations (Presidential, Parliamentary and Hybrid Systems)" . United Nations Development Programme. Archived from the original on 17 October 2008 . Retrieved 16 October 2008 .

^ Schoenbrod, David (2008). "Delegation". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE ; Cato Institute . pp.

117– 18.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n74 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

^ "Terminology" .

Parliament of Tasmania .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2022 . Retrieved 6 March 2022 .

^ a b "IPU PARLINE database: "General information" module" .

IPU Parline Database . International Parliamentary Union.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ "Vatican City State" . Vatican City State.

Archived from the original on 25 November 2018 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ Pope John Paul II (26 November 2000).

"Fundamental Law of Vatican City State" (PDF) . Vatican City State. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ Frederick, Brian (December 2009).

"Not Quite a Full House: The Case for Enlarging the House of Representatives" .

Bridgewater Review .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 15 May 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bauman, Richard W.; Kahana, Tsvi, eds. (2006).

The least-examined branch: the role of legislatures in the constitutional state .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-85954-7 .

Carey, John M. (2006).

"Legislative organization" .

The Oxford handbook of political institutions .

Oxford University Press . pp.

431–454 .

ISBN 978-0-19-927569-4 .

Garner, James Wilford (1905).

"Legislature" . In Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M. (eds.).

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

Martin, Shane; Saalfeld, Thomas; Strøm, Kaare W., eds. (2014).

The Oxford handbook of legislative studies . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-191-01907-4 .

Olson, David M. (2015).

Democratic legislative institutions: a comparative view . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-47314-5 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Separation of powers Typical branches Executive Legislature Judiciary Additional branches Fourth Estate Civil service commission Auditory Electoral Prosecutory By country Australia Hong Kong Singapore United Kingdom United States See also Dual mandate Fusion of powers Judicial independence Judicial review Parliamentary sovereignty Separation of duties Unified power v t e Legislatures of World Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Portals : Law Politics Legislature at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Korea Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legislature&oldid=1303191973 " Categories : Legislatures Separation of powers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing Old East Slavic-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legislature 108 languages Add topic

