Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Concept 3 Facts and data 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents gutefrage.net 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German question and answer website You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(May 2020) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:gutefrage.net]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|gutefrage.net}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gutefrage.net" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) gutefrage.net Type of site Advice community Available in German Owner Markus Wölflick, Dr. Stephan Roppel URL www .gutefrage .net Commercial Yes Registration Required for participation Users c.

4.5 million (daily, as of February 2021) [ citation needed ] Launched 2006 ; 19 years ago ( 2006 ) Current status Active gutefrage.net (commonly known and stylized in its logo as gutefrage ; from German gute Frage , which means "good question") is a German question and answer website without topic specialization.

The website is financed by advertisement , but it is possible to pay to use the site without advertisements. The user-generated content is freely available to platform users and cannot necessarily be changed or deleted by content creators at will. Content is only allowed in German, with the exception of quotes, meanings, or specific translations.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] In 2006, gutefrage.net went online as the first self-initiated startup by Holtzbrinck eLAB, a subsidiary of the Holtzbrinck Publishing Group .

[ 2 ] The website has developed into the most-used product of the Gutefrage Group [ 3 ] and, regarding its content growth and page views, has become one of the largest forums in the German-speaking world.

[ 4 ] According to its own reports, the company crossed their profit threshold in 2009.

[ 5 ] Towards the end of 2012, a mobile version of the website went online; applications for Android and iOS followed in December 2013.

[ 4 ] On December 7, 2016, the logo for gutefrage.net was renewed in honor of the site's tenth birthday. The new logo shows two speech bubbles ; the smaller bubble on the left is intended to represent a question, whereas the larger bubble on the right is intended to represent an answer. In conjunction with this change, the added ".net" was removed from the logo.

[ 6 ] In June 2020, gutefrage.net entered into a collaboration with Amazon , whereby the virtual assistant Alexa is able to access selected posts from the platform and play back answers to user questions.

[ 7 ] In 2020, the majority share of gutefrage.net was purchased by United Vertical Media GmbH, an affiliate of Müller Medien. As of February 2021, the website contains over 24 million questions with more than 94 million answers.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Concept [ edit ] The internet forum allows users to ask and answer questions of other users.

[ 10 ] The site is composed primarily of user-generated content . User posts are rewarded with an internal gamification system which is based on ratings given by other users. Users with a significant level of engagement within a given topic are, after individual verification by gutefrage.net employees, distinguished as "experts." [ 10 ] Aside from asking and answering questions, users can communicate with each other via private messages. Askers have the option to select the most helpful answers to each of their questions; the selected answer is then visibly accentuated.

[ 10 ] Facts and data [ edit ] As of 2021, the platform reported around 1.85 million active users, 27 million questions, and over 100 million answers. The website's monthly net reach accounted for 30 million unique users . A given question can expect to receive an average of four answers, with 72% of questions being answered within the first five minutes. Users post a monthly average of 255,000 questions on gutefrage.net .

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Richtlinien" .

www.gutefrage.net . Retrieved 2020-10-27 .

^ online, heise (17 January 2007).

"Holtzbrinck gründet Ratgeber-Startup "gutefrage.net" " .

heise online (in German) . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ a b "Gutefrage: Über uns - gutefrage" (in German). 2019-05-19. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019 . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ a b "gutefrage gruppe - Wir sind ein auf Ratgeberseiten spezialisiertes Online-Unternehmen. Wir bringen Millionen von Menschen zusammen" (in German). 2015-05-18. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ Becker, Alexander (2010-02-09).

"Holtzbrincks Gutefrage meldet Break-even | MEEDIA" (in German). Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ "Warum hat gutefrage.net das Logo geändert? (gutefrage)" (in German). 2016-12-07. Archived from the original on 7 December 2016 . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ "Deutschland fragt – gutefrage und Alexa antworten!" .

www.gutefrage.net (in German) . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ "Jubiläum: 15 Jahre gutefrage" .

www.gutefrage.net (in German) . Retrieved 2021-02-15 .

^ "Holtzbrinck Digital verkauft gutefrage.net und highfivve" .

new-business.de . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

^ a b c "Wie funktioniert Gutefrage.net" .

gutefrage (in German) . Retrieved 2022-04-13 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Holtzbrinck DIE ZEIT Verlagsgruppe Die Zeit (50%) Zeit Wissen Spotlight Verlag Digital & Services Digital Science Altmetric Gutefrage.net Macmillan United States Trade Farrar, Straus and Giroux First Second Henry Holt Macmillan Audio Picador Quick and Dirty Tips St. Martin's Press Tor/Forge Tor.com Macmillan Learning Bedford-St. Martin's W. H. Freeman Worth Publishers i>clicker Hayden-McNeil Children's FSG Books for Young Readers Feiwel and Friends Holt Books for Young Readers Kingfisher Roaring Brook Priddy Square Fish United Kingdom Macmillan Pan Picador Tor Macmillan Children's Books Campbell Young Picador Sidgwick & Jackson Mantle Macmillan Audio Books Macmillan New Writing The Collector's Library Germany S. Fischer Rowohlt Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%) Droemer Knaur (50%) Springer Nature (53%) Apress BioMed Central Birkhäuser Macmillan Education Nature Research Journals Palgrave Macmillan Journals Scientific American Springer Journals Springer Gabler Springer Medizin Ärzte-Zeitung Springer Vieweg Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gutefrage.net&oldid=1245213660 " Categories : 2006 establishments in Germany Internet properties established in 2006 Question-and-answer websites German websites Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Building and structure articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 11 September 2024, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents gutefrage.net 1 language Add topic

