Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Health humanities 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Health humanities is an interdisciplinary field of study that draws on aspects of the arts and humanities in its approach to health care, health and well-being.

[ 1 ] It involves the application of the creative or fine arts (including visual arts , music , performing arts ) and humanities disciplines (including literary studies , languages , law , history , philosophy , religion , etc.) to questions of human health and well-being.

[ 2 ] This applied capacity of the humanities is not itself a novel idea; however, the construct of the health humanities only began to emerge in the first decade of the 21st century.

History [ edit ] Historically, the roots informing the health humanities can be traced back to, and can now be considered to include, such multidisciplinary areas as the medical humanities [ 3 ] and the expressive therapies/creative arts therapies .

[ citation needed ] In the health humanities, health (and the promotion of health) is understood according to the constructivist (and other non-positivist ) principles indigenous to the humanities, as opposed to the positivism of science.

[ 4 ] The health humanities are rooted in dialogical (negotiated, intersubjective voices of multiple truths), versus monological (a singular, authoritative voice of "the" truth) perspectives on health. As such, evidence upon which health practices are based is generally considered axiological (based in meanings, values, and aesthetics), versus epistemological (based in factual knowledge), in orientation. The health humanities are not an alternative to the health sciences, but rather offer a contrasting paradigm and pragmatic approach with respect to health and its promotion, and can function in a manner that is complementary to the health sciences.

[ citation needed ] In January 2009, Paul Crawford became the world's first Professor of Health Humanities at the University of Nottingham , and led with Victoria Tischler, Charley Baker, Brian Brown, Lisa Mooney-Smith and Ronald Carter the development of the Arts and Humanities Research Council -funded International Health Humanities Network. Baccalaureate and Masters programs in health humanities have been developed in the US, Canada and UK.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the UK, a Health Humanities Centre was established in 2015 at University College London , dedicated to research and teaching in the health humanities, including a Master of Arts degree in health humanities.

[ 7 ] In 2020, a Master of Science in Research in Health Humanities and Arts started at The University of Edinburgh .

[ 8 ] Textbooks on the health humanities include Health Humanities Reader , [ 9 ] Health Humanities , [ 10 ] Research Methods in Health Humanities , [ 11 ] and The Routledge Companion to Health Humanities .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Critical theory Interdisciplinarity Philosophy of healthcare Sociology of health and illness References [ edit ] ^ Crawford, P. (2020) Introduction: Global health humanities and the rise of creative public health. In: The Routledge Companion to Health Humanities , eds. P. Crawford, B. Brown, & A. Charise. London: Routledge, 1-7: 3.

^ "What is Health Humanities?" .

SCOPE: The Health Humanities Learning Lab . 2016 . Retrieved 15 September 2016 .

^ "Medical Humanities – BMJ Journals" . Mh.bmj.com . Retrieved 5 July 2010 .

^ Squier, S. M. (2007). Beyond nescience: The intersectional insights of health humanities.

Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 50 (3), 334-337.

^ Berry, S.L., Lamb, E.G., and Jones, J. (2016). Health Humanities Baccalaureate Programs in the United States. Center for Literature and Medicine, Hiram College. www.hiram.edu/images/pdfs/centerlitmed/HHBP_8_11_16.pdf. 14 December 2019.

^ Peterkin, A.D. and Skorzewska, A. (2018). Health Humanities in Post-Graduate Medical Education. Oxford University Press: Oxford.

^ "UCL Health Humanities Centre" . 9 October 2020. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015.

^ "Programme Introduction" .

^ Jones, T., Wear, D., & Friedman, L. D. (Eds.). (2014).

Health Humanities Reader . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

^ Crawford, P., Brown, B., Baker, C., Tischler, V., & Abrams, B. (2015).

Health Humanities . London: Palgrave-Macmillan.

^ Klugman, C.M., & Lamb, E.G. (Eds.). (2019).

Research Methods in Health Humanities , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Crawford, P., Brown, B., & Charise, A. (Eds.). (2020).

The Routledge Companion to Health Humanities , London: Routledge Further reading [ edit ] Jones, Therese; Blackie, Michael; Garden, Rebecca; Wear, Delese (2017).

"The Almost Right Word: The Move From Medical to Health Humanities" .

Academic Medicine .

92 (7): 932– 935.

doi : 10.1097/ACM.0000000000001518 .

PMID 28657553 .

v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Health_humanities&oldid=1271432128 " Categories : Medical humanities Theatre of the Oppressed Health care Health education Humanities Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from September 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 This page was last edited on 24 January 2025, at 01:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Health humanities 2 languages Add topic

