Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tarikh Ibn al-Wardi 2 Risālah al-naba’ ‘an al-waba’ 3 Kharīdat al-ʿAjā'ib wa farīdat al-gha'rāib 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Wardi 7 languages العربية فارسی Italiano Kurdî مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 14th-century Arab poet; 15th-century Arab geographer Abū Ḥafs Zayn al-Dīn ʻUmar ibn al-Muẓaffar Ibn al-Wardī ( Arabic : عمر ابن مظفر ابن الوردي ),  known as Ibn al-Wardi , was an Arab geographer (died circa 1446, [ 1 ] sometimes listed as late as 1457). He was the author of Kharīdat al-ʿAjā'ib wa farīdat al-gha'rāib ( The Pearl of wonders and the Uniqueness of strange things ), a geographical treatise with sections on natural history.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The name Abū Ḥafs Zayn al-Dīn ʻUmar ibn al-Muẓaffar Ibn al-Wardī (ابن الوردي) may also refer to this man's grandfather (born in Maarat al-Numan , Syria , 691 AH (1291/1292CE) died 749 AH (1348/1349CE)), a historian and poet known for his writings about the plague in Syria before his death.

[ 4 ] Their family descended from Caliph Abu Bakr .

[ 5 ] He wrote Tarikh Ibn al-Wardi ( The History by Ibn al-Wardi ).

The two men are often confused for each other, particularly in the western world. Gorton's biography, conflating the two, reads: An Arabian geographer and poet of eminence in the 14th century. In his youth he filled the office of deputy to the hakim, or principal judge of the city of Aleppo; but he quitted the judicature to devote his time to the cultivation of science. He composed for the use of the governor of Aleppo, a curious treatise on geography, entitled "The Pearl of Wonders." He was also the author of an abridgment of the chronicle of Abufeda, poems, &c. His death took place in 1330. Several portions of his geographical work have been published by the literati of France and Germany.

[ 3 ] Tarikh Ibn al-Wardi [ edit ] Ibn al-Wardi (Sr.) was an eyewitness of the Black Death ; he died in Aleppo of plague on 27 Dhū aI-Hijjah 749 (18 March 1349).

[ 4 ] His Tarikh ("history," "annals") is considered an abridgement of "the chronicle of Abu al-Fida with a continuation from 729/1329 to 749/1349." That Arab history by Abulfeda , Tarikh al-Mukhtasar fi Akhbar al-Bashar ( An Abridgment of the History at the Human Race , or History of Abu al-Fida ), was itself an extension of an earlier work, The Complete History by Ali ibn al-Athir .

Risālah al-naba’ ‘an al-waba’ [ edit ] Ibn Al-Wardi's (Sr.) risalah ("message"), translated by Dols as " An Essay on the Report of the Pestilence ," includes his firsthand account of the plague in Syria: China was not preserved from it nor could the strongest fortress hinder it. The plague afflicted the Indians in India. It weighed upon the Sind. It seized with its hand and ensnared even the lands of the Uzbeks. How many backs did it break in what is Transoxiana! The plague increased and spread further. It attacked the Persians, extended its steps toward the land of the Khitai, and gnawed away at the Crimea. It pelted Rum with live coals and led the outrage to Cyprus and the islands. The plague destroyed mankind in Cairo. Its eye was cast upon Egypt, and behold, the people were wide-awake.... The plague attacked Gaza, and it shook ‘Asqalan severyly. The plague oppressed Acre. The scourge came to Jerusalem …. It, then, hastened its pace and attacked the entire maritime plain. The plague trapped Sidon and descended unexpectedly upon Beirut, cunningly. Next, it directed the shooting of its arrows to Damascus.

[ 4 ] The main English translation in use today, by Michael Dols, "is presented in simple prose without regard to the original's meter, rhyme, and elaborate literary conceits".

[ 4 ] Kharīdat al-ʿAjā'ib wa farīdat al-gha'rāib [ edit ] Ibn al-Wardi's atlas of the world, a manuscript copied in 17th century The Kharīdat (written circa 1419) [ 6 ] by Ibn Al-Wardi (Jr.) summed up the geographical knowledge of the Arabic world of the time, referring to climate, terrain, fauna and flora, population, way of living, existing states and their governments in individual regions of the world. The work was accompanied by a coloured world map and a picture of Ka'bah.

Although in the book al-Wardi credits al-Mas'udi , al-Tusi and several other sources, Mohamed Bencheneb claimed it is a plagiarism of a book by Egyptian writer Najm ad-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Ḥamdān ibn Shabib al-Ḥanbali , entitled Jāmi ʿal-Funūn wa-Salwat al-Maḥzūn .

[ 7 ] [ 2 ] Bencheneb suggests the first chapter may either be taken from Yaqut al-Hamawi 's Mu'jam ul-Buldān or have been received via al-Hanbali.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] Citations ^ Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition . p. 594.

^ a b Bencheneb, Mohamed (1936), "Ibn al-Wardī" , The Encyclopaedia of Islām , vol. III, E. J. Brill ltd., p. 428 ^ a b Gorton, John (1833).

A General Biographical Dictionary, Vol II . Whittaker and Company. pp. 267 (Internet Archive version).

^ a b c d Ibn al-Wardi, Michael Dols (1974).

Michael Dols Tr. Ibn Al Wardi On The Plague 1974 .

^ "Lamiyyah by Ibn Al Wardi Named: (The Counsel of Friends and the Guidance of Companions)" (PDF) .

tottenhamhalemosque.org .

^ "KHARITAT AL-AJAIB WA FARIDAT AL-GHARAIB, 'THE PEARL OF WONDERS AND UNIQUENESS OF STRANGE THINGS' BY IBN AL-WARDI, DATED 1212 AH/1797 AD" .

www.orientalartauctions.com . Retrieved 2024-11-18 .

^ a b Jwaideh (1987) , p. 19, note 4.

Bibliography Jwaideh, Wadie, ed. (1987) [1959].

The Introductory Chapters of Yāqūt's Muʻjam Al-Buldān . Brill Archive.

External links [ edit ] List of Kharidat copies in the Union Catalogue of Manuscripts from the Islamicate World: https://www.fihrist.org.uk/catalog/work_2391?n=1 Partial copy of the Kharidat, a 17th-century or later translation: https://archive.org/details/ldpd_14642704_000/ Full copy of the Kharidat, from the 1500s or later: https://www.loc.gov/item/2013415532 Full copy of the Kharidat, without illustrations, from c. 1600: https://dlmenetwork.org/en/library/catalog/e980b3c8-cf7e-490c-81b1-606079b0b927 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_al-Wardi&oldid=1303051486 " Categories : 1290s births 1349 deaths 14th-century Arab people Medieval Syrian geographers 14th-century geographers People from Maarat al-Numan 14th-century deaths from plague (disease) Arab writers Banu Abu Bakr Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Wardi 7 languages Add topic

