Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variation Toggle Variation subsection 1.1 Critical theory 2 Control measures 3 By country or territory 4 Immigration visa categories by country or territory 5 General guidelines by country or territory 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Immigration law 17 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Nederlands Русский සිංහල Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National government policies Immigration General Immigration by country List of immigrant populations Immigration country Immigration policy Illegal immigration Forced displacement Internal migration History and law Alien Asylum shopping Border security Citizenship Crime Deportation Self-deportation Detention Emigration Externalization Immigration law Immigrant investor programs Immigration tariff Indefinite leave to remain Migration diplomacy Net migration rate list Non-refoulement Permanent residency Population transfer Pushback Repatriation Extradition Residence permit Return migration Right of asylum Right of return Refugee Safe third country Smuggling Surveillance Voluntary return Social processes Acculturation ( Acculturation gap ) Birth tourism Anchor baby Satellite babies Economic effects Expatriate Human capital flight Human migration Immigrant assimilation Immigration consultant Integration Migration background Persecution Refugee crisis Social exclusion Student migration Unreported employment Visa fraud Political Theories Civic nationalism Religious nationalism Replacement migration Social cohesion Nativism Multiculturalism Plurinationalism Push and pull factors Ethnocentrism Foot voting Causes Chain migration Economic migrant Foreign worker Global labor arbitrage War Weaponized Opposition and reform Criticism of multiculturalism Immigration reform Opposition to immigration White genocide conspiracy theory v t e Immigration law includes the national statutes , regulations , and legal precedents governing immigration into and deportation from a country . Strictly speaking, it is distinct from other matters such as naturalization and citizenship , although they are sometimes conflated.

[ 1 ] Countries frequently maintain laws that regulate both the rights of entry and exit as well as internal rights, such as the duration of stay, freedom of movement , and the right to participate in commerce or government .

[ citation needed ] Variation [ edit ] Immigration laws vary around the world and throughout history, according to the social and political climate of the place and time, as the acceptance of immigrants sways from the widely inclusive to the deeply nationalist and isolationist . National laws regarding the immigration of citizens of that country are regulated by international law . The United Nations' International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights mandates that all countries allow entry to their own citizens.

[ 2 ] This principle is not always respected in practice. For instance, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia adopted a policy of denying entry to all individuals in particularly affected jurisdictions, including Australian citizens and permanent residents.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Similarly, while states within the Schengen Area typically permit freedom of movement across borders, many states within the area implemented ad hoc border controls during the pandemic.

Immigration policy is the aspect of border control concerning the transit of people into a country, especially those that intend to stay and work in the country. Taxation, tariff and trade rules set out what goods immigrants may bring with them, and what services they may perform while temporarily in the country.

Agricultural policy may make exemptions for migrant farm workers, who typically enter a country only for the harvest season and then return home to a country or region in the Global South (such as Mexico or Jamaica from where U.S. and Canada, respectively, often import temporary agricultural labour).

[ 5 ] An important aspect of immigration policy is the treatment of refugees , [ 6 ] more or less helpless or stateless people who throw themselves on the mercy of the state they try to enter, seeking refuge from actual or purported poor treatment in their country of origin. Asylum is sometimes granted to those who face persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion.

As a result of investment-oriented immigration policies, states sometimes implement border control measures known as immigrant investor programmes that offer permanent residence or citizenship in return for investment.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Immigrant investor programmes originated in the 1980s when tax havens in the Pacific and Caribbean began "cash-for-passport" programmes that facilitated visa-free travel and tax avoidance .

[ 10 ] Such programmes have sparked controversy in several countries. A lack of demonstrable economic benefits, and security concerns, have been among the most common criticisms. In 2014 the Canadian government suspended their golden visa programme (although, as of 2017, Quebec maintains its own golden visa programme).

[ 11 ] The implementation of such programmes in Europe has been criticised by the European Parliament, [ 12 ] which approved a non-binding resolution that in 2014 declaring that an EU passport, which by definition provides its bearer the right to reside in any EU or EEA jurisdiction, should not have a "price tag".

[ 13 ] Critical theory [ edit ] Critical theory can be used to interpret the right of asylum [ 14 ] and immigration law.

[ 15 ] Control measures [ edit ] To control immigration, many countries set up customs at entry points . Some common locations for entry points are airports and roads near the border. At the customs department, travel documents are inspected. Some required documents are a passport , an international certificate of vaccination , and an onward ticket. Sometimes travelers are also required to declare or register the amount of money they are carrying.

[ citation needed ] By country or territory [ edit ] Countries, citizenship, and immigration law Country or Area Nationality Immigration Details Changes to immigration law US United States nationality law Immigration to the US Illegal immigration to the US Citizenship may be granted after 5 years of permanent residence.

United Kingdom British nationality law Immigration to the UK Historical immigration to Great Britain Illegal immigration to the UK A foreigner may apply for naturalisation after having had indefinite leave to remain for one year in addition to 5 years of residency, or (treaty nationals) may apply after having been resident in the United Kingdom for 5 years.

[ citation needed ] The law has been changed retrospectively in the past and likely to change retrospectively in the future.

Canada Canadian nationality law Immigration to Canada Illegal immigration to Canada Australia Australian nationality law Immigration to Australia Illegal immigration to Australia New Zealand New Zealand nationality law Immigration to New Zealand South Africa South African nationality law Immigration to South Africa Illegal immigration to South Africa Citizenship may be applied for after 5 years of permanent residence.

[ 16 ] Guernsey Guernsey's inhabitants are full British citizens [ 17 ] Jersey Gibraltar None of the overseas territories has its own nationality status, and most residents hold two forms of British nationality: British Overseas Territories citizenship (BOTC) and British citizenship.

Isle of Man Citizenship is covered by UK law, and Manx people are classed as British citizens.

South Korea South Korean nationality law Immigration to South Korea Illegal immigration to South Korea Citizenship may be applied upon meeting the requirements for naturalization.

Hong Kong Immigration to Hong Kong A foreigner who is a Hong Kong Permanent ID Card holder may naturalise as a Chinese national with HKSAR Passport , if applicant: has settle in Hong Kong or Chinese territory; has near relatives of Chinese nationals; and/or other reasons deemed as legitimate.

[ 18 ] India Indian nationality law Illegal immigration to India Citizenship may be granted after 12 years of residence (of which 1 year should be continuous).

Israel Israeli nationality law Aliyah Immigration to Israel from Arab lands Illegal immigration to Israel European Union Citizenship of the European Union Immigration to Europe Austria Austrian nationality law Immigration to Austria Belgium Belgian nationality law Immigration to Belgium Bulgaria Bulgarian nationality law Immigration to Bulgaria Cyprus Cypriot nationality law Czech Republic Czech nationality law Immigration to the Czech Republic Denmark Danish nationality law Immigration to Denmark Estonia Estonian nationality law Immigration to Estonia Finland Finnish nationality law Immigration to Finland France French nationality law Immigration to France Germany German nationality law Immigration to Germany Greece Greek nationality law Immigration to Greece Hungary Hungarian nationality law All immigration is banned. Foreigners can only be temporary expats.

[ citation needed ] Ireland Irish nationality law Immigration to Ireland Italy Italian nationality law Immigration to Italy Latvia Latvian nationality law Lithuania Lithuanian nationality law Luxembourg Luxembourgian nationality law [ 19 ] Malta Maltese nationality law Immigration to Malta Until 21 September 1964, Maltese persons held British nationality , as Malta was a British Crown colony .

Netherlands Dutch nationality law Immigration to the Netherlands Poland Polish nationality law Portugal Portuguese nationality law Immigration to Portugal Romania Romanian nationality law Immigration to Romania Slovakia Slovakian nationality law Slovenia Slovenian nationality law Immigration to Slovenia Spain Spanish nationality law Immigration to Spain Sweden Swedish nationality law Immigration to Sweden Singapore Singaporean nationality law Immigration to Singapore Norway Norwegian nationality law Immigration to Norway A minimum of 7 years are required for citizenship.

Immigration visa categories by country or territory [ edit ] This section is an attempt to classify and bring together information about immigration legislation on a number of countries with high immigration.

Regular immigration visa categories Country / territory Employer-Sponsored Work Visa Independent Work Visa Businessperson, Self-employed or Entrepreneur Investor Ph.D. or Scientist Spouse By birth (foreign national parents) Studying as a migration route US Through H1B lottery, many applicants failed to receive a settlement after 6 years and had to leave the country.

EB-1 Extraordinary Ability – for internationally recognized scientists, sportsman etc.

[ 20 ] EB-5 : minimum investment of $ 800,000 .

PhDs are generally allowed to apply for an employer-independent EB2 visa Automatic citizenship United Kingdom Tier 2 – settlement (ILR) after 5 years. A limit on number of Tier 2 migrants per year coming from outside the country was introduced by new government which makes it more difficult to find an employer willing to sponsor the visa if applying from outside the UK.

[ citation needed ] (Practically not available since April 2011) Tier 1 General – settlement (ILR) after 5 years. A limit on 1000 Tier 1 migrants per year introduced by new government. Besides that the migration legislation changes on average every six months which makes Britain not attractive for skilled migrants looking for a second nationality.

[ citation needed ] Tier 1 Entrepreneur Tier 1 Investor There is no specific category here but it is easier for universities (as opposed to businesses) to acquire a Tier 2 sponsorship licence.

[ citation needed ] ILR is provided after 5 years in marriage or partnership and living in the country.

British citizenship can be obtained as a right for anybody who was born in the UK before 1983. After 1983, it can only be obtained by birth if at least one parent was settled there.  It is also available as of right for people of whom one parent is a British citizen otherwise than by descent." [ 21 ] All other classes of British Nationality do not confer right of abode in the UK to the holder.

Tier4 Full-time students at university education are allowed to work up to 20 hours a week. Others are allowed to work up to 10 hours per week. After 10 years of continuous presence in the country on residential visas ILR is provided. There is a cap on the duration of staying in the country on a student visa.

[ citation needed ] Canada [ 22 ] Temporary Foreign Worker (TFW) [ 23 ] [ i ] Available.

[ 24 ] The Federal Skilled Trades Program is for skilled workers who want to become permanent residents based on their qualification in a skilled trade . Skilled trades for the Program are organized under these NOC groups: [ 25 ] industrial, electrical and construction trades maintenance and equipment operation trades supervisors and technical jobs in natural resources , agriculture and related production processing, manufacturing, and utilities supervisors, and central control operators chefs and cooks butchers and bakers Business people [ ii ] can enter and work in Canada if they qualify under one of the following: [ 26 ] Canada–United States–Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) Other Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) [ iii ] General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) To work in Canada as an investor, one must: [ 26 ] meet any other rules of CUSMA; have a work permit; and be involved in planning either a) a large amount of trade in goods or services, mainly between Canada and their home country; or b) a large investment in Canada by that person or their company.

Federal Skilled Worker Program.

Eligible persons can sponsor their spouse or partner to become permanent residents, but must be able to: [ 27 ] support them financially; and ensure they don't need social assistance from the government One does not automatically have Canadian citizenship if they were born outside Canada to Canadian parent(s) on or after 17 April 2009, but neither were born or naturalized in Canada [ 28 ] International students may be able to fall under several categories of  permanent residence, including the Canadian Experience Class , the Federal Skilled Worker Program, and the Provincial Nominee Program.

[ 29 ] Australia Available [ 30 ] Skilled Independent visa (Subclass 189)and Skilled Nominated visa (subclass 190) New Zealand Available Argentina Electronic Entry Processing (TIE 24 H) [ 31 ] [ i ] Not Available Those overage who got married are exempt of the 2-years requirements for the citizenship.

Everyone who birth in Argentina (Regardless the nationality) are Argentines (except for the children of foreign ministers and members of the Legation residing in the Republic).

[ 32 ] Visa for Official Education Students (Art. 7 DNM Provision 2802/2023); [ 33 ] And Visa for Non-Official Education Students: Exchange Students, Interns, and Scholars (Arts. 8 to 13 DNM Provision 2802/2023) [ 34 ] South Africa Corporate worker permit.

[ 35 ] General work permit, Quota work permit, exceptional skills work permit and Intra-company transfer work permit.

[ 36 ] Business permit. Minimum foreign capital investment ZAR 2,5 Million into book value of business which may be reduced on application. Minimum of 5 South African citizens/residents to be employed.

[ 37 ] See Business permit.

[ 38 ] No specific category. May fall under Exceptional Skills or Quota work permit.

[ 39 ] Spousal visa. Proof of cohabitation and shared finances.

[ 40 ] Not applicable. Children born in South Africa to foreign nationals will obtain the same status as their parents.

Study is viewed in isolation in relation to the course of study. No benefits obtained promoting continued stay.

Isle of Man Similar to British Tier1 General, but does not lead to EU nationality Similar to British Tier1 Entrepreneur, but does not lead to EU nationality South Korea If you have lived more than 5 years under a D-7, D-8, D-9, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, E-5, E-7 or F-2 visa .

[ citation needed ] If you have internationally recognized extraordinary ability in science, business, culture, sports or education.

If you are over 60 and receive income via pension from overseas.

If you invest $2 million. If you invested only $500,000, you need to stay more than 3 years on a D-8 visa. If you invest $500,000 in real estate of Jeju , Incheon Free Economic Zone , Busan 's Haeundae , Pyeongchang or Yeosu , you are given a F-2 residence visa and 5 years later, F-5 permanent residence.

[ 41 ] If you have a PhD in a high-tech field and are employed by a Korean firm, earning 4 times the average GNI in Korea. If you only have a bachelor's in a high-tech field or a recognized technical certificate issued in Korea, you need to have stayed for at least 3 years and earn 4 times the average GNI in Korea.

If you have stayed in Korea for more than 2 years under a F-2 visa and are the spouse of a Korean or foreigner with a F-5 permanent residence visa.

If you were born to parents who are stateless or were found abandoned within the territory of South Korea as a child, you will automatically get Korean citizenship.

Hong Kong General Employment Policy (GEP); will receive Right of Abode (ROA) in Hong Kong, after 7 years continuous ordinary residence in Hong Kong.

General Points Test (GPT) Top Talent Pass Scheme (TTPS) Capital Investment Entrant Scheme (CIES); you need to invest HK$ 10 million except on real estate; [ 42 ] will receive ROA in Hong Kong, after 7 years continuous ordinary residence in Hong Kong.

Passing GPT within Quality Migrant Admission Scheme (QMAS) [ 43 ] Person under 21 years of age born in Hong Kong of foreigner with HK Permanent ID Card , will receive ROA in Hong Kong, but not Chinese nationality .

[ 44 ] India Israel Not available European Union Varies by member state Blue Card (European Union) Austria May be available in the future, called Rot-Weiß-Rot-Card Cyprus It is considered to be very unlikely to get nationality through work route Not available Czech Republic Not available Denmark Available: Danish Green Card Finland France Not available Germany Not available Hungary Ireland Not available Available Netherlands Highly-skilled migrant' visa: available only for employers to apply on employee's behalf. Employer must be recognized as a sponsor by IND . Specific salary requirements apply.

[ 45 ] Zoekjaar ('search year')  visa: a one-year visa available to all students who recently graduated from a university or a college. No other requirements (e.g. sponsor/employer).

[ 46 ] A visa is available for self-employed people. Granting of such is determined based on innovative nature of your business, which must be assessed by a certain agency (RVO).

[ 47 ] Citizenship or permanent residency can be applied for after 3 years in marriage or partnership with a Dutch national and living in the country.

[ 48 ] No provision to grant citizenship based on country of birth is available. At least one parent must be a Dutch national. Prior to January 1, 1985, child's father must have been Dutch for the child to get Dutch citizenship.

[ 49 ] Spain Not available Sweden [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Norway Min 4 years Country or Area Employer Sponsored Work Visa Independent Work Visa Businessperson, Self-employed or Entrepreneur Investor Ph.D. or Scientist Spouse By birth while both of parents are foreign nationals Studying as a migration route Irregular/special immigration visas Country or Area Illegal Migrant Special arrangements US Green Card Lottery United Kingdom After 20 years of continuous illegal but proven presence in the country ILR is provided.

[ citation needed ] Treaty nationals may enter the UK to work, provide services or self-employment or study or reside there as self-sufficient migrant.

Some commonwealth citizens have right of abode in the UK, which, for most practical purposes, gives them the same rights as British Citizens in the UK.

[ citation needed ] Canada Australia New Zealand South Africa Arrest, detention, court to decide on outcome.

[ 52 ] Guernsey Jersey Gibraltar Isle of Man South Korea If you previously had Korean nationality or either of your parents or grandparents had Korean nationality in the past, you are immediately eligible for a F-4 visa , a practically permanent residence visa that is renewable every 2 years.

[ 53 ] If the Korean government recognizes that you made an important contribution to the nation, you are eligible for F-5 permanent residence.

[ citation needed ] Hong Kong Mainland China issued a daily quota of 150 One Way Permits to mainland Chinese for Hong Kong settlement; [ 54 ] will receive Right of Abode (ROA) in Hong Kong, after 7 years continuous ordinary residence in Hong Kong; plus the right to apply for a HKSAR Passport .

India Israel Law of Return European Union Austria Belgium Bulgaria Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany There are programs for Continental Refugees and Repatriates but the rules are severely tightened to prevent as little new migrants as possible to benefit from them.

Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands After 5 years of continuous residence and sufficient integration.

[ 55 ] Poland [ 56 ] Portugal Romania Special arrangements for citizens of Moldova Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Singapore Norway Citizens of other Nordic Council countries may naturalise after a two-year residence General guidelines by country or territory [ edit ] Country / territory Requirements and restrictions Employed dependants Social benefits Deprivation of nationality Forgoing other nationalities required for naturalization?

Deprivation of original nationality for those who naturalise in foreign countries?

US The dependant of a resident visa holder may not work.

No No, but foreign earnings are liable to taxation.

United Kingdom Before settlement : No more than 180 days spent overseas within 5 years, no more than 90 days per trip.

After settlement : Settlement would be cancelled after a certain number of days spent abroad. A single parent may immigrate if one is the sole supporter.

The dependant of a resident visa holder is allowed to work.

Before settlement : No access to public funds.

After settlement : Accessible.

Dual nationals may be deprived of their nationality for engaging in terrorism.

No No Canada No Australia New Zealand Israel [ 57 ] Yes, unless citizenship obtained by Law of Return Germany Yes, unless the prior nationality held was one of the European Union, Norway, or Switzerland; or if the applicant cannot approach the authorities of their previous country for reasons of personal safety.

Yes, unless the nationality acquired is one of the EU , Switzerland , or Norway ; or if the applicant obtained permission from the German government prior to submitting an application for naturalisation.

Ukraine Yes Norway Legitimately naturalised persons can be deprived of their nationality.

Yes, unless the applicant cannot approach the authorities of their previous country for reasons of personal safety, or if the authorities demand a fee considered too high.

Yes Russia Yes No Azerbaijan Yes China Yes Yes Denmark Yes Japan Yes Yes India Yes See also [ edit ] Asylum shopping Refugee identity certificate Migrant worker Immigration country Immigration policy Impediment to expulsion Economic citizenship Points-based immigration system Immigrant investor programs References [ edit ] ^ "immigration" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2022-11-20 .

^ United Nations. 1966.

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , art. 12(4) .

^ "Australia's decision to ban its citizens from returning from India — Is it legal? Is it moral? Is it just? - ABC Religion & Ethics" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 7 May 2021.

^ "Stranded abroad, Australians lodge UN petition against government for 'right to return home' " . 6 April 2021.

^ "Immigration and Farm Labor in the U.S." (PDF) . National Agriculture and Rural Development Policy Center. 4 May 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 September 2015 . Retrieved 28 July 2015 .

^ Szkudlarek, Betina; Nardon, Luciara; Osland, Joyce S.; Adler, Nancy J.; Lee, Eun Su (August 2021).

"When Context Matters: What Happens to International Theory When Researchers Study Refugees" .

Academy of Management Perspectives .

35 (3): 461– 484.

doi : 10.5465/amp.2018.0150 .

ISSN 1558-9080 .

^ Abrahamian, Atossa Araxia (2015).

The Cosmopolites: The Coming of the Global Citizen . Columbia Global Reports. pp.

70– 93.

ISBN 978-0-9909763-6-3 .

^ Clenfield, Jason.

"The Passport King" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

^ "The Man Who Helps Countries Turn Investments Into Passports for the Rich" .

Skift . 12 March 2015 . Retrieved 20 July 2016 .

^ The Oxford Handbook of Citizenship, Ayelet Shachar , Chapter 35, Citizenship For Sale?, p. 794, Oxford University Press, 2017 ^ Yan, Sophia (25 March 2014).

"Canada kills investor visa popular with Chinese" .

CNN .

^ "Buying their way in" .

The Economist . 20 November 2014.

^ "Malta's golden passport scheme draws fresh criticism, Concerns centre on selection of Jersey consultancy to run operation targeted at the wealthy" .

Financial Times . 8 April 2016. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022.

^ Ingram, David (2021).

"What an Ethics of Discourse and Recognition Can Contribute to a Critical Theory of Refugee Claim Adjudication: Reclaiming Epistemic Justice for Gender-Based Asylum Seekers" .

Migration, Recognition and Critical Theory . Studies in Global Justice. Vol. 21. pp.

19– 46.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-72732-1_2 .

ISBN 978-3-030-72731-4 .

^ Pulitano, Elvira (2013).

"In liberty's shadow: The discourse of refugees and asylum seekers in critical race theory and immigration law/politics" .

Identities .

20 (2): 172– 189.

doi : 10.1080/1070289X.2012.763168 .

^ "Permanent Residence Permit South Africa - Legal Migration Services" .

lissa.com . Archived from the original on 11 December 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ " British Nationality Act 1981 ", legislation.gov.uk , The National Archives , 1981 c. 61 ^ "Application for Naturalisation as a Chinese National - Immigration Department" .

www.gov.hk . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Ministère des Affaires étrangères et européennes // Le gouvernement luxembourgeois" .

mae.lu . 1 May 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "United States Visa: EB1 Green Card Priority Workers" . Archived from the original on 2017-01-29 . Retrieved 2017-05-26 .

^ British Nationality Act 1981, s2(1)(a), subject to s14 ^ "Working temporarily in Canada" . Cic.gc.ca. 2012-01-26 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ " How do I hire a temporary foreign worker?

" Government of Canada. 2020 January 30. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ "Immigrating to Canada" . Cic.gc.ca . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ " Eligibility to apply for the Federal Skilled Trades Program (Express Entry) ." Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada. 2020 September 3. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ a b " Business people ." Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada. 2020 July 2. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ " Sponsor your spouse, partner or child: about the process ." Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada. 2020 September 9. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ " See if you may be a citizen ." Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada. 2020 July 15. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ " I am an international student in Canada. How can I apply to become a permanent resident?

" Immigration and Citizenship . Government of Canada. 2020 January 30. Retrieved 2020 November 30.

^ "immi.gov.au" . immi.gov.au . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ "Tramitación de ingreso electrónica (TIE 24 H)" .

^ "LEY DE CIUDADANIA ARGENTINA" (PDF) .

^ "Visa para estudiantes enseñanza oficial (Art. 7 disposición DNM 2802/2023)" .

^ "Visa para estudiantes no oficial intercambios estudiantiles/pasantes/becarios (Arts. 8 a 13 disposición DNM 2802/2023)" .

^ "General Work Permit South Africa - LISSA - Legal Immigration Service SA" .

lissa.com . Archived from the original on 18 January 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Department of Home Affairs - Critical Skills Visa" .

www.home-affairs.gov.za . Archived from the original on 5 March 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Business VISA South Africa - LISSA" .

lissa.com . Archived from the original on 18 September 2015 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ About Business Permits in South Africa Archived 2013-08-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Exceptional Skill for Scientists or PhD's in SA" . Archived from the original on 2013-09-03 . Retrieved 2013-09-01 .

^ Spouse Visa or Spouse Permit Archived 2013-08-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ " '영주권에 시세 차익은 덤?'…빈틈 많은 투자 이민제" .

이데일리 . 4 January 2016. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ FAQ New Amendments to the Rules for Capital Investment Entrant Scheme Archived 2012-07-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region - Immigration Department" . Archived from the original on 2007-02-17 . Retrieved 2007-02-19 .

; will receive Right of Abode (ROA) in Hong Kong, after 7 years continuous ordinary residence in Hong Kong.

^ "Apply for Right of Abode in Hong Kong - Immigration Department" .

www.gov.hk . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Highly skilled migrant | Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND)" . Archived from the original on 2017-10-25.

^ "Looking for a job after study, promotion or research | Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND)" .

ind.nl . Archived from the original on 2018-08-24.

^ "Self-employed person | Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND)" . Archived from the original on 2019-07-23 . Retrieved 2019-07-23 .

^ "Naturalisation: Exceptions to the 5-year term" .

^ "Dutch citizen by birth or acknowledgement" .

^ "Working in Sweden – Migrationsverket" . Migrationsverket.se. 2011-12-22. Archived from the original on 2012-03-31 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ "Self-employed from countries outside the EU – Migrationsverket" . Migrationsverket.se. 2012-02-21. Archived from the original on 2012-03-20 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ All about South African Legal Immigration Service Archived 2013-09-12 at the Wayback Machine s ^ "Immigration Bureau" .

www.immigration.go.kr . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "LCQ17: One-way Permit" .

www.info.gov.hk . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Sorry, something went wrong" .

^ Репатриация в Польшу. Новый закон о репатриации, права репатрианта в Польше – официальная информация (in Russian). Wiza.polska.ru . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

^ "Решение об отмене израильского гражданства и как с этим бороться" . Pravo.israelinfo.ru. 2012-02-19 . Retrieved 2012-04-01 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b The Electronic Entry Processing (TIE 24 H) system allows nationals from visa-exempt countries to apply online for authorization to engage in professional, artistic, business, or academic activities.

This system has replaced the previous requirement of completing white entry forms on aircraft before entering the country. To begin the application process, applicants must access the relevant online platform and subsequently contact their chosen consular representation for further steps.

^ Defined by the Government of Canada as those who "come to do business under a free trade agreement." ^ Such as the Canada–Chile FTA , the Canada–Peru FTA , the Canada–Colombia FTA , or the Canada–Korea FTA External links [ edit ] Citizenship Laws of the World – the most comprehensive although a little bit outdated report by United States Office of Personnel Management Investigations Service PDF , copy: PDF v t e Immigration General Immigration by country List of immigrant populations Immigration country Immigration policy Illegal immigration Forced displacement Internal migration History and law Alien Asylum shopping Border security Citizenship Crime Deportation Self-deportation Detention Emigration Externalization Immigration law Immigrant investor programs Immigration tariff Indefinite leave to remain Migration diplomacy Net migration rate list Non-refoulement Permanent residency Population transfer Pushback Repatriation Extradition Residence permit Return migration Right of asylum Right of return Refugee Safe third country Smuggling Surveillance Voluntary return Social processes Acculturation ( Acculturation gap ) Birth tourism Anchor baby Satellite babies Economic effects Expatriate Human capital flight Human migration Immigrant assimilation Immigration consultant Integration Migration background Persecution Refugee crisis Social exclusion Student migration Unreported employment Visa fraud Political theories Civic nationalism Religious nationalism Replacement migration Social cohesion Nativism Multiculturalism Plurinationalism Push and pull factors Ethnocentrism Foot voting Causes Chain migration Economic migrant Foreign worker Global labor arbitrage War Weaponized Opposition and reform Criticism of multiculturalism Immigration reform Opposition to immigration White genocide conspiracy theory v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Immigration_law&oldid=1306591715 " Category : Immigration law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles prone to spam from May 2024 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 16:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Immigration law 17 languages Add topic

