Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Middle finger 78 languages Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ अवधी বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kiswahili Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Ligure Lombard मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Bajau Sama Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 21 July 2025 .

Third finger of the human hand For the offensive gesture, see The finger .

For other uses, see Middle finger (disambiguation) .

Middle finger Middle finger of the left hand Details Artery Proper palmar digital arteries , dorsal digital arteries Vein Palmar digital veins , dorsal digital veins Nerve Dorsal digital nerves of radial nerve , proper palmar digital nerves of median nerve Identifiers Latin digitus III manus, digitus medius manus, digitus tertius manus TA98 A01.1.00.055 TA2 153 FMA 24947 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] The middle finger , long finger , second finger , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] third finger , [ 3 ] tall finger or tall man [ citation needed ] is the third digit of the human hand , typically located between the index finger and the ring finger .  It is typically the longest digit. In anatomy , it is also called the third finger , digitus medius , digitus tertius or digitus III .

Overview [ edit ] In Western countries, extending the middle finger (either by itself, or along with the index finger in the United Kingdom: see V sign ) is an offensive and obscene gesture, widely recognized as a form of insult, due to its resemblance of an erect penis .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] It is known, colloquially, as "flipping the bird", [ 6 ] "flipping (someone) off", or "giving (someone) the finger".

The middle finger is often used for finger snapping together with the thumb.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Finger numbering Galileo's middle finger References [ edit ] ^ "middle finger" .

www.vocabulary.com .

^ "middle finger" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 17 August 2022 .

^ "third finger" .

Medical Dictionary . Retrieved 17 August 2022 .

^ "When did the middle finger become offensive?" .

BBC News . 6 February 2012.

^ "The shock index: is giving the finger still offensive?" .

The Guardian . 22 February 2012.

^ Jason Joseph, Rick Joseph (2007).

101 Ways to Flip the Bird .

Broadway Books .

ISBN 978-0-7679-2681-2 .

^ Acharya, Raghav; Challita, Elio J.; Ilton, Mark; Saad Bhamla, M. (November 2021).

"The ultrafast snap of a finger is mediated by skin friction" .

Journal of the Royal Society Interface .

18 (184).

doi : 10.1098/rsif.2021.0672 .

PMC 8596009 .

PMID 34784775 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Middle fingers at Wikimedia Commons v t e Human regional anatomy Body Skin Head Hair Face Forehead Cheek Chin Eyebrow Eye Eyelid Nose Mouth Lip Tongue Tooth Ear Jaw Mandible Occiput Scalp Temple Neck Adam's apple Throat Nape Torso (Trunk) Abdomen Waist Midriff Navel Vertebral column Back Thorax Breast Nipple Pelvis Genitalia Penis Scrotum Vulva Buttocks Anus Limbs Arm Shoulder Axilla Elbow Forearm Wrist Hand Finger Fingernail Thumb Index Middle Ring Little Leg Hip Thigh Knee Calf Foot Ankle Heel Toe Toenail Sole Authority control databases Terminologia Anatomica This anatomy article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Middle_finger&oldid=1301673407 " Categories : Fingers Hand gestures Anatomy stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 03:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Middle finger 78 languages Add topic

