Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In scholasticism 2 Interpretation of C. S. Peirce 3 Notes Toggle the table of contents Scotistic realism 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on John Duns Scotus Scotism Scholasticism Univocity Haecceity Immaculate Conception Beatific vision Formal distinction Hylomorphism Scotistic realism Substance theory ( ousia ) Accident Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Individuation Existence of God Christology Platonic realism Categories (Aristotle) Problem of universals Metaphysics Christianity and slavery Works Opus Oxoniense Tractatus de Primo Principio Quaestiones Quodlibetales Influences Aristotle ("The Philosopher") St. Paul ("The Apostle") Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine ("The Theologian") St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard ("The Master") Averroes ("The Commentator") Maimonides ("Rabbi Moses") St. Albertus Magnus ("The Universal Doctor") St. Thomas Aquinas ("The Angelic Doctor") People Andreas Aureoli Balic Barnewall Baron Bonet Caracciolo Carletti Faber Ferchi Frassen Horan Mac Cathmhaoil Mastrius de Mayronis d'Orbellis Ó Fithcheallaigh Pelagius Punch Scotellus Scriptoris Thomae Sixtus IV Wadding Related Aristotelianism Franciscan Order Oxford University Catholic theology List of Franciscan theologians Empiricism Philosophy Portal Catholicism Portal v t e Scotistic realism (also Scotist realism or Scotist formalism ) is the Scotist position on the problem of universals . It is a form of moderate realism , which is sometimes referred to as 'scholastic realism'.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The position maintains that universals exist both in particular objects and as concepts in the mind.

[ 3 ] The "problem of universals" was an ancient problem in metaphysics about whether universals exist. For John Duns Scotus , a Franciscan philosopher , theologian and Catholic priest , universals such as "greenness" and "goodness" exist in reality. This is opposed to the later nominalism of William of Ockham , and the earlier conceptualism of Abelard , which say universals exist only within the mind and have no external or substantial reality, or universals don't exist at all (including the mind).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In addition, Scotus doesn't think that universals exist in some "third realm" or "Platonic heaven", as Plato thought (i.e.

Platonism ).

[ 6 ] In this way, Scotistic realism can be seen as a middle ground between Aristotelian realism (i.e. immanent realism) and conceptualism.

[ 7 ] Scotistic realism can also be seen to take a nod to Platonism.

[ 8 ] Not because Scotus thinks that universals ultimately trace back to a "Platonic Heaven"; rather, because (for Scotus) universals ultimately trace back to ideas in God's mind.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Therefore, scotistic realism affirms that universals exist in particular objects, finite minds, and the infinite mind of God.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In scholasticism [ edit ] The problem of universals existed as early as Plato , who taught the Theory of Forms , that universal "forms" existed. This opinion was rejected by many later thinkers, such as Peter Abelard , who instead argued that forms are merely mental constructs.

[ 13 ] Antonio De Fantis , Tabula generalis ac Mare magnum Scotice subtilitatis Scotus denied these claims; in his Opus Oxoniense he argued that universals have a real and substantial existence.

[ 14 ] For Scotus, the problem of universals was closely tied to that of individuation , by identifying what makes a particular thing this or that particular thing; we could also come to understand if any form of universal exists, it is in this work that Scotus introduces the word " haecceity ", which means the "thisness" of a particular object – what makes it what it is.

I say then that the main reason for the likening or similarity is the form itself shared between the generator and the generated, not according to individual unity and identity insofar as it is "this" form, but according to a lesser unity and identity insofar as it is a form. The reason for generating is in accordance with this. Form also is a more principal reason for the distinction than matter is, because just as the form is more principally that by which something is a composite than the matter is, so it is more principally that by which a composite is one, and consequently not distinguished in itself and yet distinct from everything else — Scotus, Ordinatio II, d. 3, p. 1. q. 6, n. 210 [Scotus, (1950-), 7:412-413; Spade (1994), 69] In this, Scotus argues that form is a better means of individuating a particular object; because according to him the form of an object as a composite is the best manner of making objects distinct from one another, rather than the matter of the object. This is at the heart of Scotist realism, particularly at the theories of haecceity and formal distinction . Scotus also argues, against Aquinas and others, that there is no distinction between the essence of a thing and its existence .

[ 15 ] Interpretation of C. S. Peirce [ edit ] The American philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce was quite influenced by Scotus. Here is a statement of Peirce's interpretation of Scotistic Realism by T. A. Goudge : The gist of that 'subtle and difficult' doctrine is taken by Peirce to be as follows.  Apart from thought, only singular things exist.  But there are in singulars certain 'natures,' themselves neither universal nor particular, which constitute the ground of intelligibility.  In things, these natures are particular; when brought into relation with an act of the intellect, they are universal ... Thus, for example, the directly experienced hard surface of a particular stone is determinate, whereas the universal hardness which the intellect grasps is indeterminate or general.  A consequence of this view is that the individual per se is not a proper object of knowledge.  What we know are genera and species, themselves the product of mental action.  Yet because complete being embraces both universality and particularity, because man perceives the singular with his senses while cognizing the universal with his intellect, it is possible for him to attain to the singular by relating universals to something which is this.

[ 16 ] Peirce interprets Scotus's idea of individuation or haecceity (thisness) in terms of his own category of "secondness." When we think of this, we are relating our pointing finger, for example, or a particular sense organ with another individual thing. As Scotus said, "nothing is this in itself." It is so only in relation to something else. Goudge goes on to give Peirce's argument for the objectivity of universals: The objection may be raised that such a view destroys the reality of the universal by making it depend on a relation to thought.  Peirce replies that this objection springs from the belief that the real must be wholly independent of reflective activity, i.e., must be a thing in itself.  But the notion of the thing in itself is self-contradictory, for it requires us to think about what is per definitionem out of relation to thought.  We can have no conception of any incognizable reality ... Indeed, “a realist is simply one who knows no more recondite reality than that which is represented in a true representation.” [ 17 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Peterson, J. (1999). Introduction to scholastic realism. New York: Peter Lang.

^ Mayorga, R. M. P. T. (2002). On Universals: The Scholastic Realism of John Duns Scotus and Charles Sanders Peirce. University of Miami.

^ "Scotus, John Duns | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ "conceptualism" in The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy . Simon Blackburn. Oxford University Press, 1996. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. 8 April 2008 ^ Paul Vincent Spade, Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals: Porphyry, Boethius, Abelard, Duns Scotus, Ockham , Indianapolis, Hackett, 1994.

^ "Scotus, John Duns | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Williams, Thomas, "John Duns Scotus", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2019/entries/duns-scotus/ >.

^ Mayorga, R. M. P. T. (2002). On Universals: The Scholastic Realism of John Duns Scotus and Charles Sanders Peirce. University of Miami.

^ Peterson, J. (1999). Introduction to scholastic realism. New York: Peter Lang.

^ Mayorga, R. M. P. T. (2002). On Universals: The Scholastic Realism of John Duns Scotus and Charles Sanders Peirce. University of Miami.

^ Peterson, J. (1999). Introduction to scholastic realism. New York: Peter Lang.

^ Mayorga, R. M. P. T. (2002). On Universals: The Scholastic Realism of John Duns Scotus and Charles Sanders Peirce. University of Miami.

^ Abelard:Logica Ingredientibus (Glosses on Porphyry) ^ Opus Oxoniense II. D3, 1-6, 1-212 ^ Opus Oxoniense I iii 1-2, ^ Thomas A. Goudge, The Thought of C. S. Peirce (Dover 1969), p. 99.

^ Charles S. Peirce, Collected papers 5.312.

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐869cd5cd97‐tr5j4
Cached time: 20250803162010
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.285 seconds
Real time usage: 0.354 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 744/1000000
Revision size: 8206/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44546/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1006/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31165/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.172/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3727294/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  274.806      1 -total
 35.10%   96.468      1 Template:Scotism
 34.36%   94.411      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 33.87%   93.088      1 Template:Reflist
 27.80%   76.399      2 Template:Cite_web
 20.38%   56.009      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy_footer
 20.26%   55.677      2 Template:Navbox
  8.00%   21.973      1 Template:Quotation
  7.70%   21.168      2 Template:Portal-inline
  4.33%   11.886      1 Template:Comma_separated_entries Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28728553:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250803162010 and revision id 1267733516. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scotistic_realism&oldid=1267733516 " Categories : Formalism (deductive) Metaphysical realism Medieval philosophy Scotism This page was last edited on 6 January 2025, at 11:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scotistic realism 1 language Add topic

